Chapter 66: Department for the Aging
Section 2400. Department; commissioner.
There shall be a department for the aging, the head of which shall be the
commissioner for the aging.
Section 2401. Deputies.
The commissioner may appoint and at pleasure remove a deputy commissioner.
Section 2402. Powers and duties.
The department shall have the following powers and duties:
   a.   to stimulate community interest in the problems of the aging;
   b.   to promote public awareness of resources available for the aging, and
to refer the public to appropriate departments and agencies of the city, state
and federal governments for advice, assistance and available services in
connection with particular problems;
   c.   to cooperate with and assist local neighborhoods in the development of
programs and the establishment of local offices;
   d.   to serve as a clearing house for information relating to the needs of
the aging;
   e.   to disburse available city, state and federal funds to programs
throughout the city and, when practical, coordinate such funds with available
funding from the private sector;
   f.   to provide regular guidance and support to the center for older
workforce development;
   g.   to promulgate rules and regulations for the operation of facilities,
services and programs under its jurisdiction; and
   h.   to maintain, operate and control such programs and facilities as may be
necessary or required for the proper administration of the department.
(Am. L.L. 2020/122, 12/20/2020, eff. 4/19/2021)
Section 2403. Advisory council.
   a.   There shall be in the department an advisory council consisting of
thirty-one members at least sixteen of whom shall be recipients of services
rendered to older adults. Beginning in December 2021, these members shall
include representatives from the areas of social service, health care,
business, legal services, the academic community and local neighborhoods.
   b.   It shall be the duty of the council to advise the commissioner and make
recommendations. The council shall submit an annual report of its activities to
the mayor and the speaker of the council. Beginning with the report due in
December 2021 and biennially thereafter, the council's report shall include
recommendations for how to eliminate age discrimination in the workplace and
how to develop the older adult workforce. These recommendations shall also be
submitted to the center for older workforce development and should be developed
while considering the following:
      1.   Data and reports of age discrimination in the workplace, nationally
and within the state, including any trends in different industries, demographic
differences, age ranges, reporting statistics and any successful remedies;
      2.   The development and use of new technologies and systems in combating
age discrimination in the employment process and during employment;
      3.   Existing policies across city agencies, guidelines and resources
related to age discrimination and reporting by victims thereof; and
      4.   Existing methods and procedures for reporting and responding to
allegations of age discrimination in the workplace, within city agencies and
across the city.
   c.   The members of the council shall be appointed by the mayor. Ten of said
members, two residents from each of the five boroughs of the city, shall be
recommended for appointment by a majority vote of the city council members of
the respective boroughs.
   d.   The terms of office of the thirty-one members of the council first
appointed shall be as follows: eleven appointees, five of whom shall be
recommended for appointment by the city council members of the respective
boroughs, one from each borough, shall serve for a term ending the thirty-first
day of March, nineteen hundred eighty-one; ten appointees shall serve for a
term ending the thirty-first day of March, nineteen hundred eighty-two; and ten
appointees, five of whom shall be recommended for appointment by the city
council members of the respective boroughs, one from each borough, shall serve
for a term ending the thirty-first day of March, nineteen hundred eighty-three.
Upon the expiration of such terms, the terms of office of their successors
shall be three years. Vacancies occurring otherwise than by expiration of term
shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as regular
appointments.
   e.   The mayor shall designate one of the members of the council to be
chairman and one to be vice-chairman.
   f.   The members of the council shall serve without compensation.
(Am. L.L. 2020/122, 12/20/2020, eff. 4/19/2021)
Section 2404. Public housing liaison.
There shall be in the department the position of public housing liaison whose
duties shall include, but not be limited to the following:
   a.   Establishing a system to receive and process complaints regarding
senior center facilities located on property owned by the New York city housing
authority, including assisting senior center participants with concerns about
repairs at such facilities;
   b.   Conducting outreach to participants of senior centers located on
property owned by the New York city housing authority about the existence of
such liaison, how to contact such liaison, and about any existing system for
filing complaints or grievances about senior centers with the department;
   c.   Making recommendations to the commissioner with respect to how programs
and facilities that receive funding from the department can better serve older
adult public housing residents; and
   d.   Coordinating with the New York city housing authority, as necessary,
about facilities and any other matters impacting older adults in public
housing.
(L.L. 2021/075, 6/27/2021, eff. 12/24/2021)
Section 2405. Cabinet for older New Yorkers.
   a.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms have
the following meanings:
      Mayor’s office for people with disabilities. The term “mayor’s office for
people with disabilities” means the office established under executive order
number 17 for the year 1990.
      Mayor’s office of talent and workforce development. The term “mayor’s
office of talent and workforce development” means the office established under
executive order number 22 for the year 2022.
      NYC service. The term “NYC service” means the division of the office of
the mayor focused on volunteerism and service in New York city established in
the year 2009.
   b.   The entities defined in subdivision a of this section shall include any
successor office or other agency that carries out the same or substantially
similar functions as such entities.
   c.   Cabinet. There shall be a cabinet for older New Yorkers. The cabinet
shall meet at least once quarterly.
   d.   Duties. The cabinet shall facilitate coordination across agencies to
further the elimination of age-related barriers and inequities in the provision
of services to older adults and review current and future initiatives to ensure
that such initiatives are inclusive of older adults.
   e.   Members. The cabinet shall be composed of the following members, or
their designees:
      1.   Commissioner for the aging, who shall serve as chair;
      2.   Chair of the civic engagement commission;
      3.   Commissioner of information technology and telecommunications;
      4.   Commissioner of equity;
      5.   Chair of the commission on human rights;
      6.   Commissioner of consumer and worker protection;
      7.   Commissioner of cultural affairs;
      8.   Commissioner of health and mental hygiene;
      9.   Commissioner of housing preservation and development;
      10.   Commissioner of parks and recreation;
      11.   Police commissioner;
      12.   Commissioner of small business services;
      13.   Commissioner of social services;
      14.   Commissioner of transportation;
      15.   Commissioner of veterans’ services;
      16.   Commissioner of youth and community development;
      17.   Chief service officer of NYC service;
      18.   Director of the office of community mental health;
      19.   Director of the office of criminal justice;
      20.   Director of the office of food policy;
      21.   Director of the office of immigrant affairs;
      22.   Commissioner of the mayor's office for people with disabilities;
      23.   Director of the office of talent and workforce development; and
      24.   Director of the office of urban agriculture.
   f.   Required invitations. The commissioner shall also invite to participate
in the work of the cabinet the following persons, or their designees:
      1.   Chancellor of the city school district of the city of New York;
      2.   Chief executive officer of the New York city health and hospitals
corporation;
      3.   Chief executive officer of the New York city housing authority;
      4.   President of the Brooklyn public library;
      5.   President of the New York public library; and
      6.   President of the Queens public library.
   g.   Optional invitations. The commissioner may invite representatives of
any relevant federal, state, or local entity to participate in the work of the
cabinet.
   h.   Report. One year after the effective date of the local law that added
this section and annually thereafter, the commissioner shall submit to the
speaker of the council, the public advocate, the comptroller, and the Bronx,
Brooklyn, Manhattan, Queens, and Staten Island borough presidents, and post on
the website of the department a report on the work of the cabinet. Such report
shall include, but need not be limited to:
      1.   Actions taken or proposed as a result of the meeting of such
cabinet;
      2.   Attendance at cabinet meetings; and
      3.   Minutes of cabinet meetings.
(L.L. 2024/064, 5/18/2024, eff. 8/16/2024)
