Chapter 3: Vacant and Unguarded Buildings
§ 3-01 Sealing and Protection of Vacant and Unguarded Buildings.
   Where buildings are vacant, unguarded, open to unauthorized entry and are
required to be sealed pursuant to the provisions of an unsafe building order
issued by the Department of Buildings or a determination by the Department of
Housing Preservation and Development that the condition is dangerous to life,
health and safety, they shall be sealed and protected in the following manner:
   (a)   Buildings with exterior walls constructed of brick or other masonry.
      (1)   All exterior openings including door openings, which are in the
cellar, basement and first story, or which are less than ten (10) feet from
grade, shall be sealed with concrete block or stucco on plywood as provided
below. All exterior openings which are on the course of a fire escape or are
above the first story and less than six (6) feet measured horizontally from an
opening in an adjoining building shall be sealed with concrete block or stucco
on plywood as provided below. One door opening, readily visible from the
street, may, at the discretion of the owner, be sealed with a padlocked metal
roll-up door, one (1) hour fire rating metal door or an exterior door of one
(1) and three-quarter (3/4) inch solid wood covered with twenty-six (26) U.S.
gauge galvanized metal with edging turned over and nailed with flat head
galvanized nails. The door of solid wood shall be hung in such a manner that no
screws are exposed on the outside of the door on either the hinges or the
hasps. Hinges shall not have removable hinge pins. Two hasps and locks shall be
provided, located so as to divide the height of the door in equal sections.
      (2)   Concrete Block Seal.
         (i)   Concrete block shall conform to the provisions of Reference
Standard RS-10 of the New York City Building Code.
         (ii)   All door and window frames shall be removed before concrete
blocks are installed. Brickwork which new concrete blocks will abut, shall be
cleaned and thoroughly wetted before blocks are installed.
         (iii)   Doors and windows, not exceeding three (3) feet in width,
shall be sealed with concrete block at least four (4) inches in thickness.
Openings exceeding three (3) feet in width shall be sealed with concrete blocks
at least eight (8) inches in thickness.
         (iv)   Concrete blocks shall be laid in masonry cement mortar with a
mix of not more than three (3) parts of sand for each part of masonry cement by
volume. Joints in masonry shall be broken and exterior faces shall be struck.
Blocks shall not extend beyond the brickline. Masonry cement shall conform to
the provisions of Reference Standard RS-10 of the Building Code.
      (3)   Stucco on Plywood Seal:
         (i)   If the window frame is in a condition whereby plywood can be
secured to it, five-eighth (5/8) inch CDX grade plywood shall be nailed into
such frame openings with eight d (8d) common nails every twelve (12) inches.
Galvanized wire lathe shall then be nailed to plywood using one (1) inch roof
nails every twelve (12) inches. Wire lathe shall be covered by a one (1) inch
coat of Portland cement with a float finish. Cement shall not extend beyond the
opening's brickline.
         (ii)   If a window or door frame is in a condition whereby such
plywood cannot be secured to it, the frame shall be removed. The opening shall
then be framed-out with new grade one (1) wood or metal two (2) × four (4) inch
top and bottom plates with wood or metal studs every sixteen (16) inches on
center.
         (iii)   Openings exceeding three (3) feet shall be framed-out with new
grade one (1) two (2) × four (4) inch top and bottom plates with wood or metal
studs every sixteen (16) inches on center.
   (b)   Buildings with exterior walls constructed of material other than
masonry. All exterior openings including door openings, which are in the
cellar, basement and first story, on the course of a fire escape, are less than
six (6) feet measured horizontally from an opening in an adjoining building or
which are less than ten (10) feet from grade, shall be sealed with stucco on
plywood as provided in this section or with five-eighth (5/8) inch CDX grade
plywood which may be nailed directly to the window frame if such frame is in a
condition which will enable such plywood to be attached, fastened directly to
the exterior wall, or secured with bolts and battens in accordance with Detail
"A". If such frame is not in a condition to enable such plywood to be attached,
the opening shall be framed-out with new grade one (1) wood or metal two (2) ×
four (4) inch top and bottom plates with wood or metal studs every sixteen (16)
inches on center. One door opening, readily visible from the street, may, at
the discretion of the owner, be sealed with a padlocked metal roll-up door, one
(1) hour fire rating metal door or an exterior door of one (1) and three-
quarter (3/4) inch solid wood covered with twenty-six (26) U.S. gauge
galvanized metal with edging turned over and nailed with flat head galvanized
nails. The door of solid wood shall be hung in such a manner that no screws are
exposed on the outside of the door on either the hinges or the hasps. Hinges
shall not have removable hinge pins. Two hasps and locks shall be provided,
located so as to divide the height of the door in equal sections.
   (c)   Openings in roofs which are accessible from an adjoining building
shall be sealed as follows:
      (1)   Ventilating equipment and similar protruding structural elements in
roofs shall be completely removed, except that dumbwaiter shafts extending
above roof level need not be removed if the door opening into the shaft is
sealed with concrete blocks or stucco on plywood. Openings remaining after
removal of such equipment and/or protruding structural elements shall be sealed
with one (1)-inch thick tongue and groove boards, not less than six (6) inches
in nominal width or with five-eighth (5/8) inch CDX plywood, nailed onto three
(3)-inch by eight (8)-inch joists, not more than sixteen (16) inches on center.
Joists shall be secured to the roof timbers framed about the openings in a
sound and secure manner. Boards shall be covered with ninety (90) pound roofing
felt secured by one (1) inch roofing nails every twelve (12) inches or roofing
cement to provide a watertight durable cover. Skylights at the top of the
dumbwaiter shafts shall be sealed by removing the assembly, framing out the
opening with new grade one (1) two (2) × four (4) inch joists on edge, sixteen
(16) inches on center and then covered with five-eighth (5/8) inch CDX grade
plywood. Such plywood shall then be covered with ninety (90) pound roofing felt
secured by one (1) inch roofing nails every twelve (12) inches or roofing
cement to provide a watertight durable cover.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1e024518ebfb3921ec38bc2ecfa58f65299ca12d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-42.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1e024518ebfb3921ec38bc2ecfa58f65299ca12d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-44.gif]
 
      (2)   Roof skylights shall be secured by constructing a frame which
encloses all sides of the skylight. The frame shall be constructed using new
grade one (1) two (2) × four (4) inch single bottom plate and double top plate
with wood or metal studs every sixteen (16) inches on center. Bottom plates
shall be nailed to the building's roof joists with sixteen d (16d) common nails
or sixteen d (16d) concrete nails every twelve (12) inches. Top plates shall
overlap at the corners. New grade one (1) two (2) × six (6) inch joists on edge
with headers, every sixteen (16) inches on center, shall bear on top plates.
The entire frame shall then be covered with five-eighth (5/8) inch CDX grade
plywood. A watertight durable cover shall be provided on the top of the frame
using ninety (90) pound roofing felt secured by one (1) inch roofing nails
every twelve (12) inches or roofing cement. A diagram for enclosure of roof
skylight is provided at Detail "B".
      (3)   Public hall roof bulkheads shall be sealed as follows: Windows of
bulkheads shall be removed and sealed with concrete blocks or stucco on plywood
as provided in this section. Doors of bulkheads may be secured shut if the
frame and door are in a condition whereby the door may be adequately secured.
If not in such condition, the door and frame shall be removed and the opening
shall be sealed with concrete blocks or stucco on plywood as provided in this
section. Openings at top of roof bulkheads shall be sealed by removing the
assembly, framing out the opening with new grade one (1) two (2) × eight (8)
inch joists on edge, sixteen (16) inches on center and then covered with five-
eighth (5/8) inch CDX grade plywood. Such plywood shall then be covered with
ninety (90) pound roofing felt secured by one (1) inch roofing nails every
twelve (12) inches or roofing cement to provide a watertight durable cover.
   (d)   Notification to utilities. Notification shall be made to the steam,
electric and gas utility companies which provide service to the buildings to
request discontinuance of service to the buildings. In addition, water service
to the building shall be discontinued and certification to that effect from the
Department of Environmental Protection shall be filed with the department.
   (e)   Rubbish removal and extermination. Prior to the completion of sealing
of exterior openings as set forth in this section, all decomposable debris and
rubbish shall be removed from the yards, courts and any area at the perimeter
of the premises and the building shall be treated to exterminate rodents by a
licensed exterminator.
   (f)   Hazardous combustible material within buildings. If hazardous
materials which could cause a fire or explosion are discovered within the
building, they shall be removed and disposed of in an appropriate manner prior
to sealing.
§ 3-02 Obtaining Access to Keys of Sealed Premises.
   (a)   Submission of Request. Persons wishing to have access to the keys to a
premises sealed by the Department of Buildings must appear in person at the
Executive Offices of the New York City Department of Buildings. At this time
they must submit form OP-14, "Request for Access to Sealed Premises," with
section "A – Ownership Interest" and "B – Statement of Intent" both completed
and notarized. Copies of the form are available at the Executive Offices of the
Department of Buildings.
   (b)   Verification of Ownership Interest.
      (1)   The General Counsel's Office reviews the form to verify an
ownership or leasehold interest in the premises. The person seeking to obtain
access must provide the General Counsel's Office with some identification
including a photograph (e.g. driver's license, passport) and whatever document
establishes the person's ownership or leasehold interest in the premises.
Examples of such documents include the following:
         (i)   a copy of a recorded deed;
         (ii)   a signed lease, along with the owner's name(s), address(es) and
telephone number(s);
         (iii)   a mortgage agreement;
         (iv)   a State certified Certificate of Incorporation;
         (v)   signed partnership documents; and
         (vi)   any other document deemed acceptable by the Commissioner.
      (2)   A representative of the General Counsel's Office will review the
above documentation to verify ownership interest. If ownership interest is
verified, the representative will sign and date the form where indicated. This
representative gives a copy of the signed form to the person seeking to obtain
access and gives the original form to the office of Borough Operations.
   (c)   Obtaining the Key.
      (1)   Once the General Counsel's Office signs the form verifying
ownership interest, the person seeking to obtain access must bring the
following documents to the Office of the Executive Chief Inspector to
substantiate the affirmations required by subdivision c of § 26-127.1 of the
Administrative Code:
         (i)   a copy of Form OP-14 signed by the General Counsel's Office;
         (ii)   a copy of the computer index sheet listing the application and
violations for the premises;
         (iii)   a copy of the vacate order;
         (iv)   a copy of all relevant outstanding violations;
         (v)   a copy of any relevant work permit issued by the Department of
Buildings; (vi) a copy of all relevant plans approved by the Department; and
         (vii)   any other document deemed necessary by the Commissioner.
      (2)   A representative of the office of the Borough Operations will
review the above documentation to determine if the person has the requisite
need to gain access to the premises. If it is determined that access should be
granted, the representative of the office of the Borough Operations will:
         (i)   have a photograph taken of the person seeking to obtain access,
initial the photograph and attach it to the form;
         (ii)   obtain a copy of the identification including a photograph
(e.g. drivers license, passport) and attach it to the form;
         (iii)   indicate on the form reasons for granting access;
         (iv)   specify on the form the date by which the keys must be
returned;
         (v)   sign the form; and
         (vi)   give a copy of both sides of the completed form to the person
receiving the key.
   (d)   Returning the key.
      (1)   All keys must be returned to the office of Borough Operations by
the date indicated on the form.
      (2)   If a vacate order has been rescinded, all locks and chains must be
returned with the keys.
      (3)   In order to obtain an extension of time for keeping the key, the
person seeking access must appear in person at the Executive Offices with a
notarized letter stating the reason for this request. A representative from the
office of Borough Operations will review the request and, if accepted, will
note the new return date on the original form and initial the change. The
notarized letter will be attached to the original form.
§ 3-03 Hearings to Determine Whether Sealing Orders Were Properly Issued.
   (a)   Hearings to determine whether sealing orders were properly issued by
the Department of Buildings may be arranged through the General Counsel's
office. A person challenging a sealing order may obtain a hearing by submitting
a written request to the office of the General Counsel.
   (b)   The Office of Administrative Trials and Hearings (OATH) will be
notified to schedule a hearing after the General Counsel's office receives the
written request for the hearing. OATH will set the date and time for the
hearing. The General Counsel's office will notify the person requesting the
hearing as soon as OATH calendars the hearing. In the event that the person
seeking the hearing fails to appear, the Commissioner's Order to seal the
premises will remain in effect.
§ 3-04 Obtaining Access to Keys of Premises Sealed Pursuant to § 26-127.2 of
the Administrative Code.
   (a)   Submission of Request. Persons wishing to have access to the keys to a
premises sealed by the Department of Buildings pursuant to § 26-127.2 of the
Administrative Code must appear in person at the Executive Offices of the New
York City Department of Buildings. At this time they must submit the form,
"Request for Access to Premises Sealed for Zoning Violations," with section "A
– Ownership Interest" and "B – Statement of Intent" both completed and
notarized. Copies of the form are available from the Administrative Enforcement
Unit ("AEU") at the Executive Offices of the Department of Buildings.
   (b)   Verification of ownership interest.
      (1)   The AEU reviews the form to verify an ownership or leasehold
interest in the premises. The person seeking to obtain access must provide the
AEU with some identification including a photograph (e.g. driver's license,
passport) and whatever document establishes the person's ownership or leasehold
interest in the premises. Examples of such documents include the following:
         (i)   a copy of a recorded deed;
         (ii)   a signed lease, along with the owner's name(s), address(es) and
telephone number(s);
         (iii)   a mortgage agreement;
         (iv)   a State certified Certificate of Incorporation;
         (v)   signed partnership documents; and
         (vi)   any other document deemed acceptable by the Commissioner.
      (2)   A representative of AEU shall review the above documentation to
verify ownership interest. If ownership interest is verified, the
representative will sign and date the form where indicated. A copy of the
signed form shall be provided to the person seeking to obtain access.
   (c)   Obtaining the key.
      (1)   Once the AEU signs the form verifying ownership interest, the
person seeking to obtain access must submit copies of the following documents
to the AEU:
         (i)   Form entitled "Request for Access to Premises Sealed for Zoning
Violations," with section A signed by AEU;
         (ii)   the sealing order;
         (iii)   any other document deemed necessary by the commissioner.
      (2)   A representative of the AEU will review the above documentation to
determine if the person has the requisite need to gain access to the premises.
If it is determined that access should be granted, the representative of the
AEU will:
         (i)   have a photograph taken of the person seeking to obtain access,
initial the photograph and attach it to the form;
         (ii)   obtain a copy of the identification including a photograph
(i.e. driver's license, passport) and attach it to the form;
         (iii)   indicate on the form reasons for granting access;
         (iv)   specify on the form the date by which the keys must be
returned;
         (v)   sign the form; and
         (vi)   give a copy of both sides of the completed form to the person
receiving the key.
   (d)   Returning the key.
      (1)   All keys must be returned to the AEU by the date indicated on the
form.
      (2)   If a sealing order has been rescinded, all locks and chains must be
returned with the keys.
      (3)   In order to obtain an extension of time for keeping the key, the
original person seeking access must appear in person at the AEU with the key
and a notarized letter stating the reason for this request and, if accepted,
will note the new return date on the original form and initial the change. The
notarized letter will be attached to the original form.
Chapter 4: Certificates of Occupancy, Live Loads and Occupancy Loads
§ 4-01 Posting Requirements.
   (a)   A copy of the Certificate of Occupancy indicating the live loads and
occupant loads shall be posted within every building for which a Certificate of
Occupancy has been issued, except in one and two-family dwellings, and such
posted Certificate of Occupancy shall be deemed in full compliance with § 27-
225 of the Administrative Code. In a commercial or industrial structure for
which no Certificate of Occupancy was issued, a sign shall be posted and
maintained in a conspicuous place on each floor stating the live loads.
   (b)   The copy of the Certificate of Occupancy shall be posted in the main
entrance hall or lobby leading to the elevator of each building when there are
elevators and to the main entrance hall to the stairs when there are no
elevators and shall be posted near the main entrance door when there is no
entrance hall to stairs or elevators.
   (c)   The Certificate of Occupancy shall be posted in a frame having a size
sufficient to accommodate properly the Certificate of Occupancy.
   (d)   The frame shall be faced with glass or other transparent facing which
will permit the Certificate of Occupancy to be read without difficulty.
   (e)   Frames shall be constructed of corrosion resistant metal or durable,
impact and flame resistant plastic.
   (f)   Frames shall be constructed in such manner as to prevent removal of
the facing or the Certificate of Occupancy, without the use of special tools.
   (g)   Certificates shall be placed in such location as to be readily
available to interested persons, and the bottom of the frame shall be located
between 54 to 66 inches above the floor.
   (h)   Sufficient lighting shall be provided to make the Certificate of
Occupancy legible at all times when the building is occupied.
   (i)   In place of posting the Certificate of Occupancy in a location
specified under 1 RCNY §
4-01(b), it may be located as specified in this rule but only in those
buildings where there is a resident caretaker or superintendent on the premises
or where there is a building manager on the premises and where such caretakers,
superintendents or managers or their assistants are present in the building at
all times when the building is occupied. In such buildings, the Certificate of
Occupancy may be posted within the entrance hall of the apartment or office of
the caretaker or superintendent or inside the entrance to an office of a
building manager. The Certificate of Occupancy shall be posted in such
locations in the manner specified by the foregoing rules.
   (j)   A diagrammatic plan approved by the Department of Buildings, as
required by § 27-564 of the Administrative Code, shall be posted in accordance
with the requirements for a Certificate of Occupancy indicated in these rules
showing:
      (1)   the weight of any piece of machinery or equipment weighing more
than 1,000 pounds and its identifying description and location.
      (2)   the maximum design wheel load and the total maximum weight of any
vehicle that may be brought into the building.
      (3)   the equivalent uniform partition loads, or in lieu of this, a
statement to the effect that the design was predicated on actual partition
loads. A diagrammatic key plan shall not be required where the above
information is clearly noted on the posted Certificate of Occupancy. Section
4-01(j) shall not apply to any structure or portion thereof erected and altered
in compliance with any code in effect prior to December 6, 1968. Notice of the
permitted floor loads in such buildings shall be posted as required by the
former code.
Chapter 5: Concrete
§ 5-01 Conveyance by Pumping Methods [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 11/7/2022, eff. 12/7/2022)
§ 5-02 Licensing of Concrete Testing Laboratories.
   (a)   General.
      (1)   Each laboratory shall have in responsible charge a Director who
shall be professionally qualified and who shall personally supervise all
technical functions of the laboratory relating to testing of concrete and
concrete materials. Sections 27-605 and 27-607 of the Administrative Code
require that a licensed Professional Engineer or a Registered Architect
supervise the testing of materials and the inspection of concrete construction.
      (2)   All technicians shall be qualified to perform all tests they may be
required to conduct under the supervision of the Director.
      (3)   The laboratory shall annually furnish to the Department of
Buildings a list of all personnel who are supervising and performing tests and
their qualifications. Note: 1 RCNY §
5-02(b)(6) shall also be complied with.
      (4)   The laboratory shall furnish to the Department of Buildings a list
of all the equipment used to perform tests on concrete and concrete materials.
      (5)   The laboratory shall request and have an inspection made of its
procedure and equipment by the "Cement and Concrete Reference Laboratory"
whenever the "Cement and Concrete Reference Laboratory" is inspecting
laboratories in this area on its cyclical tour of inspection. These inspections
shall be made at the cost and expense of the laboratory seeking a license. A
copy of the inspection report shall be promptly submitted to the Department of
Buildings.
      (6)   The laboratory shall correct within 10 days any condition ordered
by the Department of Buildings which in its judgment may adversely affect the
results of any test.
      (7)   A license shall be issued to each applicant upon proof of
compliance with these rules and upon payment of a fee of one hundred dollars
($100).
      (8)   The annual renewal fee shall be fifty dollars ($50).
      (9)   A violation of any of these rules or the falsifying or
misrepresentation of any fact in any required report shall constitute cause for
revocation or suspension of the license by the Commissioner, after a hearing
upon prior notice of at least ten calendar days. However, notwithstanding the
foregoing, when the public safety may be imminently jeopardized or when false
report has been made, the Commissioner shall have the power, pending a hearing
and determination of charges, to forthwith suspend the license for a period not
exceeding five working days. The presence of batch tickets at a plant filled in
on any day other than the day the specific batch is to be delivered to the
construction site, whether signed or unsigned, shall constitute a false report.
      (10)   All reports submitted by the laboratory shall bear its name and
its license number.
      (11)   Renewal of licenses or certificates of qualification, heretofore
issued, and issuance of new licenses shall be conditioned upon and subject to
the provisions of §§ 26-131 through 26-139 and 26-200 through 26-204 of the
Administrative Code.
      (12)   The laboratory shall display a copy of its license on its
premises.
      (13)   The Director shall furnish all of his employees an identification
card with a photograph of the employee affixed thereto.
      (14)   The Director shall maintain a daily record of the activities of
all of his employees, indicating the time of departure to and return from batch
plant or construction site inspections, the construction project to which the
employee is assigned, and the batch plant visited. This record shall be
maintained for 2 years and shall be made available to the department personnel.
   (b)   Personnel.
      (1)   The Director shall be qualified by virtue of education and
experience to supervise all tests of concrete and concrete materials conducted
by the laboratory. He shall be qualified to practice Professional Engineering
or Architecture in the State of New York.
      (2)   All technicians performing tests on the chemical composition of
cement shall be qualified analytical chemists.
      (3)   All other technicians, field personnel, and all personnel having
direct supervision of technical staff shall be qualified by education and
experience to take samples and perform required tests. Qualifying education and
experience may include a degree in engineering, suitable experience in concrete
construction, suitable training in concrete industry sponsored programs and the
like.
      (4)   Satisfactory proof of such qualifications for concrete field
testing technicians shall include certification resulting from the ability to
pass a qualification test following the guidelines of the American Concrete
Institute as set forth in ACI publication CP-2(82).
      (5)   All concrete field testing technicians shall be qualified pursuant
to 1 RCNY §
5-02(b)(4) on or before July 1, 1985.
      (6)   The Department of Buildings shall annually publish in The City
Record, on or before the first of July, a listing of concrete field testing
technicians qualified pursuant to 1 RCNY §
5-02(b)(4).
      (7)   The Director shall submit to the department an affidavit that all
technicians and field personnel are qualified to perform their designated tasks
and shall keep on the premises a record of the qualifications of all personnel,
which shall be made available to the department upon request.
   (c)   Reports. Reports shall be presented in a form acceptable to the
Department of Buildings.
   (d)   Tests.
      (1)   The following specifications of the American Society for Testing
and Materials (ASTM) shall be considered as part of these rules:
C29-78   Test for Unit Weight and Voids in Aggregate.
C31-85   Methods of Making and Curing Concrete Test Specimens in the Field.
C39-84   Test Method for Compressive Strength of Cylindrical Concrete
         Specimens.
C40-84   Test Method for Organic Impurities in Fine Aggregates for Concrete.
C42-84a  Methods of Obtaining and Testing Drilled Cores and Sawed Beams of
         Concrete.
C70-79   Standard Method of Test for Surface Moisture in Fine Aggregate.
C88-83   Test Method for Soundness of Aggregates by Use of Sodium Sulfate or
         Magnesium Sulfate.
C109-86  Test Method or Compressive Strength of Hydraulic Cement Mortars (Using
         2-inch or 50-mm cube Specimens).
C114-85  Method of Chemical Analysis of Hydraulic Cement.
C115-79b Standard Method of Test for Fineness of Portland Cement by the
         Turbidimeter.
C117-84  Test Method for Material Finer than 75-um (No. 200) Sieve in Mineral
         Aggregates by Washing.
C127-84  Test Method for Specific Gravity and Absorption of Coarse Aggregate.
C128-84  Test Method for Specific Gravity and Absorption of Fine Aggregate.
C136-84a Method for Sieve Analysis of Fine and Coarse Aggregates.
C138-81  Standard Method of Test for Unit Weight, Yield and Air Content
         (Gravimetric) of Concrete.
C143-78  Test Method for Slump of Portland Cement Concrete.
C151-84  Test Method for Autoclave Expansion of Portland Cement.
C172-82  Method of Sampling Fresh Mixed Concrete.
C173-78  Standard Method of Test for Air Content of Freshly-Mixed Concrete by
         the Volumetric Method.
C183-83a Method of Sampling and Acceptance of Hydraulic Cement Mortar.
C184-83  Test for Fineness of Hydraulic Cement by the 150-um (No. 100) and 75-
         um (No. 200) Sieves.
C187-86  Test Method for Normal Consistency of Hydraulic Cement.
C190-85  Test Method for Tensile Strength of Hydraulic Cement Mortars.
C191-82  Test Method for Time of Setting of Hydraulic Cement by Vicat Needle.
C192-81  Method of Making and Curing Concrete Test Specimens in the Laboratory.
C204-84  Test Method for Fineness of Portland Cement by Air Permeability
         Apparatus.
C230-83  Specification for Flow Table for Use in Tests of Hydraulic Cement.
C231-82  Standard Method of Test for Air Content of Freshly-Mixed Concrete by
         the Pressure Method.
C260-86  Specification for Air-Entraining Admixtures for Concrete.
C266-77  Test for Time of Setting of Hydraulic Cement by Gillmore Needles.
C494-86  Specification for Chemical Admixtures for Concrete.
C131-81  Resistance to Abrasion of Small-Size Coarse Aggregate by Use of Los
         Angeles Machine.
C535-81  Resistance to Degradation of Large-Size Coarse Aggregate by Abrasion
         and Impact in the Los Angeles Machine, Test for
C803-82  Penetration Resistance to Hardened Concrete, Test for
E4-83a   Practices for Load Verification of Testing Machines.
 
      (2)   All testing of cement shall be conducted in accordance with the
Standard Specifications of the American Society for Testing and Materials
(ASTM).
   (e)   Curing and testing of concrete specimens.
      (1)   The laboratory shall be equipped with a suitable size enclosed room
for the curing of all concrete test specimens. It shall be of such size that
specimens can be easily handled during storage and preparation for testing. The
room shall be equipped with the necessary equipment to maintain a temperature
of 73.4 degrees 3.0 degrees F. at all times, as per ASTM C 192. The room also
shall be equipped to maintain a relative humidity of 95 percent plus in order
that the specimens will be maintained in a moist condition in which free water
is on the surface at all times. The test specimen shall not be exposed to a
stream of running water.
      (2)   The laboratory shall have equipment for determining relative
humidity and temperature of the room and recording devices to monitor them.
      (3)   The laboratory shall be equipped with a power operated testing
machine with a variable speed control. It shall be of sufficient capacity and
capable of applying load without shock at a rate of loading prescribed in § 4
(b) of ASTM C 39.
      (4)   The testing machine shall be equipped with two steel bearing blocks
with hardened faces, one of which is a spherically seated block that normally
will bear on the upper surfaces of the specimen and the other a plain rigid
block on which the specimen will rest. The bearing faces of these blocks used
for compression testing of concrete shall have a Rockwell hardness of not less
than 55 HRC. The bearing faces shall be at least as large and preferably
slightly larger than the surface of the specimen to which the load is applied.
The bearing faces when new shall not depart from a plan by more than 0.0005-
inch at any point and they shall be maintained within a permissible variation
limit of 0.001-inch. The movable portion of the spherically seated block shall
be designed so that the bearing face can be rotated freely and tilted through
small angles in any direction.
      (5)   The machine, if hydraulic, shall be equipped with a dial gauge
having a sufficient diameter to allow the increments of load to be read within
plus or minus 1/2 percent of the load being applied.
      (6)   The machine shall show a certificate of calibration or verification
within the time limits set by requirements of ASTM E 4. If any major repairs
have been made on the testing machines, the machine shall be re-calibrated.
   (f)   Equipment. The laboratory shall provide and maintain in proper working
condition the following equipment as a minimum requirement:
      (1)   Necessary for concrete mix designs:
         (i)   Concrete mixer
            (A)   1 1/2 cubic foot capacity
            (B)   3 1/2 cubic foot total drum volume
         (ii)   Slump cone 8-inches in diameter at the base and 4-inches at the
top of a height of 12-inches and conforming to ASTM C 143.
         (iii)   A tamping rod consisting of a round, straight steel rod 5/8-
inch in diameter.
         (iv)   Cylindrical metal measures of 1/2 cubic foot and a cubic foot
capacity conforming to the requirements of ASTM C 138.
         (v)   A sturdy, flat plate about 15-inches square for striking off the
concrete in the measure.
         (vi)   Appropriate air meter.
         (vii)   Necessary scoops, wood floats, trowels.
         (viii)   A balance or scale sensitive to 0.1 pound, having a capacity
of not less than 100 pounds.
      (2)   Necessary equipment for preparation of concrete test cylinders:
         (i)   For compression tests:
            (A)   Capping plates for cement or plaster caps. Plate glass at
least 1/4-inch thick, or machined metal plates at least 1/2-inch thick or
polished stone plates of suitable materials, such as granite or diabase and at
least 3-inches thick. A capping plate shall be at least l-inch greater in
diameter than the specimen.
            (B)   Capping plates for use with mixtures of sulphur and granular
materials, or similar materials and dimensions, recessed to retain the molten
mixture.
            (C)   The surface of any capping plate shall not depart from a
plane by more than .002-inch in the diameter of the specimen.
            (D)   Straight edge and feeler gauges to check planeness of capping
plates and caps.
            (E)   Calipers and rule for checking size of cylinders.
            (F)   Controlled temperature melting pot if sulphur mixtures are to
be used. Mixing pans, scoops, spoons, trowels, spatulas, etc., if cement or
plaster caps, are to be used.
            (G)   Appropriate grinding equipment may be substituted for the
capping equipment.
         (ii)   Materials required:
            (A)   For cement or plaster caps, any of the following:
                  Type I Portland Cement
                  High Alumina Cement (Lumnite)
                  Type III Portland Cement
                  High strength gypsum plasters such as:
                  Hydrostone and Hydrocal White (Note: Plaster of Paris is not
satisfactory).
            (B)   For sulphur caps either of the following: Laboratory prepared
mixtures of sulphur and granular materials. Proprietary mixtures such as:
Vitroband, Leadite, Cylcap, etc. (Note: See ASTM C 1982 for limitations of
various type caps).
      (3)   Necessary for analysis of fine and coarse aggregates:
         (i)   Square or round mesh sieves, Pan Nos. 200, 100, 50, 30, 16, 8,
4, 1/4-inch, 3/8-inch, 1/2-inch, 3/4-inch, 1-inch, 1 1/2-inches, 2-inches, 3-
inches, 3 1/2-inches, No. 12.
         (ii)   Sieve shaking equipment.
         (iii)   Scales:
            (A)   Gram scale sensitive to at least 0.1 gram.
            (B)   Gram scale with at least 5,000 gram capacity and sensitive to
1 gram.
            (C)   Pound scale sensitive to 1/4-ounce.
            (D)   Steel brush to brush sieves.
            (E)   Oven-heat continuously between 221 degrees and 230 degrees F.
            (F)   Containers for holding solutions.
            (G)   Perforated containers for immersing aggregates in solutions -
wire baskets.
            (H)   Calibrated Volumetric (milliliters) graduate, 500 milliliters
capacity.
            (I)   Conical metal mold 1 1/2-inches diameter at top, 3 1/2-inches
diameter at bottom, 2 7/8-inches high.
            (J)   Tamping rod - 12-ounces, having a flat circular tamping face
1-inch in diameter.
            (K)   Tamping rod - 5/8-inch diameter, 24-inches length.
            (L)   Cubic foot cylindrical measure either 1/2 cubic foot, 1/
4 cubic foot, 1/3 cubic foot, 1/10 cubic foot or 1 cubic foot.
            (M)   500 milliliters flask.
            (N)   Thermometer - heats over 100 degrees C.
      (4)   Necessary for field testing and inspection:
         (i)   Thermometer, 0 degrees - 200 degrees F.
         (ii)   Scale, 100 lbs. capacity.
         (iii)   6-inch round by 12-inch long container.
         (iv)   Slump cone and 5/8-inch by 24-inch rod.
         (v)   Air meter.
         (vi)   Rule, 12-inches.
   (g)   Cement testing.
      (1)   Introduction. Cement testing shall be done in laboratories equipped
to make the basic tests required for evaluating cement.
      (2)   Division into physical and chemical tests. These tests are divided
into two parts, physical and chemical and all physical test specimens shall be
prepared in a room or area where the temperature is controlled within the
limits of 20 to 27.5 degrees C. and the humidity at not less than 50 percent.
      (3)   Physical test equipment:
         (i)   Analytical balance complete with calibrated weights.
         (ii)   Scale of 2,000 gram capacity accurate to 0.1 percent.
         (iii)   Wagner Turbidimeter or Blaine permeability apparatus
calibrated with standard cement from the Bureau of Standards.
         (iv)   One 325 mesh sieve as well as 100, 50, 30 and 16 mesh sizes.
         (v)   Electrically driven mixer bowl and paddle.
         (vi)   Flow table and flow mould.
         (vii)   Trowel and tamper for cubes.
         (viii)   Cube moulds and sealing compound.
         (ix)   Autoclave, moulds and comparator with steel reference bar.
         (x)   Vicat apparatus and moulds.
         (xi)   Gilimore needles and glass plates for samples.
         (xii)   LeChatelier flask.
         (xiii)   Supply of graded Ottawa Sand.
         (xiv)   Glass graduates of 100, 150 and 200 ml. capacity.
         (xv)   Cylindrical measure of 400 ml.
         (xvi)   Straight edge and spatula.
         (xvii)   Calibrated testing machine of not less than 30,000 lbs.,
capacity equipped with spherically seated upper steel block of not more than
31/2 diameter.
      (4)   ASTM standard tests for cements. Standard tests for cements as
required by ASTM are as follows:
            Fineness
            Soundness
            Time of setting
            Air content of mortar
            Compressive tests of 2-inch by 2-inch cubes.
      (5)   Chemical composition of cement:
         (i)   The laboratory shall be equipped with an analytical balance and
standard weights, platinum and porcelain crucibles, curettes, pipettes, etc.
         (ii)   Distilled water and all reagents necessary for the
determination of the oxides of silica, iron, aluminum, magnesium, sulphur,
calcium, and insoluble residue by one of approved.
         (iii)   All tests shall be performed in a room equipped with fume
chamber, gas burners, working benches, by a qualified analytical chemist.
         (iv)   Special tests such as the alkalies of sodium and potassium
shall be made as outlined by the ASTM.
§ 5-03 Approval of Prequalified Concrete Mixes.
   (a)   Source of concrete mixes. Concrete proportioned according to
prequalified mixes shall be produced only from batch plants, approved by the
Commissioner pursuant to rules and regulations of the department.
   (b)   Mix designs not previously accepted. Each concrete producer or group
of producers seeking approval of mix designs that have not been previously
accepted by the Department shall file an application with the M.E.A. Division,
Department of Buildings at the address provided in the City's website, http://
www.nyc.gov, and shall furnish the following:
      (1)   A compilation of the proposed mix designs listing the batch
weights, types of aggregates and other ingredients together with a numbering
system that will provide identification of each mix for testing and recording
purposes. Each compilation shall contain a title sheet upon which a master list
of all the mixes shall be designated. Opposite each mix a space shall be
provided for the signature of the examiner and the date of the approval of that
particular mix. When a mix has been approved for use as a "PREQUALIFIED MIX,"
the examiner shall affix his signature and the date in the space provided, and
then he shall affix the approval stamp of the Commissioner of Buildings.
      (2)   For each mix utilizing a different combination of aggregates,
admixtures, cement type, water-cement ratio, etc., a report of preliminary
trials made by a testing laboratory licensed under § 26-200 together with an
attestation by the Architect or Engineer who supervised the making of the
preliminary tests. The laboratory report shall include the following
information:
         (i)   Fine and coarse aggregate.
            Type (natural or manufactured sand, gravel, stone, etc.).
            Weight per. cu. ft. dry rodded.
            Specific gravity.
            Percentage of voids.
            Percentage of absorption.
            Fineness modulus (see ASTM Definitions C 125).
            Gradation and comparison to ASTM C 33; also size of coarse
aggregate.
         (ii)   Cement-type.
         (iii)   Batch weights.
         (iv)   Admixtures-type and amount.
         (v)   Test results of each particular mix design being submitted for
approval. Separate tests shall be made for each compressive strength.
         (vi)   Attestation of the Architect or Engineer engaged by the
producer or producers to supervise the tests.
         (vii)   Board of Standards and Appeals Cal. No. for items requiring
Board approval, such as lightweight aggregate admixtures, etc.
         (viii)   Such other information required by §§ 27-605(a)(1), (2) and
(3).
      (3)   Each concrete producer or group of producers that submits for
approval the information required hereabove, shall be assigned an application
number which is to be known as the "PREQUALIFIED MIX REFERENCE NUMBER." This
REFERENCE NUMBER shall be valid only for the calendar year for which it is
issued. All applications shall be submitted before November 1 of each year for
review and for prequalification for the calendar year next following. When the
concrete proposed for use is to be produced using the mix designs from a
summary compilation that has been approved, the architect or engineer who has
been retained to make or supervise the Controlled Inspection shall verify that
the mixes have been approved as "PREQUALIFIED MIXES" and shall file a statement
for each project setting forth the PREQUALIFIED MIX REFERENCE NUMBER from which
the concrete mix proportions are to be selected.
   (c)   Mix designs previously approved and used.
      (1)   Each concrete producer making an application shall be assigned a
PREQUALIFIED MIX REFERENCE NUMBER in the same manner as designated in 1 RCNY §
5-03(b)(3).
      (2)   The application shall set forth the details of location, date and
laboratory that pertained to the previous project. It also shall include a
statement setting forth the average strength obtained from tests made at the
job, together with a summary of the total number of tests made and, of those
tests, how many fell below the specified strength.
      (3)   A copy of the laboratory report that was originally accepted shall
be submitted. It shall contain the information listed under 1 RCNY §
5-03(b)(2). (Reports with the water-cement ratios selected at a point on the
curve established by preliminary mix tests corresponding to a strength of
concrete 15% higher than the minimum ultimate strength called for on the plans
shall not be accepted, unless the water-cement ratio complying with § 27-605(a)
(2) can be determined.)
      (4)   The Architect or Engineer retained for the Controlled Inspection
shall file a statement similar to the one mentioned in 1 RCNY §
5-03(b)(3).
§ 5-04 Approval of Concrete Production Facilities.
   (a)   The scope of these rules relating to facilities for the production of
concrete under Article 5 of Subchapter 10 of Chapter 1 of Title 27 of the
Administrative Code shall be applicable to batch plant installations of either
a permanent or temporary nature, located on or off the site of construction.
   (b)   Application for approval of a batch plant shall be made on behalf of
the owner by an engineer on department forms filed with the Commissioner of
Buildings at the address provided in the City's website, http://www.nyc.gov. No
off-site batch plants will be acceptable unless the legal use of the premises
as a batch plant has been previously approved by either the Department of
Buildings or the Department of Small Business Services.
   (c)   The concrete producer shall supply a list of all plant equipment to be
used in the batching of concrete on forms furnished by the department.
   (d)   The concrete producer shall engage a Licensed Professional Engineer,
not in his regular employ, to inspect the batching facilities. This inspection
shall be made at the cost and expense of the concrete producer seeking plant
approval. A copy of the verification of the inspection shall be submitted with
the application for plant approval on forms furnished by the department.
   (e)   The applicant shall follow inspection procedures and complete the
check list on forms furnished by the department which shall accompany the
application for plant approval.
   (f)   The concrete producer shall promptly correct any objection made by the
department which in its judgment it deems may adversely affect the quality of
the concrete being placed. Should the department find any objection because of
the producer's failure to meet the necessary standards for plant approval,
corrections shall be made within 30 working days after the receipt, by the
producer, of a written notice from the department.
   (g)   Approval of plant facilities shall be fully reviewed every two years
upon a renewal submission for approval by the concrete producer provided the
plant is not relocated during the two-year period.
   (h)   If a concrete plant is relocated from the location as filed on the
original application form after initial approval is received, a new submission
shall be required.
   (i)   During the two-year approval period, if any equipment is changed,
added to, modified or moved within the same premises as originally filed,
notification will be sent to the Commissioner of Buildings, Materials and
Equipment Acceptance Division at the address provided in the City's website,
http://www.nyc.gov. Accompanying said notification shall be an amendment to the
application verified by an affidavit from a professional engineer not in the
regular employ of the concrete producer stating that the modification meets all
requirements of the check list.
   (j)   The concrete producer shall be required to produce concrete in
accordance with all applicable provisions of the Building Code and all
pertinent reference standards referred to therein.
   (k)   The concrete producer shall be required to submit attestations and
certifications specified in §§ 27-605 and 27-606 of the Administrative Code
promptly for the appropriate type of concrete for each construction project.
Where automated batching equipment is used, the tapes recording the batched
weights shall be available for inspection for a period of two years.
   (l)   Concrete produced for the construction of buildings subject to
controlled inspection of concrete shall not be batched and delivered to the
construction site unless a person designated for batch plant inspection is
present at the plant. However, it shall be permissible to deliver the concrete
in the absence of the person designated for inspection when there are
extenuating circumstances, provided the design architect or engineer and the
architect or engineer designated for control inspections are notified promptly
by phone with a follow-up letter. The follow-up letter shall indicate the
circumstances under which the uninspected concrete was shipped and shall supply
all necessary facts such as the times and dates and volume of concrete batched
and delivered, the design strength and mix proportions, and the application
number, location, and contractor that the concrete is being delivered to.
Similarly, the appropriate Borough Superintendent's office is to be promptly
notified by phone with a follow-up letter together with copies of the other
required notification letters.
   (m)   Approval shall be for a period of two years. However, temporary
approval of batch plants may be authorized at the discretion of the
Commissioner for a period of ninety days, provided an application for approval
with necessary information furnished on appropriate forms is filed, and
provided the application is otherwise acceptable in other respects. Temporary
approvals may be renewed for additional ninety day periods at the discretion of
the Commissioner.
   (n)   Concrete producers shall be required to permit complete plant
inspections by department personnel periodically.
   (o)   A copy of the batch plant approval will be forwarded to the owner of
each facility and shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the plant.
   (p)   A violation of any of these rules or the falsifying or
misrepresentation of any fact in the application or in any report shall
constitute cause for revocation or suspension of any approval by the
Commissioner, after a hearing upon prior notice of at least ten calendar days.
For temporary approvals, the falsifying or misrepresentation of any fact in the
application or in any report shall be cause for immediate revocation of such
temporary approval by the Commissioner. However, notwithstanding the foregoing,
when the public safety may be imminently jeopardized, or when a false report
has been made, the Commissioner shall have the power, pending a hearing and
determination of charges, to forthwith suspend any approval for a period not
exceeding five calendar days.
Chapter 10: Drums for Derrick Load and Boom Hoists
§ 10-01 Requirements.
Drums for derrick load and boom hoists shall be contained on the same bedframe
operated independently by one or more engines. Each drum shall have a separate
hand brake and clutch or power down mechanism in lieu of a clutch, as well as a
positive dog on the drum and a dog on the brake pedal. The hoisting mechanism
shall be in full view and under the control of a licensed hoisting machine
operator at all times.
Chapter 11: Elevators, Escalators, Personnel Hoists and Moving Walks
§ 11-01 Rules for the Certification and Qualification of Private Elevator
Inspection Agencies and for the Performance of Inspections and Filing of
Inspection Reports for Elevators and Escalators by such Agencies. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 4/25/2017, eff. 5/25/2017)
§ 11-02 Elevator and Escalator Violations Constituting a Condition Dangerous to
Human Life and Safety.
   (a)   Dangerous conditions. Any of the following elevator and escalator
violations constitute a condition dangerous to human life and safety.
      (1)   Elevator out-of-service when there is only one elevator in the
building or building section.
      (2)   Fireman service not functioning in premises.
      (3)   Badly worn, defective, or damaged hoist cables and/or governors
cables.
      (4)   Defective hoistway doors.
      (5)   Defective hoistway door interlocks.
      (6)   Defective car door/gate.
      (7)   Defective car door/gate switch.
      (8)   Defective/missing vision panels.
      (9)   Defective car safety devices.
      (10)   Defective brake assembly.
      (11)   Defective hoist machine.
      (12)   Defective selector/assembly.
      (13)   Missing top emergency covers.
      (14)   Defective escalator fire shutters.
      (15)   Defective escalator comb plates.
      (16)   Defective escalator stop switch.
      (17)   Excessive escalator skirt panel clearances.
      (18)   Defective or non-functional safety switches.
      (19)   Badly worn, defective, or damaged relays or controllers and/or
selector.
      (20)   Defective, badly worn, or damaged car safety device parts.
      (21)   Defective car and/or counterweight buffers.
      (22)   Any damaged, badly worn or defective equipment, which could result
in elevator breakdown.
   (b)   Civil penalties. In the event any person fails to remove any of the
violations listed in these rules, after having been served with a notice
personally or by certified mail indicating that removal of such condition
exists and requiring such removal or compliance unless the removal of such
condition is prevented by a labor dispute or is the result of vandalism beyond
the control of the owner, he shall be liable for civil penalty of not less than
one hundred fifty dollars per day commencing on the date of the service of such
notice and terminating on the date that such removal or compliance has been
substantially completed in addition to other penalties set forth in law. When
service of such notice is made by mail to the owner, civil penalties as herein
provided shall commence five days from the date of such mailing.
   (c)   Discontinuance of action upon removal of violation. Where a notice
requiring removal of a violation listed in these rules has been issued,
liability shall cease and the corporation counsel, on request of the
Commissioner, shall discontinue prosecution only if the removal or compliance
so required has been completed or substantially completed within ten days after
the service of such notice. The Commissioner shall, upon good cause shown,
grant additional time for such removal or compliance. In addition, the civil
penalties shall be tolled from the date the owner certifies under oath, a form
prescribed by the Commissioner, that the removal of the violation has been
substantially completed. If subsequent inspection by the department shows a
failure to have removed the violation, the civil penalties shall be deemed to
have accrued as of the first day notice of violation has been served.
§ 11-03 Cease Use Orders for Elevators, Personnel Hoists, Escalators and Moving
Walks.
A cease use order should be issued for all elevators, personnel hoists,
escalators, and moving walks pursuant to § 26-127 of the Administrative Code of
the City of New York whenever an imminently hazardous condition exists. In
addition, the device should be tagged as unsafe. This tag may not be removed
without prior approval from the Department of Buildings. Such imminently
hazardous conditions include but are not limited to:
   (a)   Elevator running with an open hoistway door or car gate/door.
   (b)   Elevator running with broken or non-functioning upper or lower final
hoistway or machine limit switches.
   (c)   Hoistway or car door vision glass and grille guard missing.
   (d)   Unravelling or broken hoist, counterweight, governor or compensation
cables.
   (e)   Missing hoistway door or car door gibs.
   (f)   Inoperable governor.
   (g)   Elevator running with non-functioning interlock.
   (h)   Emergency top exit cover missing (passenger elevator).
   (i)   Side emergency exit door open (passenger elevator).
   (j)   Emergency stop switch not working (automatic elevator, escalator or
moving walk).
   (k)   Directional switch not working (escalator or moving walk).
   (l)   Other imminently hazardous conditions as observed by the inspector.
§ 11-04 Separability.
If any of the provisions of these rules are found by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid or ineffective in whole or in part, the effect of
such decision shall be limited to those provisions that are expressly stated in
the decision to be invalid or ineffective, and all other provisions of these
rules shall continue to be separately and fully effective.
§ 11-05 Certification of Completion of Work After Issuance of Temporary Use
Permit for an Elevator, Escalator, and Other Device, Except Amusement Devices,
Listed in § 27-185(b) or § 27-982 of the Administrative Code. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 11/7/2022, eff. 12/7/2022)
§ 11-06 Elevators, Escalators or Other Devices, Except Amusement Devices,
Listed in § 27-185(b) or § 27-982 of the Administrative Code Renewal of
Temporary Use Permits and Fees.
   (a)   Renewal of a temporary use permit for an elevator, escalator, or other
device, except amusement devices, listed in § 27-185(b) or § 27-982 of the
Administrative Code.
      (1)   A temporary use permit issued pursuant to § 27-188 of the
Administrative Code for an elevator, escalator or other device listed in § 27-
185(b) or § 27-982 of the Administrative Code may be renewed subject to the
following:
         (i)   Each renewal application shall be submitted on forms furnished
by the department not later than five business days prior to the expiration
date of the temporary use permit;
         (ii)   Such application shall state the reason for renewal and be
accompanied by the required fee as set forth in subdivision (3) of this
section; and
         (iii)   Such application shall be submitted on behalf of the owner and
signed by the owner or its authorized representative.
      (2)   The commissioner will automatically renew a temporary use permit
every thirty days for up to 120 days unless informed otherwise by the
applicant. After 120 days, a renewal application must be filed and accompanied
by the required fee.
      (3)   The department may require a department inspection prior to the
issuance of a renewal.
      (4)   Each application for renewal shall be accompanied by a fee of $100
per device.
   (b)   Failure to keep or be prepared for scheduled appointment.
      (1)   Scheduled appointments for the inspection or tests of an elevator,
escalator or other device listed in § 27-185(b) and § 27-982 of the
Administrative Code may be canceled provided that notice of cancellation is
received by the department no later than 3 business days prior to the scheduled
appointment.
      (2)   Where a department inspector arrives at the site of a scheduled
inspection or test and is unable to perform the scheduled inspection or witness
the test because the owner or its authorized representative has failed to keep
or is unprepared for the scheduled appointment, then the department shall
impose a fee for the missed appointment in the amount of $200. The fee shall be
due and payable within thirty days after the date of the missed appointment or
prior to the scheduling of a new appointment, whichever is earlier.
   (c)   Pre-inspection clearance.
      (1)   An owner or its authorized representative may request the
department to perform a pre-inspection clearance of an elevator, escalator, or
other device listed in § 27-185(b) and § 27-982 of the Administrative Code
within five business days of the department's receipt of such request and
payment of the required fees set forth in subdivision (2) of this section. The
department reserves the right to schedule the requested pre-inspection
clearance during non-regular or off-peak hours.
      (2)   A request for a pre-inspection clearance shall be accompanied by a
non-refundable fee in the amount of $200 per device.
   (d)   This section shall not apply to amusement devices.
Chapter 15: Fire Protection
§ 15-01 Communication and Alarm Systems ("Mini-Class 'E' Systems") for Certain
Buildings Under 100 Feet in Height.
   (a)   Number of occupants. The subject subsection (27-972(h)) of the
Building Code states that a communication and alarm system, acceptable to the
Commissioner of Buildings, shall be provided in buildings classified in
occupancy group E, less than 100 feet in height, occupied or arranged to be
occupied for an occupant load of more than one hundred persons above or below
the street floor or more than a total of five hundred persons in the entire
building. The provisions regarding occupant load are to be interpreted to apply
where one or more of the following prevail:
      (1)   The sum of the occupants on all the floors below the street floor
exceeds 100 persons; or
      (2)   The sum of the occupants on all the floors above the street floor
exceeds 100 persons; or
      (3)   A total of more than 500 persons in the entire building including
the street floor.
   (b)   Occupancy load. Occupant load shall be determined by the existing
certificate of occupancy. In the absence of such certificate of occupancy, the
occupant load shall be the greater of the actual number of occupants or on the
basis of 1 person per 100 square feet net floor area. Net floor area shall be
all space within the building exterior walls, excluding the following areas:
      (1)   areas enclosing stairs.
      (2)   public corridors.
      (3)   elevators and shafts.
      (4)   rest rooms.
      (5)   storage rooms.
   (For example, a net floor area of 10,100 square feet is capable of an
occupancy of 101 persons.)
   The communication and alarm system, acceptable to the Commissioner of
Buildings, shall have the following capabilities and components:
   (c)   Capabilities and components.
      (1)   Fire command station. A communications center, located in the lobby
of the building on the entrance floor as part of the elevator control panel if
such exists, or located in the immediate vicinity of the elevators if they
exist, to provide:
         (i)   Individual two-way voice communication from the fire command
station to a fire warden station on each floor and to the regularly assigned
location of the fire safety director, to consist of a telephone handset or
approved speaker microphone system or other approved voice communication
system. Initiation of a call from the fire command station shall sound a loud
and distinctive sound or an audible device, selectively on the entire floor
which is being called or at all floors throughout the building, through the use
of a general all call button. This call shall be immediately answered by the
fire wardens of the floors involved.
         (ii)   Manual pull station located adjacent to the fire command
station to transmit a fire alarm signal to the fire department via a central
station of a franchised operating company.
         (iii)   Annunciation of associated fire safety systems at the fire
command station is optional; however, such annunciation shall not be connected
to the mini-class "E" system.
         (iv)   This system shall be a "supervised" system. A "supervised"
system is one that is electrically monitored so that the occurrence of a single
open or single ground fault condition of its wiring which prevents the required
normal operation of the system or causes the failure of its primary (main)
power supply source is indicated by a distinctive trouble signal.
      (2)   Fire Warden Station. A station located on each floor within view of
the passenger elevator lobby if such exists; however, when an elevator lobby
does not exist, the station shall be located in the path of egress to an
existing stairway. The fire warden station shall have two-way communication
with the Fire Command Station and:
         (i)   Shall consist of telephone handset or a speaker microphone
system or other approved equivalent voice communication system.
         (ii)   The initiation of a call from a fire warden shall cause a loud
and distinctive sound at the Fire Command Station and at the Fire Safety
Director's Office, which call shall be immediately answered by the Fire Safety
Director from the Fire Command Station.
      (3)   Fire Safety Director's Office. A station located within the
building at the principal work location of the Fire Safety Director arranged
the same as a warden's station. There shall be a two-way voice communication
system to the Fire Command Station. A two-way voice communication system
described above shall also be provided at the mechanical control center should
one exist.
      (4)   General requirements.
         (i)   The components of the system shall require New York City
Department of Buildings Material Equipment Acceptance ("M.E.A.") approval.
         (ii)   A.   SOURCES OF ELECTRICAL POWER Two sources of electrical
power shall be provided as follows:
               1.   The primary source shall be generated electric power not
exceeding 277/480 volts, supplied by utility company power, or isolated plant.
               2.   The secondary source shall be an emergency power system (as
per Section 27-396 of the Building Code), an emergency generator and/or battery
power.
               3.   One source of power shall be connected to the system at all
times. The primary and secondary power sources shall be so arranged and
controlled by automatic transfer switches and/or circuitry that when the
primary source of power fails, the secondary source will be connected
automatically to the fire alarm signal system. Intermediary devices between the
system supply and the source of power, other than fused disconnect switches,
transformers, fused cutouts and automatic transfer switches, are prohibited.
Such disconnect switches, cutouts, transformers and automatic transfer switches
shall supply only the fire alarm system and other systems covered by this
reference standard. When the utility company requires the installation of
metering current transformers, the system supply shall be connected on the load
side of the current transformers. All installations shall comply with the
applicable sections of the New York City Electrical Code. The primary source of
power and the secondary source (if said secondary source is an emergency power
system or generator) shall each be provided with a means of disconnect from the
fire alarm system. For buildings supplied at 120/208 volts, each disconnect
shall consist of a fused cutout panel, utilizing cartridge fuses, with
provision for interrupting the unfused neutral and all ungrounded conductors.
The neutral shall be provided with a removable solid copper bar. The incoming
service neutral shall be bonded to the metallic housing of the cutout panel on
the line side of the removable bar. The fused cutout panel housing shall
consist of a locked metallic cabinet with hinged door, painted fire department
red, and permanently identified as to the system served. For buildings served
at 265/460 volts, the primary and secondary service disconnects shall be fused
disconnect switches (in lieu of fused cutout panels) in locked, red painted,
permanently identified enclosures. The service voltage shall be transformed to
120/208 volts and a fused cutout panel provided within 5 feet of the
transformer on the 120/208 volt side. The incoming supply connections shall
comply with the New York City Electrical Code, and the fused cutout panel shall
comply with the requirements specified herein before.
            B.   PRIMARY POWER SOURCE The primary service to the fire alarm
system shall be so arranged that the building source of supply can be
disconnected without de-energizing the fire alarm supply. To accomplish this,
the primary fire alarm supply shall be connected ahead of all building over
current protection and/or switching devices.
            C.   SECONDARY POWER SOURCE The secondary service to the fire alarm
system shall be provided as follows:
               1.   If the building has a required emergency power system, the
secondary source shall be the emergency power system, regardless of whether the
primary source is utility company power or an isolated plant.
               2.   If the building has an emergency generator supplying power
to any of the loads listed in Section 27-396.4 of the Building Code, the
secondary source shall be the generator.
               3.   For all other buildings, the secondary source shall be a
battery supply provided in accordance with Reference Standard 17-5 for storage
batteries. The battery shall be designed for 24-hour supervisory operation of
the system, followed by 15 minutes of total system load.
         (iii)   WIRING
            A.   Power Conductors (Above 75 volts) shall be:
               1.   Copper: THHN, THWN/THHN, TFFN, TFN, FEP, RHH, RHW-2, XHH,
or XHHW minimum 600 volts; 90 C; for installation in rigid metallic conduit
(RMC), intermediate metallic conduit (IMC) or electric metallic tubing (EMT).
               2.   Cable type MI, M.E.A. approved for fire alarm service.
            B.   Low Voltage Conductors (75 volts and less) shall be:
               1.   Copper: THHN, THWN/THHN, TFFN, TFN, FEP, RHH, RHW, XHH, or
XHHW minimum 600 volts; 90 C; for installation in rigid metallic conduit (RMC),
intermediate metallic conduit (IMC) or electric metallic tubing (EMT).
               2.   Minimum wire size No. 18 AWG.
               3.   Multi-conductor cables run in raceways, or exposed as
described hereinafter, shall meet the following additional requirements:
                  (a)   Type FPLP only; minimum insulation thickness 15 mils;
minimum temperature 150 C; colored red.
                  (b)   Red colored jacket overall; minimum thickness 25 mils.
                  (c)   Cable printing as per UL 1424; must bear additional
description "ALSO CLASSIFIED NYC CERT. FIRE ALARM CABLE" legible without
removing jacket.
            C.   Installation of Conductors and Raceway shall be in accordance
with the following:
               1.   Power conductors shall not be installed in common raceways
with low voltage conductors.
               2.   Comply with applicable requirements of New York City
Electrical Code, except where requirements are exceeded by this Reference
Standard.
               3.   Conductors other than M.I. cable shall be run in raceway,
except as specifically described below.
               4.   Multi-conductor cables may be installed without raceway
protection where cable is protected by building construction. Where not
protected by building construction, cables shall be located 8 feet or more
above the finished floor and not subject to physical tampering or hazard.
Locations within eight feet of the finished floor that are deemed as "protected
by building construction" shall include raised floors, shafts, telephone and
communication equipment rooms and closets, and rooms used exclusively for fire
alarm system equipment.
               5.   All wiring within mechanical and elevator equipment rooms
shall be run in raceways.
               6.   Raceways run within 8 feet of finished floor in garage
areas, loading docks, mechanical rooms, and elsewhere where subject to
mechanical damage, shall be rigid galvanized steel conduit only.
               7.   Where wiring is required to be run in raceway, install
conductors in rigid metallic conduit (RMC), intermediate metallic conduit (IMC)
or electric metallic tubing (EMT), except that multi-conductor cables may also
be run in surface metal raceway. Conductors for other electrical systems shall
not be installed in raceways containing REFERENCE STANDARD 17 conductors.
               8.   Where allowed to be run without raceway protection, multi-
conductor cables shall be installed as follows:
                  (a)   Cables shall not depend on ceiling media, pipes, ducts,
conduits, or equipment for support; Cables must be supported independently from
the building structure.
                  (b)   Cables must be secured by cable ties, straps or similar
fittings, so designed and installed as not to damage the cable. Cables must be
secured in place at intervals not exceeding 5'-0" on centers and within 12" of
every associated cabinet, box or fitting.
               9.   Installation of raceways, boxes and cabinets shall comply
with the following general requirements:
                  (a)   Covers of boxes and cabinets shall be painted red and
permanently identified as to their use.
                  (b)   Penetrations of fire-rated walls, floors or ceilings
shall be fire stopped.
                  (c)   Within stairways, raceways within 8 feet of the floor
shall not be installed so as to reduce or obstruct the stairway radius.
                  (d)   Raceways or cables shall not penetrate top of any
equipment box or cabinet.
               10.   All conduits supplying 120-volt power to the fire alarm
control unit and/or to outlying control cabinets, shall contain a green
insulated grounding conductor sized in accordance with the New York City
Electrical Code (#10 AWG minimum). The grounding conductor shall be connected
to the ground bus or other suitable grounding terminal in each box and cabinet
in which it enters. At the fuse cutout panel supplying the fire alarm system,
provide a grounding electrode conductor sized and installed in accordance with
the New York City Electrical Code (#10 AWG minimum).
               11.   For cabinets whose 120 volt supply is not derived from the
main fire alarm system cutout panel, provide green insulated separate grounding
electrode conductors, sized and installed as per New York City Electrical Code
(#10 AWG minimum). In steel-framed buildings, a connection to local steel
structure will be acceptable.
               12.   Splices and terminations of wires and cables shall be as
follows:
                  (a)   Permitted only in boxes or cabinets specifically
approved for the purpose.
                  (b)   Utilize mechanical connections specifically approved by
UL 486 A & C for the conductors, or if soldered, first joined so as to be
mechanically and electrically secure prior to soldering and insulating.
Temperature rating of completed splices shall equal or exceed the temperature
rating of the highest rated conductor.
               13.   Wiring for audible notification devices shall be arranged
so that a loss of a portion of the wiring on a floor will not render more than
60% of the devices inoperative, and the devices shall be so connected to the
circuitry (i.e. by means of alternate circuits) as to maintain at least partial
audibility throughout the entire floor.
         (iv)   The name and telephone number of the central office company
shall be displayed at the manual pull station.
         (v)   There shall be a Fire Safety Director on duty at all times that
the premises is actually occupied by the number of persons specified in the
opening paragraphs of these rules. The Director shall have a Certificate of
Fitness issued by the New York City Fire Department.
         (vi)   Applications shall be filed and permits obtained as required by
departmental memoranda concerning fire alarm systems.
§ 15-02 Interior Fire Alarm and Signal System for Place of Assembly Used as a
Cabaret and for Stages, Dressing Rooms, and Property Rooms.
   (a)   Number of occupants. Subdivisions 27-968(a)(10)(a) and (b) of the
Building Code state that an interior fire alarm and signal system shall be
provided in any room, place or space occupied or arranged to be occupied by 75
or more persons and in which either any musical entertainment, singing, dancing
or other form of amusement is permitted in connection with the restaurant
business or the business of directly or indirectly selling to the public food
or drink, or where dancing is carried on and the public may gain admission,
with or without payment of a fee, and food or beverages are sold, served, or
dispensed, and any new or altered catering place as of April 4, 1979 having 300
or more persons. This does not apply to eating or drinking places which provide
incidental musical entertainment, without dancing, either by mechanical
devices, or by not more than three persons playing piano, organ, accordion or
guitar or any stringed instrument or by not more than one singer accompanied by
himself or a person playing piano, organ, accordion, guitar or any stringed
instrument.
   (b)   Occupant load. The occupant load of a Place of Assembly shall be
calculated by dividing the net floor area of the space by the appropriate
figure in the following table:
 
Occupancy                           Net Floor Area Per Occupancy (Square
                                    Feet)
(1) Dance Floor                     10
(2) Dining Spaces                   12
(3) Standing Room (Audience) in all 4
Places of Assembly
(4) Seating Area (Audience) in all
Places of Assembly
(4) (i) Fixed Seats                 Designated Number of Seats or Occupants
(4) (ii) Movable Seats              10
 
   (c)   Capabilities and components.
      (1)   Fire Alarm System: shall be closed circuit, "electrically
supervised", individually coded and connected to an approved franchise/central
office alarm company. A "supervised" system is one that is electrically
monitored so that the occurrence of a single open or single ground fault
condition of its wiring which prevents the required normal operation of the
system or causes the failure of its primary (main) power supply source is
indicated by a distinctive trouble signal.
         (i)   Manual fire alarm stations: shall be installed at each required
natural path of egress from all levels from public assembly area.
         (ii)   Fire alarm gongs: shall be installed to provide adequate
audibility throughout the Public Assembly area and all areas occupied in
conjunction with the area at all levels including dressing rooms, rest rooms,
coat rooms, etc. "Audibility" shall be loud and distinct under maximum sound
system operation unless 1 RCNY §
15-02(c)(2)(ii) is complied with.
         (iii)   Sprinkler waterflow device: shall be installed to indicate
flow of water in the sprinkler system and shall be made part of the interior
Fire Alarm by interconnecting the waterflow device to the interior Fire Alarm
so that actuation of the waterflow device shall sound a distinctive coded alarm
via the fire alarm gongs.
      (2)   General requirements.
         (i)   The components of the system shall require New York City M.E.A.
approval.
         (ii)   A device may be installed to automatically turn off the sound
system and psychedelic and special effects lighting when a manual fire alarm
and/or sprinkler waterflow device is activated in all public assemblies that
require an interior fire alarm and signal system.
         (iii)   A.   SOURCES OF ELECTRICAL POWER Two sources of electrical
power shall be provided as follows:
               1.   The primary source shall be generated electric power not
exceeding 277/480 volts, supplied by utility company power, or isolated plant.
               2.   The secondary source shall be an emergency power system (as
per Section 27-396 of the Building Code), an emergency generator and/or battery
power.
               3.   One source of power shall be connected to the system at all
times. The primary and secondary power sources shall be so arranged and
controlled by automatic transfer switches and/or circuitry that when the
primary source of power fails, the secondary source will be connected
automatically to the fire alarm signal system. Intermediary devices between the
system supply and the source of power, other than fused disconnect switches,
transformers, fused cutouts and automatic transfer switches, are prohibited.
Such disconnect switches, cutouts, transformers and automatic transfer switches
shall supply only the fire alarm system and other systems covered by this
reference standard. When the utility company requires the installation of
metering current transformers, the system supply shall be connected on the load
side of the current transformers. All installations shall comply with the
applicable sections of the New York City Electrical Code. The primary source of
power and the secondary source (if said secondary source is an emergency power
system or generator) shall each be provided with a means of disconnect from the
fire alarm system. For buildings supplied at 120/208 volts, each disconnect
shall consist of a fused cutout panel, utilizing cartridge fuses, with
provision for interrupting the unfused neutral and all ungrounded conductors.
The neutral shall be provided with a removable solid copper bar. The incoming
service neutral shall be bonded to the metallic housing of the cutout panel on
the line side of the removable bar. The fused cutout panel housing shall
consist of a locked metallic cabinet with hinged door, painted fire department
red, and permanently identified as to the system served. For buildings served
at 265/460 volts, the primary and secondary service disconnects shall be fused
disconnect switches (in lieu of fused cutout panels) in locked, red painted,
permanently identified enclosures. The service voltage shall be transformed to
120/208 volts and a fused cutout panel provided within 5 feet of the
transformer on the 120/208 volt side. The incoming supply connections shall
comply with the New York City Electrical Code, and the fused cutout panel shall
comply with the requirements specified in this rule.
            B.   PRIMARY POWER SOURCE
               1.   The primary service to the fire alarm system shall be so
arranged that the building source of supply can be disconnected without de-
energizing the fire alarm supply. To accomplish this, the primary fire alarm
supply shall be connected ahead of all building over current protection and/or
switching devices.
               2.   Partial systems such as strobe light control panels,
partial fire alarm, automatic smoke/heat detection, and sprinkler alarm
subsystems and/or other associated systems may be connected to an emergency
supply riser panel via a tapped connection, and an identified, locked fused
cutout box located within 5 feet of the tap. Where an emergency power system
(E.P.S.) is provided in accordance with Section 27-396.4 of the Building Code,
it shall be connected to the emergency supply riser. Where an E.P.S. is not
available, the emergency supply riser shall be connected to a tap ahead of the
service switch.
            C.   SECONDARY POWER SOURCE The secondary service to the fire alarm
system shall be provided as follows:
               1.   If the building has a required emergency power system, the
secondary source shall be the emergency power system, regardless of whether the
primary source is utility company power or an isolated plant.
               2.   If the building has an emergency generator supplying power
to any of the loads listed in Section 27-396.4 of the Building Code, the
secondary source shall be the generator.
               3.   For all other buildings, the secondary source shall be a
battery supply provided in accordance with Reference Standard 17-5 for storage
batteries. The battery shall be designed for 24-hour supervisory operation of
the system, followed by 15 minutes of total system load.
         (iv)   WIRING
            A.   Power Conductors (Above 75 volts) shall be:
               1.   Copper: THHN, THWN/THHN, TFFN, TFN, FEP, RHH, RHW-2, XHH,
or XHHW minimum 600 volts; 90 C; for installation in rigid metallic conduit
(RMC), intermediate metallic conduit (IMC) or electric metallic tubing (EMT).
               2.   Cable type MI, M.E.A. approved for fire alarm service.
            B.   Low Voltage (75 volts and less) shall be:
               1.   Copper: THHN, THWN/THHN, TFFN, TFN, FEP, RHH, RHW, XHH, or
XHHW minimum 600 volts; 90 C; for installation in rigid metallic conduit (RMC),
intermediate metallic conduit (IMC) or electric metallic tubing (EMT).
               2.   Minimum wire size No. 18 AWG.
               3.   Multi-conductor cables run in raceways, or exposed as
described hereinafter, shall meet the following additional requirements:
                  (a)   Type FPLP only; minimum insulation thickness 15 mils;
minimum temperature 150 C; colored red.
                  (b)   Red colored jacket overall; minimum thickness 25 mils.
                  (c)   Cable printing as per UL 1424; must bear additional
description "ALSO CLASSIFIED NYC CERT. FIRE ALARM CABLE" legible without
removing jacket.
            C.   Installation of Conductors and Raceway shall be in accordance
with the following:
               1.   Power conductors shall not be installed in common raceways
with low voltage conductors.
               2.   Comply with applicable requirements of New York City
Electrical Code, except where requirements are exceeded by this Reference
Standard.
               3.   Conductors other than M.I. cable shall be run in raceway,
except as specifically described below.
               4.   Multi-conductor cables may be installed without raceway
protection where cable is protected by building construction. Where not
protected by building construction, cables shall be located 8 feet or more
above the finished floor and not subject to physical tampering or hazard.
Locations within eight feet of the finished floor that are deemed as "protected
by building construction" shall include raised floors, shafts, telephone and
communication equipment rooms and closets, and rooms used exclusively for fire
alarm system equipment.
               5.   All wiring within mechanical and elevator equipment rooms
shall be run in raceways.
               6.   Raceways run within 8 feet of finished floor in garage
areas, loading docks, mechanical rooms, and elsewhere where subject to
mechanical damage, shall be rigid galvanized steel conduit only.
               7.   Where wiring is required to be run in raceway, install
conductors in rigid metallic conduit (RMC), intermediate metallic conduit (IMC)
or electric metallic tubing (EMT), except that multi-conductor cables may also
be run in surface metal raceway. Flexible metallic conduit, not exceeding 36"
in length, shall be permitted for final connections to initiating and
notification devices. Conductors for other electrical systems shall not be
installed in raceways containing REFERENCE STANDARD 17 conductors.
               8.   Where allowed to be run without raceway protection, multi-
conductor cables shall be installed as follows:
                  (a)   Cables shall not depend on ceiling media, pipes, ducts,
conduits, or equipment for support; Cables must be supported independently from
the building structure.
                  (b)   Cables must be secured by cable ties, straps or similar
fittings, so designed and installed as not to damage the cable. Cables must be
secured in place at intervals not exceeding 5'-0" on centers and within 12" of
every associated cabinet, box or fitting.
               9.   Installation of raceways, boxes and cabinets shall comply
with the following general requirements:
                  (a)   Covers of boxes and cabinets shall be painted red and
permanently identified as to their use.
                  (b)   Penetrations of fire-rated walls, floors or ceilings
shall be fire stopped.
                  (c)   Within stairways, raceways within 8 feet of the floor
shall not be installed so as to reduce or obstruct the stairway radius.
                  (d)   Raceways or cables shall not penetrate top of any
equipment box or cabinet.
               10.   All conduits supplying 120-volt power to the fire alarm
control unit and/or to outlying control cabinets, shall contain a green
insulated grounding conductor sized in accordance with the New York City
Electrical Code (#10 AWG minimum). The grounding conductor shall be connected
to the ground bus or other suitable grounding terminal in each box and cabinet
in which it enters. At the fuse cutout panel supplying the fire alarm system,
provide a grounding electrode conductor sized and installed in accordance with
the New York City Electrical Code (#10 AWG minimum).
               11.   For cabinets whose 120 volt supply is not derived from the
main fire alarm system cutout panel, provide green insulated separate grounding
electrode conductors, sized and installed as per New York City Electrical Code
(#10 AWG minimum). In steel-framed buildings, a connection to local steel
structure will be acceptable.
               12.   Splices and terminations of wires and cables shall be as
follows:
                  (a)   Permitted only in boxes or cabinets specifically
approved for the purpose.
                  (b)   Utilize mechanical connections specifically approved by
UL 486 A & C for the conductors, or if soldered, first joined so as to be
mechanically and electrically secure prior to soldering and insulating.
Temperature rating of completed splices shall equal or exceed the temperature
rating of the highest rated conductor.
               13.   Wiring for audible and visual alarm notification devices
shall be arranged so that a loss of a portion of the wiring on a floor will not
render more than 60% of the devices of each type inoperative, and the devices
shall be so connected to the circuitry (i.e. by means of alternate circuits) as
to maintain at least partial audibility/visibility throughout the entire floor.
         (v)   The equipment shall be colored RED and enclosed in suitable
housing permanently fastened to the structure at the appropriate locations. A
diagonal white stripe one inch wide from upper left corner to lower right
corner shall be painted or applied to sending stations. The stripe shall not
render any lettering illegible or obliterate the station number.
         (vi)   The name and telephone number of the central office company
shall be displayed at all manual pull stations and at all central office
transmitters.
         (vii)   There shall be a fire guard on duty at all times that the
Place of Assembly is open and functioning as a cabaret. The fire guard shall
have a Certificate of Fitness issued by the New York City Fire Department.
         (viii)   Emergency Lighting and Sprinkler Systems shall be installed
and maintained as required by law.
         (ix)   A Fire Alarm System in a Place of Assembly subject to this rule
in a high rise (Class E) office building shall interface with a Fire Alarm and
Communication System required by Local Law No. 5/1973.
         (x)   Applications shall be filed and permits obtained as required by
Departmental Memorandum.
§ 15-03 Extension of Time to Complete Installations for Buildings in Occupancy
Group E Over 100 Feet in Height. [Repealed]
§ 15-04 Exemption of Certain Existing J-1 Residential Hotels from Certain Fire
Safety Special Filing Requirements.
   (a)   Definition. Existing J-1 Residential Hotel. An existing J-
1 residential hotel is defined as a single room occupancy multiple dwelling, in
which at least seventy-five (75) percent or more of the total number of
occupied individual dwelling units:
      (1)   have had no more than two (2) separate tenancies for at least three
(3) years preceding the date on which the application for residential hotel
status is made or, preceding the date of submission of an annual certification
as set forth below or
      (2)   have been used by a religious not-for-profit organization as a
residency for its members who maintain residency for at least one (1) year and
have no more than two (2) separate tenancies for at least one (1) year
preceding the date on which the application for residential hotel status is
made, provided that a fire safety plan for fire drill and evacuation procedures
in accordance with the requirements of the Fire Commissioner shall be submitted
to the Fire Department and the approval of the Fire Commissioner shall be
obtained.
   (b)   Details of exemptions. This section shall exempt owners of existing
"residential hotels," as that term is defined in 1 RCNY §
15-04(a), from J-l fire safety special filing requirements of §§ 27-382(b), 27-
384(b), 27-954(w), 27-989(b), 27-996.2(a)(2) of Article 26 of Subchapter 1 of
Chapter 1 of Title 27 of the Administrative (Building) Code as enacted by Local
Law 16 of 1984, effective March 17, 1984, as well as installation requirements
set forth in the following sections:
      (1)   § 27-382(b) Power source – Exit lights.
      (2)   § 27-384(b) Power source – Exit signs.
      (3)   § 27-954(w) Required sprinklers.
      (4)   § 27-989(b) Elevator in readiness.
      (5)   § 27-996.2(a)(2) Firemen service operation in existing elevators.
   (c)   Certification.
      (1)   The certification of residential hotel status may be obtained only
by the filing of an alteration application for residential hotel certification.
Such application shall contain the supporting documentation required in 1 RCNY
§
15-04(d) below. Certification of residential hotel status as defined in 1 RCNY
§
15-03(a) above shall be issued by the borough superintendent. Certification
shall be valid for a period of one (1) year from the date of initial
certification. Thereafter, the owner of the residential hotel shall engage a
registered architect or licensed professional engineer to certify annually
through the filing of a building notice application that the residential hotel
is in compliance with the requirements of 1 RCNY §
15-03(a) above.
      (2)   Owners of residential hotels shall keep a copy of their residential
hotel certification on site at the hotel. Failure to timely renew a hotel's
residential certification may result in the issuance of violations for the
hotel's failure to comply with the requirements of Local Law 16 of 1984 and
Local Law 16 of 1987 for a J-l occupancy.
   (d)   Supporting documentation. The following documentation shall be
furnished by the owner in support of his or her application for certification
of residential hotel status:
      (1)   Certificate of Occupancy or, if unavailable;
      (2)   Occupancy and Arrangement Card from the Department of Housing
Preservation and Development and Department of Housing Preservation and
Development Computer Printout;
      (3)   List all rooms occupied by tenants who have resided at the premises
for six months or longer or who are in occupancy pursuant to a lease of six
months or longer, together with the name of the tenant in each of the
aforementioned rooms and copies of any and all existing leases for the period
stated in 1 RCNY §
15-03(a) of this section; and
      (4)   For each dwelling unit in the premises subject to rent control or
hotel stabilization, copies of the annual registration statement filed with the
New York State Division of Housing and Community Renewal; and
      (5)   Copies of any relevant documents filed by the owner with the Hotel
Stabilization Association; and
      (6)   Any other documentation deemed relevant by the borough
superintendent, in his or her discretion.
   (e)   Determination of J-2 Dormitory.
      (1)   A building owner may contend that his/her building is a dormitory
and therefore as a J-2 occupancy need only provide stair and elevator signs,
and if a high-rise building also remove locks on elevator and hoistway doors.
To qualify as a dormitory, the building's current Certificate of Occupancy must
indicate use as a dormitory. Where the Certificate of Occupancy indicates both
dormitory and J-l occupancy, those portions which are J-l must comply with LL
16/84 requirements for J-1 occupancies.
      (2)   When an owner seeks to amend his building's Certificate to provide
for dormitory occupancy, he must submit an affidavit stating he will use the
dormitory space only for sleeping accommodations of individuals on a month-to-
month or longer-term basis (Administrative Code § 27-265) and that the
dormitory will be owned and operated by either a not-for-profit corporation or
a school. Such amended Certificates of Occupancy shall provide that the
dormitory may only be owned or operated by either a not-for-profit corporation
or a school.
§ 15-05 Filing and Approval of a Fire Safety Plan for Buildings Containing
Transient Occupants Such as Hotels and Motels.
   (a)   Number of occupants. These rules and regulations shall apply to
buildings or parts thereof classified in Article 11 of Subchapter 3 of Chapter
1 to Title 27 of the Administrative Code of the City of New York as occupancy
group J-l, J-2 occupied or arranged to be occupied in whole or part by a
transient occupancy. For the purpose of these rules and regulations, buildings
or parts thereof which contain a total of more than 30 sleeping rooms or can
accommodate a total of more than 30 lodgers, or contains more than 15 sleeping
rooms or can accommodate more than 15 lodgers above the first or ground story,
used for living or sleeping purposes by the same person or persons for a period
of ninety days or less shall be considered as being occupied by a transient
occupancy. Such buildings shall include but are not limited to buildings
occupied as hotels, motels, lodging houses, dormitories and single room
occupancies. All such buildings occupied or arranged to be occupied in whole or
part by a transient occupancy, regardless of the number of sleeping rooms or
accommodations, over 75 feet in height, shall comply with these rules and
regulations. The owner or other person having charge of such building shall
file a Fire Safety Plan with the Fire Department indicating compliance with 1
RCNY §
15-05(b) within 30 days after the effective date of these rules and
regulations. The owner or other person shall resubmit the revised Fire Safety
Plan for approval within 30 days after receiving comments from the Fire
Department. Upon approval, the Fire Safety Plan shall be immediately put into
effect. The owner or other person having charge of such building shall comply
with 1 RCNY §§
15-05(c)(1) to
15-04(c)(5) within 30 days of the effective date of these rules and
regulations.
   (b)   Details of fire safety plan.
      (1)   A fire safety plan for fire drill and evacuation procedures in
accordance with the requirements of the Fire Commissioner shall be submitted to
the Fire Department and the approval of the Fire Commissioner shall be
obtained. The applicable parts of the fire safety plan shall be distributed to
the building service employees. All employees of the building shall participate
and cooperate in carrying out the provisions of the fire safety plan.
      (2)   Fire safety director and deputy fire safety director.
         (i)   One employee shall be designated as fire safety director and a
sufficient number of employees shall be designated as deputy fire safety
directors. Such employees shall have a knowledge of the building's fire
protection systems and shall have a certificate of fitness, in accordance with
the requirements of the Fire Commissioner, qualifying him to conduct fire
drills, evacuations and related activities such as organizing, training and
supervising a fire brigade when required. In the absence of a fire safety
director, when a fire safety director is required to be on duty in the
building, such deputy fire safety director shall act as fire safety director.
         (ii)   As the building is continuously occupied, there shall be a fire
safety director continuously on duty in the building with the required
certificate of fitness. During fire emergencies, the primary responsibility of
the fire safety director shall be the manning of the fire command post and the
direction and execution of the evacuation as provided in the fire safety plan
and to assist the Fire Department with his knowledge of the building's fire
protection systems. Such activities shall be subject to the Fire Department
control.
      (3)   If sufficient personnel are available, as determined by the Fire
Department, a fire brigade shall be organized.
      (4)   Fire drills shall be conducted, in accordance with the fire safety
plan, at least once every three months on each shift. A written record of such
drills shall be kept on the premises for a three year period and shall be
readily available for inspection by the Fire Department.
      (5)   In buildings where compliance would cause practical difficulty or
undue hardship, the Fire Commissioner may waive or modify the requirements of
this subdivision and accept alternatives fulfilling the intent of these
requirements consistent with public safety.
   (c)   Signage.
      (1)   Elevator landings. A sign shall be posted and maintained on every
floor at the elevator landing. The sign shall read "IN CASE OF FIRE, USE STAIRS
UNLESS OTHERWISE INSTRUCTED." The lettering shall be at least one-half inch
block letters and of contrasting color from the background or as otherwise
approved by the Commissioner of Buildings. Such lettering shall be properly
spaced to provide good legibility. The sign shall also contain a diagram
showing the location where it is posted and the location and letter
identification of the stairs on the floor. The sign shall be at least eight
inches by ten inches, located directly above a call button and securely
attached to the wall or partition. The top of such sign shall not be above six
feet from the floor level. The diagram on such sign may be omitted provided
that signs containing such diagram are posted in conspicuous places on the
respective floor. In such case, the sign at the elevator landing shall be at
least two and one-half inches by ten inches and the diagram signs shall be at
least eight inches by ten inches.
      (2)   Floor numbering. A sign shall be posted and maintained with each
stair enclosure on every floor, indicating the number of the floor. The
numerals and background shall be in contrasting colors. The sign shall be
securely attached to the stair side of the door.
      (3)   Stairs and elevators. Each stair and each bank of elevators shall
be identified by an alphabetic letter. A sign indicating the letter of
identification for the elevator bank shall be posted and maintained at each
elevator landing directly above or as part of the sign specified in 1 RCNY §
15-05(c)(1). The stair identification sign shall be posted and maintained on
the occupancy side of the stair door. The letter on the sign shall be at least
three inches high, of bold type and of contrasting color from the background.
Such signs shall be securely attached.
      (4)   Sign material. Signs shall be of metal or other durable material.
      (5)   Placing, size and content of signs. A sign shall be posted and
maintained on the inside of every door opening onto a public corridor giving
access to a sleeping room. The sign shall contain a diagram showing the
location where it is posted and the location and letter identification of the
exit stairs on the floor. The diagram shall indicate the number of doors
opening onto the public corridor which must be passed to reach each exit stair.
The sign shall be at least eight inches by ten inches, located on the inside of
the door and securely attached thereto. The top of such signs shall not be
above six feet from the floor level. These signs are in addition to the signs
required in 1 RCNY §
15-05(c)(1). These signs may contain such additional information as the Fire
Department may require.
      (6)   Additional sign requirements. When floors or parts of floors are
used as accessory to a J-l and J-2 transient occupancy, "Elevator Landings" 1
RCNY §
15-05(c)(1), "Floor Numbering" 1 RCNY §
15-05(c)(2) and "Stairs and Elevators" 1 RCNY §
15-05(c)(3) shall be required.
§ 15-06 Design of Composite Construction with Metal Decks or Lightweight
Concrete. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 11/7/2022, eff. 12/7/2022)
§ 15-07 Fire-Retarding of Entrance Halls, Stair Halls and Public Halls in Old
Law Tenements and Converted Dwellings.
   (a)   Intent. The fire-retarding rules herewith set forth are approved by
the Department of Buildings for old law tenements and converted dwellings where
their entrance halls, stair halls and public halls are required, by § 189,
subdivisions 1 and 4, § 238, subdivision 4, and § 218, subdivisions 5 and 6,
Multiple Dwelling Law, and by § 27-2044, Housing Maintenance Code, to be fire-
retarded in a manner approved by the Department of Buildings.
      (1)   All entrance halls, stair halls and public halls, including service
halls and stairs, shall be fire-retarded to the extent required by the Multiple
Dwelling Law and the Housing Maintenance Code.
      (2)   It is the intent that all wood structural members of partitions,
ceilings and stair soffits shall be completely protected with fire-retarding
materials where they may be exposed to fire in entrance, stair and public
halls. To this extent these rules and regulations cover only general conditions
and are not designed to cover specific or special cases. Where such may occur
the owner is required to consult the Department of Buildings and receive
instructions before work is started.
      (3)   Where existing dumbwaiter shafts are located in, or open on public
halls which are required to be fire-retarded, such dumbwaiter shafts, when not
constructed of fireproof or fire-retarding materials, shall be fire-retarded on
the inner side, from the lowest story to the roof inclusive, in accordance with
the requirements of 1 RCNY §
15-07(b)(1) or (b)(2), except in cellar where such shafts shall be enclosed
with fireproof materials. All doors opening from such dumbwaiter shafts shall
be self-closing, and doors and assemblies when of wood or other non-fireproof
construction shall be lined on both sides with No. 26 U.S. gauge metal, except
in cellar where doors and assemblies shall have a fire-resistive of at least
one (1) hour.
      (4)   It is not intended that these rules and regulations in themselves
require plans to be filed. However, should any work involve structural changes,
then plans are required to be filed in the Department of Buildings and such
changes shall be subject to all other rules and regulations applicable thereto.
      (5)   Work shall not commence until satisfactory evidence has been
submitted to the Department of Buildings that compensation insurance has been
obtained in accordance with the provisions of the Workmen's Compensation Law.
It is the intent of § 238, subdivision 4, Multiple Dwelling Law, that every
entrance hall, public hall and stair hall in every old law tenement four
stories or more in height shall be fire-retarded. Every old law tenement three
stories and a basement, or three stories, basement and cellar in height shall
be deemed to be four stories in height when the main entrance from the grade is
to the basement, and every entrance hall, public hall and stair hall in such
building shall be fire-retarded. In old law tenements where the entrance halls,
public halls and stair halls are required to be fire-retarded, existing wood
stairs shall be fire-retarded in conformity with the requirements of these
rules and regulations, whether or not such halls had been fire-retarded in
accordance with plans filed with and approved by the former Tenement House
Department or Department of Buildings, prior to the enactment of subdivision 4
of § 238 of the Multiple Dwelling Law.
   (b)   Partitions. All existing partitions separating apartments from
entrance halls, stair halls and public halls, or otherwise forming enclosing
partitions of entrance halls, stair halls and public halls, shall be fire-
retarded by any one of the following methods:
      (1)   Metal lath and cement of gypsum mortar. Completely remove all
existing materials to face of studs or other structural members on hall side of
partitions and recover with metal lath and two coats of cement of gypsum
mortar. If cement mortar is used it shall be three-quarters inch (3/4") thick,
if gypsum mortar is used it shall be one inch (1") thick. The second coat of
mortar shall not be applied until the first coat has thoroughly set and in no
case shall the second coat be applied on the same day that the first coat of
mortar is applied. In lieu of the above method, completely remove all
combustible materials from plaster face of partitions on hall side and repair
existing plaster. After inspection, cover existing plaster with herringbone or
similar approved type metal lath with rigid rib reinforcement to provide good
bond between new and existing plaster. Cover lath with two coats (scratch and
brown) of cement of gypsum mortar as above. The first coat of cement mortar
(scratch) shall be composed of one (1) part of Portland cement to one and one-
half (1 1/2) parts of sand, with an additional volume of hydrated lime not
greater than ten (10) percent of the volume of Portland cement. The second coat
(brown) shall be composed of one (1) part of Portland cement to three parts (3)
of sand, with an additional volume of hydrated lime not greater than ten (10)
percent of the volume of Portland cement. The first coat (scratch) of gypsum
mortar shall be composed of one (1) part of gypsum to one (1) part of sand. The
second coat (brown) of gypsum mortar shall be composed of one (1) part of
gypsum to one and one-half (1 1/2) parts of sand.
      (2)   Plaster boards and gypsum mortar or stamped metal. Completely
remove all existing materials to face of studs or other structural members on
hall side of partitions and recover with plaster boards or perforated rock lath
three-eighths inch (3/8") thick, covered with two coats of gypsum mortar
(scratch and brown) so that the aggregate thickness shall be at least one inch
(1"), or in lieu thereof, recover same with plaster boards one-half inch (1/2")
thick, covered with No. 26 U.S. gauge stamped metal. In lieu of the above
method, completely remove all combustible material from plaster face of
partitions on hall side and repair existing plaster. After inspection, plaster
boards or perforated rock lath may be applied directly over the existing
plaster face of partitions on hall side. Cover plaster boards or perforated
rock lath with two coats of gypsum mortar as above, or plaster boards may be
covered with No. 26 U.S. gauge stamped metal.
      (3)   Mineral wool. Fill solidly between partition uprights, from
underside of flooring to ceiling with mineral wool blown in place by the
pneumatic method, packed solidly to fill all spaces and voids.
      (4)   Brick, gypsum, etc. Fill solidly between partition uprights from
underside of flooring to ceiling with brick, gypsum, or other acceptable
material packed solidly to fill all spaces and voids. Where brick, gypsum, or
other masonry material is intended to be used, application must be filed before
installation with the Department of Buildings for approval of strength of
existing members intended to support the proposed masonry fire-retarding.
      (5)   Other methods. No other method may be used unless same is
acceptable to the Department of Housing and Buildings.
      (6)   Removal of windows in public hall partitions. When windows in walls
or partitions are removed, both sides of the openings shall be sealed with
fire-retarding materials, except that wood lath and plaster may be used on the
room side of the opening when the existing surface of the room is constructed
of wood lath and plaster.
      (7)   Electric meters. Where direct current (DC) electric meters of
public utility companies are present or installed on partitions of public halls
the fire-retarding shall continue unbroken behind the meters or the meters
shall be mounted on a heavy slate back or non-magnetic fireproof equivalent,
such as transite, asbestos board, etc., against which fire-retarding finished
up tightly.
      (8)   Partitions in Class B converted dwellings. Where fire retarding is
required in any Class B converted dwelling referred to in 1 RCNY §
15-07(a)(7), both sides of all enclosure partitions of entrance halls, stair
halls and public halls throughout such building shall be fire-retarded in
accordance with the method set forth in 1 RCNY §§
15-07(b)(1) or (b)(2) or said partitions shall be fire-retarded in accordance
with the provisions of 1 RCNY §§
15-07(b)(3) or (b)(4).
      (9)   Partitions in altered old law tenements. In any old law tenement
where the occupancy is increased on any story, the enclosing partitions of any
entrance hall, stair hall or public hall on the story where the occupancy has
been increased, shall be fire-retarded on both sides. Such requirements shall
apply only to the walls of the entrance hall, stair hall or public hall
adjoining the altered apartment. The enclosing partitions of such halls other
than those adjoining the altered apartment and the partitions on any story
where the occupancy has not been increased, shall be fire-retarded on the hall
side. The method of fire-retarding shall be as set forth in 1 RCNY §§
15-07(b)(1) or (b)(2), or said partitions shall be fire-retarded in accordance
with the provisions of 1 RCNY §§
15-07(b)(3) or (b)(4).
      (10)   Newly constructed partitions. In any entrance hall, stair hall or
public hall where any partition or part thereof is newly constructed, and where
the plaster has been removed from any partition or part thereof, such partition
shall be fire-retarded on both sides.
   (c)   Ceilings. Any approved method for fire-retarding partitions shall be
acceptable for fire-retarding ceilings, provided that all existing materials
are completely removed to face of joists. Mineral wool, brick gypsum or other
masonry fill will not be accepted.
      (1)   Where any entrance hall, public hall or stair hall, or any portion
thereof, in any part of any old law tenement of converted dwelling is required
to be fire-retarded that portion of any ceiling directly underneath any such
entrance hall, public hall or stair hall shall be fire-retarded. Where such
ceiling is located in any store, apartment or other space it shall also be
fire-retarded as required for partitions by 1 RCNY §§
15-07(b)(1) or (b)(2). Where the above method is impractical due to the
existing ceiling construction in any such store, apartment or other space, the
Department of Buildings may permit the fire-retarding of such ceilings to be
applied from above by removing the floor of any such entrance hall, public hall
or stair hall and installing between the floor beams, and directly against the
ceiling below, a layer of heavy building paper over which there shall be placed
a basket made of reinforced ribbed expanded metal lath weighing at least 3.4
pounds per square yard. Such basket shall be lined with Portland cement or
gypsum mortar not less than one inch (1") in thickness. The building paper,
metal lath and cement or gypsum mortar shall be carried at least halfway up on
the sides of the beams. However, this method will not be accepted for the fire-
retarding of any such ceiling located in a space used for a hazardous purpose
or business, nor will it be accepted for the fire-retarding of any such ceiling
located in the cellar or for the fire-retarding of any ceiling located in any
store, apartment or other space when such ceiling is constructed of wood or of
wood and metal applied directly to the beams. In such cases the ceilings shall
be fire-retarded according to the requirements of 1 RCNY §
15-07(b)(1) or (b)(2).
   (d)   Existing wood stairs. Except where stairs of incombustible material
are required in Class B converted dwellings as set forth in 1 RCNY §
15-07(a)(7), all wood railings, balustrades and newel posts shall be completely
removed from every existing wood stairs and such stairs shall be provided with
railings, balustrades and newel posts of metal or other hard incombustible
material, of such size and secured in such manner to the existing stairs as may
be approved by the Department of Buildings, except handrails may be of
hardwood. Soffits and stringers of existing wood stairs shall be fire-retarded
in accordance with the methods set forth in 1 RCNY §§ 
15-07(e) or (f).
   (e)   Stair soffits. The soffits of every stair in every entrance hall,
public hall, and stair hall, including any soffit extending beyond the
enclosure partitions of any such hall, shall be fire-retarded. Any approved
method for fire-retarding partitions shall be acceptable for fire-retarding
stair soffits provided that all existing materials are completely removed to
face of structural members of stair soffits.
   (f)   Fascia – stair and well. Fascia of outside stringer on rake of stairs,
and well fascia at floor level, shall be fire-retarded their full depth to form
complete seals with the soffits of stairs and ceilings of halls, respectively.
Type of fire-retarding shall be one of those herein approved for ceilings of
halls, or in lieu thereof, cover fascia with sheet asbestos not less than
three-sixteenths inch (3/16") thick with joints well pointed over which there
shall be an additional single layer of No. 26 U.S. gauge stamped metal or cover
fascia with a single layer of No. 14 U.S. gauge steel.
   (g)   Fire-stopping. All partitions required to be fire-retarded shall be
fire-stopped with incombustible material at floors, ceilings and roofs. Fire-
stopping over partitions shall extend from the ceilings to the underside of the
flooring or roofing above. Fire-stopping under partitions shall extend from the
underside of flooring to ceiling below. All spaces between floor joints
(directly over and under partitions) shall be completely filled the full depth
of the joists. Any space from top of partition to underside of roof boarding
shall be completely fire-stopped. Fire-stopping shall be done with brick,
cinder concrete, gypsum, metal lath and Portland cement or gypsum mortar,
mineral wool, or other materials acceptable to the Department of Buildings.
   (h)   Door openings. Except as provided in 1 RCNY §§
15-07(h)(1) and (h)(2), all door openings into any public hall, entrance hall
or stair hall which is required to be fire-retarded shall be equipped with
self-closing protective assemblies having a fire-resistive rating of at least
one hour.
      (1)   In old law tenements where the number of apartments is not being
increased, existing wood doors opening into public halls, entrance halls or
stair halls may remain provided such doors are made to be self-closing
("Butterfly" spring hinges are not acceptable) and, provided further, all
glazed transoms and panels in every such door are glazed with wire glass. All
such transoms shall be made stationary.
      (2)   Where, in any old law tenement, the number of apartments is being
increased on one or more stories, door openings into public halls, entrance
halls or stair halls on each story or stories shall be equipped with self-
closing protective assemblies having a fire-resistive rating of at least one
hour. In such old law tenements existing wood doors opening into public halls,
entrance halls or stair halls may remain on any story where there is no
increase in the number of apartments, provided such doors and every transom and
panel in same are made to conform to the requirements set forth in 1 RCNY §
15-07(h).
      (3)   All doors shall be properly fitted to their assemblies and there
shall be no unnecessary spaces between doors and door bucks or saddles.
   (i)   Materials. All materials used in the process of fire-retarding shall
be of a type and manufacture acceptable to the Department of Buildings. The
following shall be considered as minimum requirements:
      (1)   Metal lath. Metal lath shall weigh at least 30 pounds per square
yard, except lath used over existing plaster which lath shall weigh at least
3.4 pounds per square yard and be reinforced with rigid ribs not less than
three eighths inch (3/8") deep, spaced not more than eight (8") on center
running full length of sheets. Where ribs exceed 4.8 inches on center, same
shall have at least one intermediate one eighth inch (1/8") inverted rib
running the full length of sheets. Metal lath fastened to stubs shall be
attached at least six inch (6") intervals with 4-penny nails or one inch (1")
roofing nails or No. 14 steel wire gauge wire staples, and to wood joists by at
least 6-penny nails, one and one-quarter inch (1 1/4") roofing nails, or one
inch (1") No. 14 steel wire gauge wire staples. When metal lath is applied over
existing plastered surfaces, same shall be fastened with nails or staples of
the same gauge and such nails or staples shall have anchorage of at least one-
half inch (1/2") in studs and three-quarters inch (3/4") in joists. Laps
between the studs or joists shall be securely tied or laced. Stiffened metal
lath on wood studs, or joists, shall be nailed or stapled at least at eight
inch (8") intervals, and the laps between studs similarly tied or laced. Metal
lath shall be galvanized or painted.
      (2)   Plaster boards or perforated rock lath. Plaster boards or
perforated rock lath shall be of type and manufacture acceptable to the
Department of Buildings. Each board shall bear the name of manufacturer and
brand stamped thereon for inspection after erection. Plaster boards or
perforated rock lath nailed directly to wood studding or joists shall be
fastened with one and one-eighth inches (1 1/8") wire nails of at least No. 13
steel wire gauge, with flat three-eighth inch (3/8") heads. When such boards
are applied over existing plastered surfaces, same shall be fastened with nails
of the same gauge and such nails shall have anchorage of at least one-half inch
(1/2") in studs and three-quarters inch (3/4") in joists. The maximum space
between nails shall be four inches (4"). The joints shall be broken at every
other board. The wetting of such boards before plastering is forbidden.
      (3)   Stamped metal. Stamped metal shall be No. 26 U.S. gauge (equivalent
thickness .018 inches or 3/160 inches) with one inch (1") lapped seams. Size of
sheets shall be not more than twenty-four inches by ninety-six inches (24" ×
96"), having a selvage consisting of a half-round bead sufficient to create a
one inch (1") overlap at both seams. Nailing shall be secured direct to studs
or joists with 6-penny smooth box nails (two inches (2") or No. 12 1/2 gauge)
with nails on end seams spaced not more than three inches (3") apart. Nailing
to plaster is forbidden and in all cases nails shall have anchorage of at least
one-half inch (1/2") in studs and three-quarters inch (3/4") in joists. All
beads at seams shall be chisel sealed, making a tight joint. All sheets shall
be marked "26 U.S. Gauge" for identification and inspection after erection.
      (4)   Mineral wool. Mineral wool shall be of a type and manufacture
acceptable to the Department of Buildings. Holes shall be cut approximately
three inches (3") in diameter through the wood lath and plaster near the
ceiling, in the panels between each two adjacent studs. As an alternative,
holes may be cut approximately three inches by six inches (3" × 6") on every
second stud. Check each stud panel with weight and line to find out whether
there is any obstruction. If any cross-bridging or other obstruction is
encountered additional holes shall be cut until access has been gained to all
open spaces within the stud panel in all specified partitions. Mineral wool
shall then be blown into all spaces by the pneumatic method with air pressure
sufficient to pack the insulation to a density acceptable to the Department of
Buildings. Mineral wool for this work shall be in bags or containers marked
with the manufacturer's name and label specifying its type.
      (5)   Other materials. No other material may be used unless same is
acceptable to the Department of Buildings.
   (j)   Exceptions. Where any portion of any entrance hall, stair hall or
public hall has been previously fire-retarded under the supervision of this
department, the former Tenement House Department or various former Departments
of Buildings, such fire-retarding will be accepted only to the extent that same
has been previously approved, provided, however, that such entrance hall, stair
hall or public hall is otherwise made to conform to all the requirements set
forth in these rules.
§ 15-08 Fire-Retarding of Cellar Ceilings in Old Law Tenements and Converted
Dwellings.
   (a)   Intent. The fire-retarding rules herewith set forth are approved by
the Department of Buildings for the existing multiple dwellings where the
ceilings of the cellar or other lowest story is required, by § 85 and § 240,
subdivision 3, Multiple Dwelling Law, and by § 27-2044, Housing Maintenance
Code, to be fire-retarded in a manner approved by the Department of Buildings.
      (1)   It is the intent of the law to provide a continuous fire-retarded
covering over the entire ceiling of the cellar, or other lowest story, so as to
prevent fire communicating with upper stories of a multiple dwelling. Where
there is a space less than four feet six inches (4'-6") in height from the
ground or floor level to the underside of the first tier of beams, such space
shall be considered as an "air space" and not as a cellar. However, when such
space opens to a cellar where fire-retarding of the ceiling is required, then
such space shall be separated from the cellar with a partition constructed of
incombustible material in which there is provided self-closing door and
assembly having a fire-resistive rating of at least one hour. Where the ceiling
of the cellar or other lowest story is required to be fire-retarded, all
openings in such ceilings for stairways not located directly under a main
stair, also openings in ceiling such as pipe shafts, vent shafts, unenclosed
dumbwaiter shafts, disused flues, etc., shall be properly closed. (Private
stairs within duplex apartments extending into cellar or basement are not
required to be enclosed.) New partitions erected to enclose existing stair
referred to in the preceding paragraph shall be of incombustible materials.
Existing partitions enclosing any such stair will be acceptable where same are
of incombustible materials or where same are fire-retarded on both sides in
accordance with the methods set forth in 1 RCNY §
15-07(b)(1) or (b)(2) and with materials conforming with the requirement of 1
RCNY §
15-07(i). Door openings in such enclosure partitions shall be equipped with
self-closing protective assemblies having fire-resistive ratings of at least
one hour. When existing shafts, including dumbwaiter shafts, extend below the
ceiling a distance less than one-half (1/2) the height of the cellar, such
shafts shall be considered as being part of the cellar ceiling and the
enclosures of said shafts shall be fire-retarded in the same manner as required
for cellar ceilings. All existing shafts, including dumbwaiter shafts, which
extend below the ceiling a distance more than one-half (1/2) the height of the
cellar shall be enclosed with incombustible materials. All shafts referred to
in this paragraph shall have adequate cleanout at base consisting of fire-proof
self-closing door and assembly having a fire-resistive rating of at least one
hour. Where new partitions or enclosures are erected in a cellar they shall be
constructed of incombustible materials.
      (2)   Wood girders, columns, posts, etc. The fire-retarding material of
ceiling of cellar or other lowest story shall be carried down and around all
non-fireproof ceiling projections, such as wood girders, etc., which are less
than six inches by six inches (6" × 6") in dimension. The fire-retarding
material also shall be turned down at least three inches (3") on all non-fire-
retarding columns, posts, etc., which are less than six inches (6") in
diameter.
      (3)   Non-fire-retarded cellar partitions. When non-fire-retarded
partitions in cellar, or other lowest story, extend to the ceiling, the fire-
retarding material of the ceiling shall be turned down at least three inches
(3") on said partitions, or the partitions shall be cut off at top to permit
the fire-retarding of the ceiling to be continuous. Where, in any old law
tenement three (3) stories and basement in height, there is also a cellar under
the basement story, the ceiling of such cellar shall be fire-retarded; and
also, in any such old law tenement, where the main entrance from the grade is
to the first story that portion of the basement ceiling which is directly under
the first story entrance hall, public hall and stair hall shall be fire-
retarded. In every old law tenement three (3) stories and basement in height
with no cellar under the basement, where the main entrance from the grade is to
the basement story, the ceiling of the basement story shall be fire-retarded
throughout. In any such old law tenement where the main entrance from the grade
is to the first story no such fire-retarding will be required.
      (4)   Heating appliances. The portion of the ceiling over any furnace,
boiler or hot water heater shall be fire-retarded in accordance with the
methods set forth in 1 RCNY §§
15-07(b)(1) or (b)(2), and such fire-retarding shall extend for a distance of
at least four feet (4'-0") beyond the sides and rear, and eight feet (8'-0") in
front of such furnace or boiler.
      (5)   It is not intended that these rules and regulations in themselves
require plans to be filed. However, should any work involve structural changes,
then plans are required to be filed in the Department of Buildings and such
changes shall be subject to all other Rules and Regulations applicable thereto.
      (6)   Work shall not commence until satisfactory evidence has been
submitted to the Department of Buildings that compensation insurance has been
obtained in accordance with the provisions of the Workmen's Compensation Law.
   (b)   Methods. Cellar ceilings shall be fire-retarded according to any of
the following methods: Metal lath and cement or gypsum mortar conforming to 1
RCNY §
15-07(b)(1). Plaster boards and gypsum mortar or stamped metal conforming to 1
RCNY §
15-07(b)(2). No. 26 U.S. gauge stamped metal over existing plastered ceiling,
when erected without damage to the plaster. Furring strips are not required,
but if used, they shall be metal covered on both sides and on face surface.
Stamped metal shall not be applied until after existing plastered ceiling has
been inspected and approved by an inspector of the Department of Housing and
Buildings. No other method may be used unless same are acceptable to the
Department of Buildings.
   (c)   Materials. Materials used shall be in accordance with the provisions
of 1 RCNY §§
15-07(i)(1), (i)(2) or (i)(3). Mineral wool, brick, gypsum or other masonry
fill will not be accepted for fire-retarding cellar ceilings. No other
materials may be used unless same are acceptable to the Department of
Buildings.
§ 15-09 Fire-Retarding of Cooking Spaces in All Multiple Dwellings.
   (a)   Intent. The rules herewith set forth are approved by the Department of
Buildings for the protection of cooking spaces under §§ 33 and 176 of the
Multiple Dwelling Law. As set forth in § 33 of the Multiple Dwelling Law,
nothing in these rules shall be construed as permitting fire-retarding
partitions in fireproof multiple dwellings.
   (b)   Multiple Dwelling Law. Except when sprinkler heads are installed in
conformity with subdivision (e) of this section, § 33 of the Multiple Dwelling
Law requires fire-retarding of cooking spaces in existing and newly constructed
class A and class B multiple dwellings.
   (c)   Ceilings and walls exclusive of doors. Walls and ceilings shall be
fire-retarded according to any of the following methods: Metal lath and cement
or gypsum mortar conforming to 1 RCNY §
15-07(b)(1). Plaster boards and gypsum mortar or stamped metal conforming to 1
RCNY §
15-07(b)(2). No. 26 U.S. gauge stamped metal over existing plaster when erected
without damage to the plaster. Furring strips are not required, but if used,
they shall be metal covered on both sides and on face surface. Stamped metal
shall not be applied until after existing plaster has been inspected and
approved by an inspector of the Department of Buildings. Materials used shall
be in accordance with the provisions of 1 RCNY §§
15-07(i)(1), (i)(2) or (i)(3). No other methods or materials may be used unless
same are acceptable to the Department of Buildings.
   (d)   Combustible material. In every cooking space, all combustible material
immediately underneath or within one foot of any apparatus used for cooking or
warming of food shall be fire-retarded in conformity with the applicable
provisions of these rules or covered with asbestos at least three-sixteenths
inch (3/16") in thickness and twenty-six gauge metal or with fire-resistive
material of equivalent rating. There shall always be at least two feet (2'-0")
of clear space above such apparatus.
   (e)   Sprinkler heads installed in ceilings of cooking spaces in lieu of
fire-retarding the ceilings and walls. Where sprinkler heads are installed in
the ceilings of cooking spaces in lieu of fire-retarding the ceilings and
walls, all of the provisions of 1 RCNY §§
15-09(a) through (f) inclusive, shall be complied with, except that it will not
be required that the fire-retarding of the walls and ceilings of cooking spaces
be complied with. Before the installation of sprinkler heads is begun an
application shall be filed with and approved by the Department of Buildings.
Sprinkler heads shall be of a type and manufacture approved by the Department
of Buildings or previously approved by the Board of Standards and Appeals or by
the Underwriters Laboratories Limited, and shall have fusible struts
constructed to fuse at a temperature not higher than two hundred twelve degrees
(212°) Fahrenheit. Every sprinkler head shall bear the year of manufacture
clearly on its surface. No sprinkler head may be installed after December 31st
of the year following the year of manufacture. There shall be provided at least
one (1) sprinkler head for every fifty-nine (59) square feet or fraction
thereof of the floor area of the cooking space. Sprinkler heads shall be
connected with the water supply of the building through a pipe of at least one-
half (1/2) inch inside diameter. Where practicable, sprinkler heads shall be
located in an upright position on top of the sprinkler piping. There shall be
kept available on the premises at all times a sufficient supply of extra
sprinkler heads and also a sprinkler wrench for use to replace promptly any
fused or damaged sprinkler heads. Any head which has opened or has been damaged
shall be replaced immediately with a good sprinkler head. Painting or
kalsomining of sprinkler heads is prohibited.
   (f)   Cooking spaces constructed after July 1, 1949. Application and plans
must be filed with and approved by the Department before any work is started in
connection with the construction of any cooking space after July 1, 1949.
§ 15-10 Fire Escapes, Fire Stairs and Fire Towers.
   (a)   Intent. These rules have been approved by the Department to supplement
the provisions of § 53 of the Multiple Dwelling Law in relation to Fire
Escapes, fire-stairs, etc. Where fire escapes serve as a means of exit from
other than multiple dwellings, such fire escapes shall comply with the laws
governing such occupancy. The voluntary erection of fire escapes on private
residence buildings or business and residence buildings shall be in conformity
with these rules and regulations unless otherwise directed by the Borough
Superintendent of the Department of Buildings. It is the intent of these rules
to cover only general conditions and they are not designed to cover specific or
special cases. When such may occur the owner is required to consult the
Department of Buildings and receive instructions before starting of work.
      (1)   Fire escapes on multiple dwellings requiring new certificate of
occupancy. Except as provided in 1 RCNY §
15-10(g)(2) re lodging houses, double-rung ladder type fire escapes will not be
accepted when a new Certificate of Occupancy is required.
      (2)   Alterations for increased occupancy. Where an alteration is made
increasing occupancy on any story and a fire escape is required such fire
escape shall conform to the provisions of § 53 of the Multiple Dwelling Law and
to the applicable provisions of these rules.
   (b)   General provisions.
      (1)   Caution. No fire escapes shall be removed from any apartment
without due precaution against leaving occupants without fire escape protection
as required by subdivision 9 of § 53 of the Multiple Dwelling Law.
      (2)   Entrance story, etc. – second means of egress. Where the distance
to safe landing, from the window sill of any apartment on any story, including
the entrance story, is more than twelve feet (12'-0"), a balcony and sliding
drop-ladder or other approved second means of egress shall be provided for such
apartment. Safe egress to street or other safe place shall be provided from the
termination of such means of egress.
      (3)   Application blanks and plans. Before the erection of new fire
escapes or alteration of existing fire escapes upon any multiple dwelling,
application must be filed with and approved by the Department of Buildings.
      (4)   Projections beyond the building line. Every part of fire escapes or
balconies erected on the fronts of multiple dwellings shall be at least ten
feet (10') above the sidewalk when such fire escapes or balconies project
beyond the building line.
   (c)   Illegal fire escapes shall be removed. All vertical ladder, wire,
chain or cable fire escapes if required as a means of egress shall be removed
and replaced with a legal means of egress.
   (d)   Acceptable existing means of egress on existing multiple dwellings.
Except as provided in 1 RCNY §
15-10(c), in any existing multiple dwelling any existing means of egress which
was lawfully permitted prior to the time the Multiple Dwelling Law became
effective may be continued as a legal means of egress as hereinafter
enumerated. If located on the front or rear wall of the building and properly
connected with stairs with proper openings. If located in an outer court at a
point distant not more than thirty feet (30'-0") from the outer end of such
court and provided such court is not less than five feet (5'-0") in width from
wall to wall at any point between such fire escape and the outer end of said
court. If located in an inner court whose least horizontal dimension is not
less than fifteen feet (15'-0") measured from wall to wall. If a party-wall
balcony on the front or rear wall of the building and there are no doors or
openings in the walls between the two buildings other than windows in fireproof
air shafts. If a party-balcony located in an outer court not more than fifteen
feet (15'-0") in length measured from the outer end of such court to the
innermost point thereof, and not less than five feet (5'-0") in width from wall
to wall at any point between the fire escape and the outer end of said court,
and provided also that there are no doors or openings in the walls between the
two buildings other than windows in fireproof air-shafts. No fire escape,
however, shall be deemed sufficient unless all the following conditions are
complied with: All fire escapes, whether a required means of egress or not,
shall be maintained in good order, repair and structurally safe. All parts
shall be of iron or stone. Except as provided in 1 RCNY §
15-10(bb) every apartment above the ground floor in each multiple dwelling
shall have direct access to a legal fire escape without passing through a
public hall. Except party-wall balconies, all balconies shall be connected to
each other by means of a stair or, when permitted, by double-rung ladders. All
fire escapes, except party-wall balconies, shall have proper drop-ladders in
guides from the lowest balcony of sufficient length to reach a safe landing
place beneath. All fire escapes not on the street shall have a safe and
adequate means of egress from the yard or court to the street or to the
adjoining premises. Prompt and ready access shall be had to all fire escapes.
Except as provided in 1 RCNY §
15-10(bb), such access shall be through a living room or private hall in each
apartment or suite of rooms at each story above the ground floor and shall not
include the window of a stairhall, nor shall any such egress be obstructed by
sinks or other kitchen fixtures, or in any other way. No existing fire escape
shall be extended or have its location changed except with the written approval
of the Department of Buildings. Where an existing apartment in a tenement house
erected prior to April twelfth, nineteen hundred and one, is located entirely
on a court and has no rooms opening on the street or yard, fire escapes
hereafter provided for such apartments may be located in courts under the same
conditions as prescribed for existing fire escapes in this subdivision. When
wire, chain cable or vertical ladder fire escapes are permitted to remain on
Multiple Dwellings under the provisions of subdivision 9 of § 53, they shall be
considered only as supplemental fire escapes. Such fire escapes shall be
maintained in a safe condition of repair at all times and shall be subject to
the applicable requirements of all laws and to these rules in relation to
maintenance of existing fire escapes. Before a pending violation requiring the
removal of such existing fire escapes is superseded or cancelled, an inspection
shall be made in accordance with the specific requirements as set forth in the
preceding paragraph. Each of the owners of adjoining structures, commonly
served by party-wall balconies serving as a required means of egress, shall
maintain in good order and repair that portion of each such balcony which is on
his property, and each such owner shall maintain egress normally unobstructed
and unimpeded from each such balcony to and through his structure. It shall be
unlawful for the owner of a structure on which there is a party-wall balcony
serving as a required means of egress from an adjoining structure, to remove
such party-wall balcony or any portion thereof or to prevent, eliminate or
obstruct egress from such party-wall balcony to and through his structure,
unless and until such owner has had erected a legal fire escape or other
approved means of egress. See also 1 RCNY §
15-10(bb).
   (e)   Party-wall balconies.
      (1)   New party-wall balconies. The erection of new party-wall balconies
shall be subject to the discretion and jurisdiction of the Department of
Buildings, provided, however, that there shall be no doors or openings in the
wall between the buildings served by such balconies other than windows in
fireproof airshafts. New party-wall balconies will not be permitted on
adjoining frame multiple dwellings.
      (2)   Existing party-wall balconies. Party-wall balconies existing on any
multiple dwelling shall afford safe egress, be kept in good order and repair,
be constructed so as to be structurally strong and shall be maintained in
conformity with all other applicable laws, rules and regulations. Such fire
escapes are acceptable on occupied multiple dwellings.
   (f)   Party-wall fire escapes. The Department of Buildings my consent to the
erection of party-wall fire escapes on adjoining multiple dwellings, to which
the occupants have safe, unobstructed access in common, when such party-wall
fire escapes are constructed and maintained in accordance with the law and
these rules.
      (1)   Any existing party-wall fire escape (stairways) connection with and
used in common by a multiple dwelling and a non-multiple dwelling is acceptable
when such fire escape is maintained in good order and repair and affords safe
egress.
   (g)   Double-rung ladders.
      (1)   Double-rung ladders will not be permitted on new fire escapes.
      (2)   Any fire escape existing prior to the enactment of the Multiple
Dwelling Law on any multiple dwelling that does not require a certificate of
occupancy resulting from an alteration, if structurally sound and in good
condition and provided with existing ladders inclined at an angle not exceeding
eighty (80) degrees and equipped with double-rung steps and which affords safe
egress, shall be deemed to be a legal fire escape. When a Certificate of
Occupancy is requested or required in connection with a lodging house which is
equipped with a double-rung ladder Fire Escape and such fire escape is in good
repair and adequate, except as to type, and only minor violations exist the
correction of which will make the premises conform to all other law
requirements, the existing double-rung ladder fire escape may be accepted.
      (3)   Except as provided in 1 RCNY §
15-10(g)(2) re lodging houses, double-rung ladders are not acceptable when a
new Certificate of Occupancy is to be issued.
   (h)   Alteration of existing two-balcony fire escapes on existing multiple
dwellings. When a building is not more than three (3) stories in height and
provided with a balcony on each of the second and third stories, with
connecting vertical ladders, and balconies not less than two feet five inches
(2'-5") in width and of adequate length, the Department of Buildings may permit
the removal of vertical ladders and replacing of the said ladders with
regulation sixty (60) degree connecting stairs. Standards shall be one-half
inch (1/2") round or square and height of rail at least two feet nine inches
(2'-9"). The stairs shall be not less than seventeen inches (17") wide with a
passageway between string and wall or string and top rail of not less than
fourteen inches (14"). In lieu of such passageway, the Department of Buildings
will permit a drop-ladder to be installed and placed at each end of the lowest
balcony in those cases where it is impractical to provide a passageway of such
minimum width. New brackets shall be provided where necessary. The gateway
shall be cut in the front rail with a drop-ladder and guides from second (2nd)
story to safe landing. Where fire escapes are located at rear of building a
gooseneck ladder shall be provided. The gooseneck ladder may be placed at an
angle from the top floor balcony to the roof. When placed at an angle a minimum
space of twenty-four inches (24") shall be maintained between the strings and
front top rail and a minimum space of fourteen inches (14") between the strings
and the front bottom rail. There shall be a space of at least twenty-four
inches (24") between the string of the gooseneck ladder and the frame of the
window. Conditions may be found where this modification will not exactly apply.
When such a condition is found it should be brought to the attention of the
Department of Buildings for decision. When fire escapes are at the front no
gooseneck ladder shall be required. When access to such existing two-balcony
fire escape is solely by means of a window in a bathroom, the doors of such
bathrooms shall be glazed with glass other than wire glass and all key or
cylinder locks shall be removed from doors. In such bathrooms there shall be no
fixture located in front of the window opening to fire escape. Such altered
two-balcony fire escape shall conform to all other requirements of law and
these rules and regulations.
   (i)   Accessibility of fire escapes from apartments, rooms, kitchenettes and
other spaces. Prompt and ready access shall be had to all fire escapes and,
except as provided in 1 RCNY §
15-10(bb), such access shall be through a living room, kitchenette or private
hall in each apartment or suite of rooms at each story above the ground floor.
Access to fire escapes shall not include the window of a stairhall, nor shall
any such egress be obstructed by sinks or other kitchen fixtures, or in any
other way. A clear space of at least twenty-one inches (21") must be maintained
as a passageway between any fixtures and the side of an opening leading to fire
escapes. In any apartment which is occupied by a "family" as defined in § 4(5),
Multiple Dwelling Law, and in which one or more living rooms are rented to
boarders of lodgers, every such room shall be directly accessible to a fire
escape without passing through a public hall, and for separately occupied
living rooms access to fire escapes shall be direct from such rooms without
passing through a public hall or any other separately occupied room, except as
may be permitted in §§ 66, 67, and 248 of the Multiple Dwelling Law.
      (1)   Egress from apartments used for "Single Room Occupancy". No room in
any apartment shall be so occupied for "single room occupancy" unless each room
therein shall have free and unobstructed access to each required means of
egress from the dwelling without passing through any sleeping room, bathroom or
water-closet compartment. In apartments used for "single room occupancy" there
shall be access to a second means of egress within the apartment without
passing through any public stair or public hall. On and after July 1, 1957,
every tenement used or occupied for single room occupancy in whole or part
under the provisions of § 248, Multiple Dwelling Law, and which does not have
at least two means of egress accessible to each apartment and extending from
the ground story to the roof, shall be provided with at least two means of
egress, or, in lieu of such egress, every stair hall or public hall, and every
hall or passage within an apartment, shall be equipped on each story with one
or more automatic sprinkler heads approved by the department. Elevator shafts
in such tenements shall be completely enclosed with fireproof or other
incombustible material and the doors to such shafts shall be fireproof or shall
be covered on all sides with incombustible material. In apartments used for
"single room occupancy" where access to a required means of egress is provided
through a room such access to such room shall be through a clear opening at
least thirty inches (30") wide extending from floor to ceiling and such opening
shall not be equipped with any door frame, or with any device by means of which
the opening may be closed, concealed or obstructed.
   (j)   Window bars, gates, etc. No iron bars, gates or other obstructing
devices will be permitted on any window giving access to fire escapes or where
such window provides a secondary means of egress in case of fire on any story,
including the ground floor, basement, cellar, etc. Windows on grade level at
sidewalk, yard or court, or at roof level of an adjoining building, may have
bars, but at least, one window in any apartment or suite of rooms shall be
without bars or obstructions of any kind in order to afford a second means of
egress and such window shall conform to the provisions of 1 RCNY §
15-10(k).
   (k)   Windows and doors to fire escapes. The window or door giving access to
fire escapes shall not be less than two feet (2') in width and the sill of the
window shall not be more than three feet (3') above the floor. Window openings
shall be not less than two feet six inches (2'-6") high in the clear.
      (1)   Steel casement sash. Steel casement sash opening outward onto any
fire escape balcony three feet six inches (3'-6") in width will be permitted,
provided such sash is equipped with approved extension hinges so that, when
opened, the sash will be flat against the wall, and further provided that there
will be no adjusters on the sash as part of its equipment. Passageway of
fourteen inches (14") clear width is required to be maintained between the sash
or hinges and any portion of the fire escape when the sash lies flat against
the wall. When casement sash is set at right angle to the fire escape stairway
a clear radial width of twenty inches (20") must be provided.
      (2)   Wire screens and storm windows. Wire screens are permitted on a
door or window giving access to a fire escape. Such screens may be of the
rolling type, casement or of a type that slides vertically or horizontally in
sections, providing that there shall be a clear unobstructed space two feet
(2') in width and two feet six inches (2'-6") in height when the screens are
opened and further provided that no such screen shall be subdivided with
muntins or other dividing or separating bars into spaces less than two feet
(2') in width by two feet six inches (2'-6") in height. Storm sash and storm
doors are permitted on openings giving access to fire escapes provided they are
arranged so as to be easily and readily opened from the inside and do not
obstruct or interfere with safe egress.
   (l)   Egress from fire escape balconies not to be obstructed. Egress from
fire escape balconies must not be obstructed by signs, fixed awnings or any
other obstruction.
   (m)   Extension roofs used as means of egress or directly under fire escape
balcony.
      (1)   Hereafter erected extension roofs. Where the roof of an extension
hereafter erected is to be used as a means of egress from a fire escape, or
where a fire escape balcony is located directly above said roof, such roof
shall be of fireproof construction.
      (2)   Existing extension roofs. Except in converted dwellings where
sprinklers may be installed, in every multiple dwelling where a fire escape
balcony is situated over and not more than eight feet (8') above a non-
fireproof roof, or where a non-fireproof roof of an extension is to be used as
egress from fire escapes, the entire ceiling of said extension must be fire-
retarded with metal lath and cement or gypsum mortar in the manner prescribed
in 1 RCNY §
15-07(b)(1) and (i)(1), or with one-half inch (1/2") approved plaster boards
lined with No. 26 U.S. gauge stamped metal. In buildings requiring the issuance
of a Certificate of Occupancy as a result of being altered structurally, the
only approved method shall be with cement of gypsum mortar and metal lath
weighing not less than three (3.0) pounds per square yard which shall be
applied directly to the beams or other structural members. Where the roof of an
existing extension is used as fire egress, a balcony shall be provided at the
level of the roof and, if the distance between the said balcony and a safe
landing is more than sixteen feet (16'-0"), a landing platform must be provided
not more than ten feet (10'-0") from said safe landing and this landing
platform and the balcony on the roof level must be connected by a regulation
stairway. From the landing platform a drop-ladder in guides must be provided so
as to reach the safe landing. A balcony and drop-ladder in guides as per 1 RCNY
§
15-10(r)(11) shall be provided for every two fire escape stacks or fraction
thereof using an extension roof for landing and fire egress.
      (3)   Skylights on extensions. Any existing skylights in said roof must
be constructed of incombustible material whenever deemed necessary. Where
skylights exist or are hereafter constructed on the roof of an extension used
as a means of egress from a fire escape, they must not interfere with egress in
any way and if in the line of said egress, they must be provided with a
substantial guard-rail not less than three feet six inches (3'-6") high.
   (n)   Egress to street required from fire escapes located in yards and
courts not extending to the street. In an old law tenement or a converted
dwelling where fire escapes are located in a yard less than thirty feet (30'-
0") in depth, or in a court which does not extend to such a yard or to the
street, there shall be egress to the street by means of a fire-proof
passageway. In such multiple dwellings, where the yard is less than thirty feet
(30'-0") in depth and where the consent of the owner of the adjoining premises
is obtained, in lieu of providing such fire-proof passageway, a door or gate in
a lot-line fence leading from such yard or court to the yard or court of the
adjoining premises may be accepted, provided, however, that such door or gate
provides adequate egress and is not locked or secured in any manner except by a
readily-accessible, easy to open hook or bolt. Where fire escapes are located
in the yard of a new law tenement or of a multiple dwelling erected after April
18, 1929, access shall be provided from the street to the yard either in a
direct line or through a court as provided in paragraph c of subdivision 2 of §
238 and paragraph i of subdivision 2 of Section 27, Multiple Dwelling Law.
Where fire escapes are located in a court of a new law tenement or of a
multiple dwelling erected after April 18, 1929, and such court does not extend
to the street, a fireproof passageway leading directly to the street shall be
provided as required by paragraph b of subdivision 2 of § 53, Multiple Dwelling
Law. All passageways required under these rules shall be not less than seven
feet (7'-0") in height and not less than three feet (3'-0") in width and shall
at all times be kept clear and unobstructed. Doors and gates at the end of such
passageways are prohibited, except that a door or gate equipped with an
approved-type knob or panic belt which shall be readily openable from the
inside will be permitted at the building line. Doors and gates provided with
keylocks or padlocks are prohibited.
   (o)   Location for new fire escapes. No required fire-escape shall be
permitted to be placed on an adjoining property without the written consent of
the Department of Buildings. No fire escape shall be erected within ten feet
(10') of the termination of a duct. Fire escapes for existing multiple
dwellings shall be located as required by the department and arranged so as to
provide legal egress for all rooms and apartments.
      (1)   Fire escapes in court (side yard). Except as provided in 1 RCNY §
15-10(bb)(6) where an apartment has a street frontage and extends also to a
yard, fire escapes may be permitted to be placed in a court (side yard) if the
court (side yard) is not less than seven feet (7'-0") wide. In any multiple
dwelling where exterior structural conditions are such as to prevent the
erection of a fire escape on the street front or yard, new fire escapes may be
permitted to be erected in a lot-line court (side yard) providing the lot-line
court (side yard) extends from street to rear yard and is not less than three
feet (3'-0") in width for its full length. Fire escapes erected in such court
may be three feet (3'-0") wide when the width of such court does not permit
balconies three feet four inches (3'-4") in width. The width of stairways and
passageways and other arrangement details affected by the permitted reduction
in the width of balconies will be determined and furnished to contractor by the
Department upon request.
      (2)   Where an existing apartment in a tenement erected prior to April
12, 1901, is located entirely on a court and has no rooms opening on the street
or yard, fire escapes hereafter provided for such apartments may be located in
courts under the same conditions as prescribed for existing fire escapes in 1
RCNY §
15-10(d).
   (p)   Materials. All fire escapes hereafter constructed shall consist of
outside open balconies and stairways of iron, stone, or other approved
materials. Wherever the term wrought iron is used in these rules it shall be
deemed to include all other especially approved metals. Cast iron will not be
permitted to enter into the construction of fire escapes. The use of old
material in the construction of new fire escapes is prohibited. Bolts used in
the construction or repair of fire escapes shall be machine bolts. The use of
stove bolts is prohibited. The strength and construction of stone balconies
hereafter erected forming part of the fire escape shall be subject to the
approval of the Department of Housing and Buildings. All structural steel used
in the construction of fire escapes shall be at least one-quarter (0.25) inch
in thickness.
   (q)   Types of fire escapes. There shall be two types of fire escapes: "Type
A" and "Type B". Except for brackets and braces as hereafter described, what is
applicable to one type is equally applicable to the other whether or not it is
so stated specifically.
      (1)   Definition of "Type A" and "Type B" fire escapes. A "Type A" fire
escape is one which has a supporting bracket at each end of the balcony or
platform. A "Type B" fire escape is one which has brackets not more than four
feet (4') apart supporting the balcony or platform.
      (2)   Cantilever brackets will not be accepted for new fire escapes on
existing buildings.
      (3)   Details of other types of structural supports for fire escapes must
be submitted to and approved by the Department before being used in the
construction of fire escapes.
      (4)   "Type A" fire escapes are not permitted on frame buildings, walls
or hollow masonry constructions, on walls of solid masonry less than eight inch
(8") in thickness nor on hollow walls of solid masonry unless complete
construction details are submitted to and approved by the Department before the
construction of fire escapes.
   (r)   Balconies. All balconies, except those erected upon frame buildings
and buildings having eight inch (8") brick walls, shall be not less than three
feet four inches (3'-4") in width over all and may project into the public
highway to a distance not greater than four feet (4') beyond the building line.
Balconies erected upon frame buildings and buildings having eight inch (8")
brick walls shall be thirty-six inches (36") in width. Balcony railings must be
not less than two feet nine inches (2'-9") high.
      (1)   Passageway. Seventeen inches (17") in width is required between the
strings of stairs and the wall, or between the strings of stairs and railings,
clear of all projections to a height of six feet six inches (6'-6"). Fourteen
inches (14") clear width is required between the hatchway railing and the
window sill. Seventeen inches (17") in width is required between the gooseneck
ladder and the hatchway on the upper balcony.
      (2)   Openings. The openings for stairways in all balconies shall be not
less than twenty-one inches (21") wide, and of such length as to provide at
least six feet six inches (6'-6") clear headroom on all stairways at every
tread, and shall have no covers of any kind. A round, iron guard rail, three-
quarters inch (3/4") in diameter shall be provided around all hatchways on all
new balconies, and also, when necessary, around hatchways on existing
balconies. Such guard rails shall be at least two feet six inches (2'-6") high
and shall be properly braced at intervals of three feet (3'). The brace from
guard rail to the front top rail shall be so arranged to allow six feet six
inches (6'-6") of headroom on the stairway. Openings are not permitted in the
floor of the lowest balcony of any new fire escapes. Egress must be from a
gateway in the front or end rail.
      (3)   Top rails. New top rails must be one and three-quarters inches by
one-half inch (1 3/4" × 1/2") wrought iron or steel. Angle iron top rails will
not be accepted. Separate bolt ends must be one and one-half inches by one-half
inch (1 1/2" × 1/2") at connection with top rails and secured to the same by
two three-eighths inch (3/8") bolts well upset. No welded connections, other
than shop welding, for top rails, will be permitted. Top rails must go through
the wall. When the wall is of brick, stone or concrete they must be anchored on
the inner face thereof by means of nuts and four-inch by four-inch by three-
eighths inch (4" × 4" × 3/8") washers. Where a masonry wall is eight inches
(8") in thickness the washers shall be continuous and shall extend vertically
from four inches (4") below the bracket anchorage to four inches (4") above the
top rail. Bolt ends must be at least three-quarters inch (3/4") in diameter.
Top rails must be anchored in the wall at least nine inches (9") from the
window or door opening. On recess fire escapes the top rails need not go
through the wall, but must be hot leaded six inches (6") in brick or stone and
at least twelve inches (12") from the outside face of the wall. The front and
return top rail, unless in one (1) piece, must be secured at the angle in the
following manner: (1) with lap joint, by one-half inch (1/2") rivet and a strap
of same dimension as the top rail, with one (1) three-eighths inch (3/8") rivet
or bolt in each end of the strap; (2) with butt joint, by a triangular plate
four inches by six inches by three-eighths inch (4" × 6" × 3/8") secured to
each member of the top rail by two (2) three-eighths inch (3/8") rivets or
bolts. Top rails may be spliced with iron of the same dimensions as the rails
with two (2) three-eighths inch (3/8") rivets or bolts on each side of the
splice, or may be overlapped not less than eight inches (8") and secured by two
(2) three-eighths inch (3/8") bolts or rivets. Where front rails are not rigid
they must be braced with outside braces. Said braces must be wrought iron not
less than one and three-quarters inches by one-half inch (1 3/4" × 1/2") placed
on edge. The braces must be properly spaced and secured to the extended
brackets and top rails by three-eighths inch (3/8") rivets or bolts. Where
brackets are extended to receive outside braces the extended portion must never
be less than two inches by one-half inch (2" × 1/2") and secured to the bracket
by two (2) three-eighths inch (3/8") rivets or bolts. Bow braces and over head
braces will not be accepted.
      (4)   Bottom rails. Bottom rails must be one and one-half inches by
three-eighths inch (1 1/2" × 3/8") wrought iron and front rail of same must be
secured to brackets by three-eighths inch (3/8") rivets or bolts. Return bottom
rails must be leaded or cemented in the wall when the latter is of brick, or
may be secured to the brackets when this is practicable. The bottom front and
return rails must be connected at angles by at least one (1) three-eighths inch
(3/8") rivet or bolt well burred. They may be spliced as in case of top rails.
      (5)   Standards. Standards must be not less than one-half inch (1/2")
round or square set vertically, riveted to the top and bottom rails, not more
than six inches (6") apart on centers. Special designs must be submitted for
any variation, and approved before work is begun.
      (6)   Floor slats. Floor slats must be of wrought iron one and one-half
inches (1 1/2") in width and three-eighths inch (3/8") thick and placed not
more than one and one-quarter inches (1 1/4") apart. In new balconies floor
slats shall not project more than six inches (6"), and in old balconies not
more than eighteen inches (18"), beyond the end bracket and shall not be
supported by the bottom rail. All floors must be well secured to the brackets
by three-eighths inch (3/8") "U" or damp bolts. Floor slats may be spliced with
a four-inch (4") splice late three-eighths inch (3/8") thick, secured by three-
eighths inch (3/8") countersunk or round-head bolts or rivets on each side of
the joint. The ends of the floor slats must not project over stairs so as to
overhang the top tread more than one-half inch (1/2"). The ends of such floor
slats shall not be cut or burned off so as to be jagged or uneven. The floor
slats shall be in true alignment.
      (7)   Battens. Battens must be one and one-half inches by three-eighths
inch (1 1/2" × 3/8") not more than three feet (3') apart, riveted to the slats
by five-sixteenth inch (5/16") rivets and so spaced as to secure rigidity. No
welded connections, other than shop welding, for top rails will be permitted.
Top rails must go through the wall. When the wall is of brick, stone or
concrete they must be anchored on the inner face thereof by means of nuts and
four-inch by four-inch by three-eighths inch (4" × 4" × 3/8") washers. Where a
masonry wall is eight inches (8") in thickness the washers shall be continuous
and shall extend vertically from four inches (4") below the bracket anchorage
to four inches (4") above the top rail. Bolt ends must be at least three-
quarters inch (3/4") in diameter. Top rails must be anchored in the wall at
least nine inches (9") from the window or door opening. On recess fire escapes
the top rails need not go through the wall, but must be hot leaded six inches
(6") in brick or stone and at least twelve inches (12") from the outside face
of the wall. The front and return top rail, unless in one (1) piece, must be
secured at the angle in the following manner: (1) with lap joint, by one-half
inch (1/2") rivet and a strap of same dimension as the top rail, with one (1)
three-eighths inch (3/8") rivet or bolt in each end of the strap; (2) with butt
joint, by a triangular plate four inches by six inches by three-eighths inch
(4" × 6" × 3/8") secured to each member of the top rail by two (2) three-
eighths inch (3/8") rivets or bolts. Top rails may be spliced with iron of the
same dimensions as the rails with two (2) three-eighths inch (3/8") rivets or
bolts on each side of the splice, or may be overlapped not less than eight
inches (8") and secured by two (2) three-eighths inch (3/8") bolts or rivets.
Where front rails are not rigid they must be braced with outside braces. Said
braces must be wrought iron not less than one and three-quarters inches by one-
half inch (1 3/4" × 1/2") placed on edge. The braces must be properly spaced
and secured to the extended brackets and top rails by three-eighths inch (3/8")
rivets or bolts. Where brackets are extended to receive outside braces the
extended portion must never be less than two inches by one-half inch (2" × 1/
2") and secured to the bracket by two (2) three-eighths inch (3/8") rivets or
bolts. Bow braces and over head braces will not be accepted.
      (8)   Landings. Landings at the head and foot of stairs shall be at least
forty inches by twenty inches (40" × 20"), except on the balcony on the top
story where the gooseneck ladder is located such landing shall be not less than
forty inches by thirty inches (40" × 30"). On the lowest balcony where the
opening to drop-ladder is in the return rail at front of the lowest tread the
landing must be at least forty inches by thirty-six inches (40" × 36").
      (9)   Egress from lowest balcony. The gateway in the rail must be of
sufficient width to permit the proper installation of the drop-ladder and
guide-rods. Where the opening to the drop-ladder is in the return rail and at
front of the lowest step, the landing at the foot of the stairs must be at
least three feet by three feet, four inches (3' × 3' × 4"). Top rails must be
well braced at the gateway.
      (10)   Distance from lowest balcony to ground. The distance from the
lowest balcony to the ground or safe landing shall be not more than sixteen
feet (16'-0"), except that in existing multiple dwellings where due to
structural conditions, such as plate glass store fronts, etc., it is not
possible to erect such lowest balcony within sixteen feet (16'-0") of the
ground, the Department of Buildings may permit such balcony to be erected at a
height of not more than eighteen feet (18'-0") above the ground.
      (11)   Termination of fire escapes on extension roofs. Where fire escape
stairs or ladders rest upon a fireproof roof, no balcony need be provided at
the foot of such stairs or ladders. Where fire escapes terminate on the roof of
an existing extension, a guide-rod drop-ladder shall be provided at the level
of the roof of such extension. Where the distance from such roof to a safe
landing is more than sixteen feet (16'-0"), an intermediate balcony not more
than ten feet (10'-0") above a safe landing shall be provided, and such
intermediate balcony shall be equipped with a guide-rod and drop-ladder and
connected by means of a regulation stairway and balcony at the level of the
extension roof. Balconies, where required, must be anchored and constructed in
a manner satisfactory to the Department of Buildings. The roof of every
extension used for egress, or upon which fire escapes terminate, shall be
fireproof or fire-retarded according to the provisions of 1 RCNY §
15-10(m).
   (s)   Brackets and braces.
      (1)   "Type A". All horizontal members of brackets and all cross beams
shall be not less than four-inch (4") channels weighing not less than seven and
one-quarter (7.25) pounds to the linear foot. The end bracket members shall
enter the wall at a point not less than nine inches (9") from a door or window
and shall be anchored on the inside face of the wall with an eight-inch by
eight-inch by three-eighths inch (8" × 8" × 3/8") washer and a one-inch (1")
bolt and nut. Where the wall is eight inches (8") in thickness the washer shall
be continuous and shall extend across all brackets and cross beams. The bolt
end shall be wrought iron not less than two inches by one-half inch (2" × 1/2")
which shall be drawn out to form the necessary bolt end without welded
connections. The bolt end shall be secured to the bracket with two (2) one-half
inch (1/2") rivets. On eight-inch (8") walls the bolt end shall not be less
than nine inches (9") long. On twelve-inch (12") walls the bolt end shall not
be less than eleven inches (11") long. On sixteen-inch (16") walls the bolt end
shall not be less than fifteen inches (15") long. When the wall is eight inches
(8") in thickness the bracket member shall enter the wall not less than seven
inches (7"). When the wall is twelve inches (12") in thickness the bracket
member shall enter the wall not less than eleven inches (11"). When the wall is
sixteen inches (16") in thickness the bracket member shall enter the wall not
less than fifteen inches (15"). The intermediate cross beams shall enter the
wall not less than eight inches (8") except where they enter the wall under a
window. In such case the cross beam shall enter the wall not less than four
inches (4"). The member forming the hatchway opening shall be a four-inch (4")
channel iron weighing not less than seven and one-quarter (7.25) pounds per
foot. It shall be secured to the intermediate cross beam with a three-inch by
three-inch by one-quarter inch (3" × 3" × 1/4") lug and two (2) one-half inch
(1/2") rivets or bolts. The front bottom member of the fire escape shall be of
the following size and weights:
 
Length of Balcony Weight of Channels    Size of Channels
Up to 11 feet     9.0 pounds per foot   5 inches
Up to 13 feet     10.5 pounds per foot  6 inches
Up to 15 feet     12.25 pounds per foot 7 inches
Up to 17 feet     13.75 pounds per foot 8 inches
 
The bracket braces shall be angle iron not less than two and one-half inches by
two and one-half inches by one-quarter inch (2 1/2" × 2 1/2" × 1/4"). The
braces shall drop not less than twenty-four inches (24") from the top of the
bracket and shall extend out to a point not less than three-quarters (3/4) of
the length of the bracket. Each member of the brace shall be secured to the
bracket with two (2) one-half inch (1/2") rivets. The drop member of the brace
shall be secured to the extended member with two (2) one-half inch (1/2")
rivets. The heel of the brace shall be cut out one-half inch (1/2") to allow
for the drainage of water. Where, owing to cornices, water-tables and porticos,
it is impossible to use the standard brackets, inverted brackets may be used.
When inverted brackets are used they shall be constructed with an upright wall
member and a diagonal member. The wall member shall be an angle iron not less
than three inches by four inches by three-eighths inch (3" × 4" × 3/8") and the
diagonal member shall be an angle iron not less than three inches by three
inches by three-eighths inch (3" × 4" × 3/8"). Each member shall be secured to
the bracket with two (2) one-half inch (1/2") rivets. The wall members shall be
secured to the wall with two (2) one-inch (1") bolts which shall pass through
the wall and be anchored on the inside face of the wall with a washer four
inches by three-eighths inch (4" × 3/8") which shall extend across the two (2)
bolts. A one-inch (1") nut shall secure the washer to the bolt. The bolts shall
be placed sixteen inches (16") apart on centers. The four-inch (4") member of
the wall brace shall bear against the wall and shall extend from the bracket to
and above the top return rail of the balcony. The top return rail of the
balcony shall be secured to the wall member of the brace with two (2) one-inch
(1") rivets or nuts and bolts. When inverted braces are used the bracket member
shall enter the wall not less than four inches (4"). All other portions of
"Type A" fire escapes, except roof balconies, shall be constructed and erected
as specified for the construction and erection of "Type B" fire escapes.
      (2)   "Type B". The horizontal members of brackets shall consist of a
one-piece wrought iron bar two inches by one-half inch (2" × 1/2") set so that
the two inch (2") dimension is vertical. Brackets shall be not more than four
feet (4'-0") apart. Welded brackets will not be accepted. Angle iron brackets
will not be accepted. The top member of the bracket must be drawn out to form
the necessary bolt end without welded connection. Brackets shall be placed not
less than eight inches (8") nor more than sixteen inches (16") below the window
sill, except by special permission from this Department. The top member of the
bracket must go through the wall, and when the wall is of brick, must be
anchored as specified for brackets in new buildings. Brackets on buildings in
course of erection must be built into the wall. They must be carried through
the wall and turned down three inches (3"), or the top member must be drawn out
so as to form a bolt end one inch (1") in diameter and provided with nuts and
with washers four inches by six inches (4" × 6") and three-eighths inch (3/8")
in thickness, or where brackets on existing buildings or buildings in the
course of erection pass through the walls under window or door openings, such
brackets shall be anchored on the inside face of the wall with a four-inch by
three-eighths inch (4" × 3/8") plate extending across the opening and bearing
nine inches (9") on the inner face of each pier. In such case an additional
one-half inch (1/2") bolt passing through wall and anchored to plate with one-
half inch (1/2") nut shall be provided. If wall is recessed said bar must be
shaped so as to bear on inner face of recessed wall and the ends of said bar to
bear nine inches (9") on inner face of each pier. In addition a four-inch (4")
steel channel stiffener must be provided to extend across the entire recessed
portion. Blocking the recessed portion will not be permitted. Where walls are
eight inches (8") in thickness the four-inch by three-eighths inch (4" × 3/8")
plate must extend across and take in all brackets. Special designs must be
submitted for fire escape framing other than standard and for masonry openings
not included in above schedule. Horizontal members of brackets must be braced
with one-inch (1") square braces and shall rest on a shoulder. The braces shall
be secured to the horizontal member with a rivet one-half inch (1/2") in
diameter, at a point two-thirds (2/3") of the length of the horizontal member
from the wall. The heel of the brace must be secured to the top member by a
rivet of the same size. The brace when entering the wall must be hot leaded in
brick or stone three inches (3") and have a proper bearing on the face of the
wall for at least eight inches (8"). If wedges are used to obtain full bearing
against the wall, they must be of iron and well secured to the brace and must
fill in solidly the space between brace and wall. Anchorage in or bracing in
terra cotta is not permitted. Braces must drop at least one-third (1/3) of the
length of the long brackets and must drop not less than eight inches (8") for
short brackets. Where a bracket is to receive additional weight on account of
suspension rod for lower balconies, said bracket must be reinforced by an
additional one-inch (1") square brace running from the end of the bracket
parallel to the regulation brace. Where it is impossible to brace the brackets
in the manner described above, angle iron and tie rod supports must be used.
      (3)   Anchorages for mullion windows, both "Type A" and "Type B".
Masonry Span Brackets   Anchorage Member
5'-0"        3'-6" long 6" channel 10.5 pounds or 6" × 4" × 9/16" angle
6'-0"        3'-6" long 7" channel 9.8 pounds or 6" × 4" × 11/16" angle
7'-0"        3'-6" long 8" channel 11.5 pounds or 7" channel 12.25 pounds
8'-0"        3'-6" long 8" channel 11.5 pounds
9'-0"        3'-6" long 8" channel 13.75 pounds
5'-0"        4'-0" long 8" channel 11.5 pounds or 6" × 4" × 3/4" angle
6'-0"        4'-0" long 8" channel 11.5 pounds
7'-0"        4'-0" long 8" channel 13.75 pounds
8'-0"        4'-0" long 8" channel 16.25 pounds
9'-0"        4'-0" long 8" channel 21.25 pounds
 
Notes: l – Working stresses taken at 16,000 pounds per square inch.
Notes: 2 – Load taken at 100 pounds per sq. ft. and includes live and dead
loads.
Notes: 3 – Loads on anchorage members due to bracket reaction placed for
maximum bending moment produced in member.
Notes: 4 – Bearing plates of suitable size must be provided for brackets taking
ladder load and for anchorage members.
6" × 4 9/16" angle weighs 18.1 pounds per lin. ft.
6" × 4 11/16" angle weighs 21.8 pounds per lin. ft.
6" × 4 3/4" angle weighs 23.6 pounds per lin. ft.
Angle irons to support balconies where regulation braces cannot be used shall
not be less than four inches by four inches by three-eighths inch (4" × 4" × 3/
8"). Tie rods shall not be less than one inch (1") in diameter and shall be
anchored through the wall in the same manner as brackets. The angle iron
support in such cases shall be set so that the tie rods will pull toward the
heaviest part of the webs. When it becomes necessary to shift a bracket from
one location to another in order to carry the stairs, a new regulation two inch
by one-half inch (2" × 1/2") bracket shall be installed. No welded brackets,
corroded brackets or brackets set flat with cast iron under-bracing will be
accepted. Such brackets shall be replaced, wherever found, by a two-inch by
one-half inch (2" × 1/2") regulation bracket. However, when a two inch by one-
half inch (2" × 1/2") bar bracket with cast iron under-bracing is found, said
bracket may be permitted to remain if proper one inch (1") square under-bracing
is provided.
   (t)   Stairways. All stairways shall be placed at an angle of not more than
sixty (60) degrees with flat open steps not less than six inches (6") in width
and twenty inches (20") in length and with a rise of not more than nine inches
(9").
      (1)   Treads. Treads of such construction as may be approved by the
Department from time to time will be permitted. Flat iron bars forming treads
must be one and one-half inches by three-eighths inch (1 1/2" × 3/8") and
spaced not more than three-quarters of an inch (3/4") apart. Bars forming
treads must be secured to supporting angle irons by three-eighths inch (3/8")
rivets and these angle irons must be fastened to the strings by two (2) three-
eighths inch (3/8") rivets or bolts, well burred. Galvanized angle irons one
and one-half inches by one and one-half inches by one-quarter inch (1 1/2" × 1
1/2" × 1/4") will be accepted but if not galvanized, said angle irons shall be
one and one-half inches by one and one-half inches by three-eighths inch (1 1/
2" × 1 1/2" × 3/8"). In all cases the vertical legs of the angle irons must be
set tightly against the strings so that there will be no intervening spaces.
All treads must be set level and must not overhang so as to interfere with foot
room on the tread below.
      (2)   Patented treads. Patented treads approved by the Department of
Buildings or previously approved by the Board of Standards and Appeals for new
installations will be accepted by the Department of Buildings as legal for use
in buildings under its jurisdiction. Five samples of approved treads to be
furnished to the Department of Buildings (one delivered to each borough) as a
permanent record.
      (3)   Strings. Where the strings of the stairs are adjacent to the front
rails the strings must be securely fastened to the top rails. Strings must be
braced by round bars three-quarters inch (3/4") in thickness, properly hot-
leaded or secured by four inches by three-eighths inch (4" × 3/8") expansion
bolts in brick or stone wall at height of not less than six feet six inches
(6'6") in the clear above the floor of the balcony. Strings of stairways shall
be four inches by three-eighths inch (4" × 3/8") wrought iron and shall rest on
a bracket at the bottom and be bolted to a bracket at the top. Welded strings,
other than shop welded, will not be accepted.
      (4)   Hand rails. Hand rails must be of wrought iron, three-quarters inch
(3/4") round or one and one-half inches by three-eighths inch (1 1/2" × 3/8")
bar, well braced with intermediate braces not more than five feet (5'-0")
apart, and of the same size and material as the hand rail, and secured to the
strings with two (2) three-eighths inch (3/8") rivets at each end and at each
brace; or hand rails may be secured to the bottom rail of the upper balcony and
top rail of the lower balcony by two (2) three-eighths inch (3/8") rivets at
each end. On all fire escapes hereafter erected double hand rails must be
provided for all stairways.
   (u)   Drop-ladder. A drop-ladder shall be provided from the lowest balcony
and be of sufficient length to reach a safe landing place beneath. The drop-
ladder shall be fifteen inches (15") in width, shall be placed in guides and
shall be not more than sixteen feet (16'-0") in length. Except in multiple
dwellings hereafter erected or converted, where the distance from the lowest
balcony to a safe landing place is more than sixteen feet (16'-0") but because
of structural conditions, such as plate glass store fronts, etc., a balcony is
not possible, the department may accept a drop-ladder in guides, if the
distance from the floor of the lowest balcony to a safe landing place is not
more than eighteen feet (18'-0"). No drop-ladder is required where the distance
from the lowest balcony to a safe landing place does not exceed five feet (5'-
0"). No drop-ladder will be permitted to land or terminate on a stoop or any
part thereof unless the written approval of the Department of Buildings is
obtained.
      (1)   Guides. All drop-ladders shall have guides provided with stops so
that the ladders cannot be raised above the same. The drop-ladder must be
suspended from a point directly over the opening in the rail of the balcony and
arranged to slide in the guides so as to drop in position for use. All drop-
ladders shall be provided with a shoe at the bottom. The guides shall be
constructed of one and one-half inches by one and one-half inches by one-
quarter inch (1 1/2" × 1 1/2" × 1/4") angle iron, and shall be not less than
twenty-one inches (21") apart.
      (2)   Strings. Strings of drop-ladders must be one and one-half inches by
three-eighths inch (1 1/2" × 3/8") bar. No welded drop-ladders will be accepted
unless shop welded.
      (3)   Rungs. The rungs must be five-eighths inch (5/8") in thickness, not
over twelve inches (12") apart and must be riveted to the strings.
         (v)   Gooseneck ladder. The top balcony of every fire escape shall be
provided with a stair or with a gooseneck ladder leading from said balcony to
and above the roof, except that no such stairs or gooseneck ladders will be
required in the following locations or under the following conditions:
      (1)   On multiple dwellings with peak roofs having a pitch of more than
twenty (20) degrees.
      (2)   Where fire escapes are located on the fronts or in street courts of
multiple dwellings facing upon the street. Where a multiple dwelling does not
face upon the street, such as a multiple dwelling located at the rear of a lot
upon which there is another building, every fire escape on such multiple
dwelling shall be provided with a stair or gooseneck ladder as required above,
except where the roof of such building has a pitch of more than twenty (20)
degrees as stated in exception (1) above. Except as provided in exceptions (1)
and (2) above, every fire escape on every hereafter erected or converted
multiple dwelling, and every new Fire Escape hereafter provided on every
existing multiple dwelling shall be provided with a regulation stairway from
the top balcony to the roof when such buildings exceed four (4) stories in
height. In such multiple dwellings exceeding four (4) stories in height when
due to special structural conditions which would not permit the erection of a
stair from the top balcony to the roof or where the height from the top balcony
to the roof may be such as to make the installation of a stair impractical, the
Department of Buildings may accept a gooseneck ladder in lieu of a regulation
stairway. The top balcony of a fire escape on every multiple dwelling not
exceeding four (4) stories in height may be equipped with a gooseneck ladder.
         (i)   Construction and location of gooseneck ladders. The gooseneck
ladder shall be fifteen inches (15") wide and shall be so located that it will
not obstruct egress from the apartment or apartments on the top floor. The
effective opening between the side of any window and the string of gooseneck
ladder shall be not less than twenty-four inches (24"). The gooseneck ladder
must be fourteen inches (14") from the front rail on existing balconies and
twenty-one inches (21") on balconies hereafter erected.
         (ii)   Strings. The gooseneck ladder must be constructed with one
piece strings of two inch by one-half inch (2" × 1/2") wrought iron. Strings
must be directly secured to the brackets or secured to a two inch by one-half
inch (2" × 1/2") bar bearing on two (2) brackets and well secured to strings
and brackets by three-eighths inch (3/8") bolts or rivets. Strings must spread
at the parapet wall or roof to give a passageway of eighteen inches (18").
Strings must be tied through the wall by braces going through the parapet
immediately above the roof, or, in the absence of the parapet wall, the said
braces must go through the wall immediately below the ceiling of the top floor
and be secured by three-quarters inch (3/4") bolts and four inches by four
inches by three-eighths inch (4" × 4" × 3/8") washers. The gooseneck ladder
strings must extend thirty inches (30") above the roof level. Where there is a
parapet, a gateway at the roof level shall be provided. The strings of the
gooseneck ladder must be secured to and braced at the roof.
         (iii)   Rungs. Rungs shall be of wrought iron five-eighths inch (5/8")
thick, spaced not more than twelve inches (12") apart and shall be riveted
through the strings. The top rung of all gooseneck ladders shall be level with
the roof.
   (w)   Painting. Section 53, Multiple Dwelling Law, required new fire escapes
to have two (2) coats of paint. The Department of Buildings will require these
two (2) coats to be applied on contrasting colors, the first coat at the shop
before erection, and the second coat applied after erection. Existing fire
escapes shall be repainted whenever deemed necessary.
   (x)   Exceptions. Any deviations or exceptions from these rules other than
those specifically mentioned herein shall be submitted to the Department of
Buildings for approval. Consent and approval shall be in written form and bear
the signature of the commissioner, deputy commissioner, superintendent or the
person designated to sign such consent by the commissioner, deputy commissioner
or superintendent.
   (y)   Fire escapes on frame buildings. Fire escapes shall be constructed as
for brick or stone buildings with the following exceptions, and except also
that balconies three feet (3'-0") wide will be acceptable to the department.
      (1)   Brackets. Horizontal members of brackets must be one and three-
quarters inches by one-half inch (1 3/4" × 1/2") wrought iron set on edge; one
inch (1") bolt end through a four inches by three-eighths inch (4" × 3/8") iron
plate, long enough to take in all brackets, secured to and bearing directly on
the inside of the studs. Spaces between the studs behind such plates shall be
filled in solidly with timber secured to the studs. The heel of bracket braces
must rest against one and three-quarter inches by one and three-quarter inches
by one-quarter high (1 3/4" × 1 3/4" × 1/4") angle iron extended across and
well secured to studs.
      (2)   Top rails. Top rails shall be anchored by three-quarters inch (3/
4") bolt ends, through a four inch by three-eighths inch (4" × 3/8") wrought
iron plate spanning at least two (2) studs. Space behind plate and between
studs shall be blocked solidly.
      (3)   Bottom rails. Bottom rails shall be secured to the siding in a
substantial manner with two (2) one and one-quarter inch (1 1/4") No. 14 wood
screws, or may be secured to the brackets where practicable.
      (4)   Stairways. Stair braces shall be secured to the wall of the
building by two (2) No. 14 wood screws.
   (z)   Outside fireproof stairs. Outside fireproof stairs shall be
constructed according to approved plans and applications of the Department of
Buildings. Such regulations as govern the measurements of inside stairs shall
be applied to outside fireproof stairways except that in multiple dwellings not
exceeding three (3) stories and basement in height, fireproof stairway leading
from a front porch roof which is fireproof to the fireproof floor of an
unenclosed porch will be deemed an outside fireproof stairway and such
stairways may be of the same width as the ordinary fire escape stairs. Area
covered by fireproof outside stairs must not encroach upon the minimum
dimensions of yard or courts.
   (aa)   Fire towers. Fire towers shall be constructed according to approved
plans and applications filed with the Department of Buildings.
   (bb)   Egress. Hotels and certain other class A and class B dwellings which
are subject to the provisions of § 67, Multiple Dwelling Law.
      (1)   Exceptions. Any such multiple dwelling, altered or erected after
April fifth, nineteen hundred forty-four, and which is required to conform to
the provisions of articles one, two, three, four, five, eight, nine and eleven
of Multiple Dwelling Law, shall not be required to conform to the provisions of
1 RCNY §
15-10(bb)(1)(i), (2), (3) and (4).
         (i)   Except in fireproof class A multiple dwellings erected under
plans filed after January first, nineteen hundred twenty-five, and which were
completed before December thirty-one, nineteen hundred thirty-three, and except
as otherwise provided in paragraph (4) of subdivision (bb) of this section, in
every such dwelling three (3) or more stories in height there shall be from
each story at least two (2) independent means of unobstructed egress located
remote from each other and accessible to each room, apartment or suite.
      (2)   First means of egress. The first means of egress shall be an
enclosed stair extending directly to a street, or to a yard, court or
passageway affording continuous, safe and unobstructed access to a street, or
by an enclosed stair leading to the entrance story, which story shall have
direct access to a street. That area of the dwelling immediately above the
street level and commonly known as the main floor, where the occupants are
registered and the usual business of the dwelling is conducted, shall be
considered a part of the entrance story; and a required stair terminating at
such main floor or its mezzanine shall be deemed to terminate at the entrance
story. An elevator or unenclosed escalator shall never be accepted as a
required means of egress.
      (3)   Second means of egress. The second means of egress shall be by an
additional enclosed stair conforming to the provisions of 1 RCNY §
15-10(bb)(2), a fire-stair, a fire-tower or an outside fire escape. In a non-
fireproof dwelling when it is necessary to pass through a stair enclosure which
may or may not be a required means of egress to reach a required means of
egress, such stair enclosure and that part of the public hall or corridor
leading thereto from a room, apartment or suite, shall be protected by one (1)
or more sprinkler heads; in a fireproof dwelling only that part of the hall or
corridor leading to such stair enclosure need be so protected.
      (4)   Required second means of egress – impractical. Where it is
impractical in such existing dwellings to provide a second means of egress, the
department may order additional alteration to the first means of egress and
shafts, stairs and other vertical openings as the department may deem necessary
to safeguard the occupants of the dwelling, may require the public halls
providing access to the first means of egress to be equipped on each story with
one (1) or more automatic sprinkler heads, and, in non-fireproof dwellings, may
also require automatic sprinkler heads in the stair which serves as the only
means of egress.
      (5)   Public halls and corridors providing access to fire escapes. Public
halls and corridors providing access to fire escapes, existing and new, are
acceptable when a direct and uninterrupted line to travel to the fire escape is
provided. Public halls and corridors providing access to fire escapes shall be
fire-retarded or shall be equipped with automatic sprinkler heads. The fire-
retarding and sprinkler installation shall be in conformity with the rules and
regulations of this department and as required by § 67(3) of the Multiple
Dwelling Law. All openings which provide direct access to an existing fire
escape from a public hall or corridor shall be equipped with fireproof doors
and assemblies with the doors self-closing or fireproof windows glazed with
clear wire glass. Access to new fire escapes from such halls or corridors shall
be by means of fireproof doors and assemblies with doors self-closing. Doors
providing access to fire escapes from public halls or corridors may be glazed
with clear wire glass.
      (6)   Fire Escapes – existing and new. Existing fire escapes which are
structurally strong and in good repair, having connecting stairways set at an
angle of not more than sixty-five (65) degrees, may be accepted as a secondary
means of egress. Except as otherwise required herein, new and existing fire
escapes shall be provided with a safe landing and the termination shall lead
directly to a street or to a passageway which provides access to a street. When
it is impractical to provide a termination for fire escapes as specified in
these rules, the Department may accept a termination from such fire escapes
which leads to safety.
      (7)   Supplementary means of egress. A stair, fire-stair, fire-tower, or
fire escape which is supplementary to the egress requirements of 1 RCNY §
15-10(bb)(2), (3) and (4), need not lead to the entrance story or to a street,
or to a yard or a court which leads to a street, provided the means of egress
therefrom is approved by the Department. Fire escapes which are supplementary
to the required second means of egress, including fire escapes of the inclined
ladder and vertical ladder types, may remain on the dwelling if maintained in
good order and repair, are structurally strong and safe and are provided with
safe landing and the termination thereof leads to safety in a manner
satisfactory to this Department.
      (8)   Signs – supplementary means of egress. Supplementary stairs, fire-
stairs, fire-towers or fire escapes which do not lead to the entrance story or
to a street, or to a yard or court leading to a street, shall be clearly marked
"NOT AN EXIT" in black letters at least four inches (4") high on a yellow
background and at the termination of each such stair, fire-stair, fire-tower or
fire escape, there shall be a directional sign indicating the nearest means of
egress leading to a street. All signs shall be constructed, located and
illuminated in a manner satisfactory to the department.
      (9)   Signs – general provisions. Every means of egress shall be
indicated by a sign reading "EXIT" in red letters at least eight inches (8")
high on a white background, or vice versa, illuminated at all time during the
day and night by a red light of at least twenty-five (25) watts or equivalent
illumination. Such light shall be maintained in a keyless socket. On all
stories where doors, openings or passageways giving access to any means of
egress are not visible from all portions of such stories, directional sign
shall be maintained in conspicuous locations, indicating in red on a white
background, or vice versa, the direction of travel to the nearest means of
egress. At least one sign shall be visible from the doorway of each room or
suite of rooms. Existing signs and illumination may be accepted if, in the
opinion of the Department, such existing signs and illumination serve the
intent and purpose of this subdivision.
      (10)   Stairs, fire-stairs and fire-towers. Stairs, fire-stairs and fire-
towers hereafter provided shall be constructed according to plans and
applications approved by the Department of Buildings.
   (cc)   Egress: lodging houses.
      (1)   Arrangement. There shall be at least two (2) means of unobstructed
egress from each lodging-house story, which shall be remote from each other.
The first means of egress shall be to a street either directly or by an
enclosed stair having unobstructed direct access thereto. If the story is above
the entrance story, the second means of egress shall be by an outside fire
escape constructed in accordance with the provisions of section fifty-three,
Multiple Dwelling Law, or by an additional enclosed stair. Such second means of
egress shall be accessible without passing through the first means of egress.
      (2)   Doors and windows. All doors opening upon entrance halls, stair
halls, other public halls or stairs, or elevator, dumbwaiter or other shafts,
and the door assemblies, shall be fireproof with the doors made self-closing by
a device approved by the department, and such doors shall not be held open by
any device whatever. All openings on the course of a fire escape shall be
provided with such doors and assemblies or with fireproof windows and
assemblies, with the windows self-closing and glazed with wire glass, such
doors or windows and their assemblies to be acceptable to the department.
      (3)   Aisles. There shall be unobstructed aisles providing access to all
required means of egress in all dormitories. Main aisles, approved as such by
the department to provide adequate approaches to the required means of egress,
shall be three feet (3'-0") or more in width, except that no aisles need be
more than two feet six inches (2'-6") wide if it is intersected at intervals of
not more than fifty feet (50'-0") by cross-over aisles at least three feet (3'-
0") wide leading to other aisles or to an approved means of egress.
      (4)   Signs. Every required means of egress from the lodging-house part
of the dwelling shall be indicated by a sign reading "EXIT" in red letters at
least eight inches (8") high on a white background illuminated at all times
during the day and night by a light of at least twenty-five (25) watts or
equivalent illumination. Such light shall be maintained in a keyless socket. On
all lodging-house stories where doors, openings, passageways or aisles are not
visible from all portions of such stories, and in other parts of the dwelling
which may be used in entering or leaving the lodging-house part and in which a
similar need exists, signs with easily readable letters at least eight inches
(8") in height, and continuously and sufficiently illuminated by artificial
light at all times when the natural light is not sufficient to make them easily
readable, shall be maintained in conspicuous locations, indicating the
direction of travel to the nearest means of egress. At least one (1) such sign
shall be easily visible from the doorway of each cubicle.
      (5)   Roof egress. Access from the public hall at the top story to the
roof shall be provided by means of a bulkhead or a scuttle acceptable to the
Department. Every such scuttle and the stair or ladder leading thereto shall be
located within the stair enclosure.
      (6)   Persons accommodated. The number of persons accommodated on any
story in a lodging house shall not be greater than the sum of the following
components:
         (i)   Twenty-two (22) persons for each full multiple of twenty-two
inches (22") in the smallest clear width of each means of egress approved by
the Department, other than a fire escape.
         (ii)   Twenty persons (20) for each lawful fire escape accessible from
such story if it is above the entrance story.
      (7)   In view of the fact that § 66, Subdivision 3 (formerly § 13,
subdivision m), Multiple Dwelling Law, required lodging houses to be
sprinklered throughout, including the public halls, the Department will accept
existing double-rung ladder type fire escapes on the condition that such fire
escapes are maintained in a good state of repair.
   (dd)   Ladders leading to roof scuttles. Ladders to roof scuttles as
required under the provisions of §§ 187 and 233 of the Multiple Dwelling Law,
shall be of incombustible material, not less than fifteen inches (15") wide,
with strings not less than one and one-half inches by three-eighths inch (1 1/
2" × 3/8"), with five-eighths inch (5/8") rungs not more than twelve inches
(12") apart. Strings of such ladders shall be secured at top and bottom and
ladder must be so arranged as to permit sufficient toe hold.
Chapter 16: Inspection of Existing Structures During Construction Operations
§ 16-01 Controlled Inspection of the Stability and Integrity of Existing
Structures During Construction Operations. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 11/7/2022, eff. 12/7/2022)
Chapter 17: Testing Laboratories and Testing Services
§ 17-01 Acceptance of Testing Laboratories and Testing Services. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 11/7/2022, eff. 12/7/2022)
Chapter 18: Resistance to Progressive Collapse Under Extreme Local Loads
§ 18-01 Considerations and Evaluation. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 7/13/2016, eff. 8/12/2016)
Chapter 19: Master Plumbers and Licensed Fire Suppression Piping Contractors
§ 19-01 Examination, License and Conduct of the Business of Master Plumbers and
Master Fire Suppression Piping Contractors. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 4/29/2024, eff. 5/29/2024)
§ 19-02 Continuing Education Requirements for Master Plumbers and Licensed
Master Fire Suppression Piping Contractors. [Repealed]
(Repealed eff. 8/2/2014)
§ 19-03 Exemptions from Inspection and Testing Requirements. [Repealed]
(Repealed eff. 8/2/2014)
§ 19-04 Master Plumber and Master Fire Suppression Piping Contractor License
Board – Qualification Recommendations. [Repealed]
(Repealed eff. 8/2/2014)
Chapter 20: Piping Systems
§ 20-01 Witnessing Tests of Gas Piping Systems. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 2/14/2024, eff. 3/15/2024)
§ 20-02 High Pressure Steam Piping Systems. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 2/14/2024, eff. 3/15/2024)
§ 20-03 Standards for Non-Mercury Gauges. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 11/7/2022, eff. 12/7/2022)
Chapter 21: Plans
§ 21-01 Limited Supervisory Check and/or Professional Certification Program for
Applications and Plans.
   (a)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply:
      (1)   Architect. "Architect" shall mean a person licensed and registered
to practice the profession of architecture under the education law of the state
of New York.
      (2)   Engineer. "Engineer" shall mean a person licensed and registered to
practice the profession of engineering and use the title "Professional
Engineer" and the initials "P.E." under the education law of the state of New
York.
   (b)   Conditions of Limited Supervisory Check and/or Professional
Certification. In accordance with § 27-143 of the Administrative Code of the
City of New York, the Commissioner may exercise his or her discretion in
designating portions of the examination of applications and plans for the
construction of new buildings or the alteration of existing buildings for
limited supervisory check and/or professional certification predicated upon
statements and representations made by the architect or engineer of record, and
his or her associates where applicable, provided the following conditions are
met:
      (1)   That complete and coordinated architectural, structural and
mechanical plans are or have been filed.
      (2)   That, where applicable, the portion for limited supervisory check
be clearly and specifically identified. However, such identified portion shall
not include compliance with the zoning resolution nor the exit requirements of
the building code or other applicable laws.
      (3)   That, where applicable, the necessary certifications and
appropriate approvals have been obtained regarding the following topics or from
the following agencies:
         (i)   Landmarks, landmark sites and historic districts.
         (ii)   Sewers.
         (iii)   Urban Renewal Areas.
         (iv)   Transit Authority for the effect on subways.
         (v)   Compliance with General City Law, Section 35.
         (vi)   Liability Insurance.
         (vii)   Board of Standards and Appeals.
         (viii)   Department of Environmental Protection.
         (ix)   Department of Housing Preservation and Development.
         (x)   Department of Transportation.
         (xi)   Fire Department.
         (xii)   Loft Board.
         (xiii)   Department of City Planning.
         (xiv)   U.S. Department of State.
         (xv)   Department of Cultural Affairs.
         (xvi)   Any other approval or certification of which the professional
knows or should know is required prior to submitting an application.
      (4)   That the architect or engineer of record and associate architects
or engineers, if any, are aware that the Commissioner, in the exercise of his
or her discretion in accordance with § 27-143 of the Administrative Code, will
rely upon the truth and accuracy of the statements contained in the
construction application made by them, and any amendments submitted in
connection therewith, as to compliance with the provisions of the Zoning
Resolution, the Building Code and other applicable laws and regulations.
      (5)   That the architect or engineer of record and associate architects
or engineers, if any, shall comply with the provisions of the Zoning
Resolution, the Building Code and other applicable laws and regulations or
shall resolve any non-compliance as provided in paragraph 6, below.
      (6)   That, prior to the limited supervisory check and/or professional
certification, any non-compliance shall be resolved by reconsideration or
otherwise. Such reconsideration or other resolution shall be in writing and
shall be submitted with the application that qualifies for limited supervisory
check and/or professional certification.
      (7)   That, should Department audit indicate a non-compliance with the
Zoning Resolution, the Building Code and/or other applicable laws and
regulations, the architect or engineer of record shall take the necessary
remedial measures to obtain compliance.
      (8)   That the owner is aware of the application and the conditions under
which it is being submitted and agrees to comply with any requirement for
remedial measures, if necessary.
§ 21-02 Exclusion from Limited Supervisory Check and/or Professional
Certification Programs.
   (a)   Grounds for exclusion. The Commissioner may exclude an architect or
engineer from the Department's programs for limited supervisory check and/or
professional certification of applications, plans and removal of objections if
the Commissioner finds that the architect or engineer has:
      (1)   Displayed negligence or incompetence with regard to, or lack of
knowledge of, the Building Code, the Zoning Resolution, the Department's
regulations, or other applicable laws, rules or regulations as demonstrated by
plans, applications, certifications, or inspection reports submitted by the
architect or engineer to the Department; or
      (2)   Submitted plans, applications, certifications or inspection reports
to the City that were required to be prepared by the architect or engineer or
under his or her supervision but that were not prepared by the architect or
engineer or under his or her supervision; or engaged in conduct evidencing a
delegation of professional responsibilities to a person where the architect or
engineer knew or had reason to know that such person was not qualified, by
training, by experience or by licensure, to perform them; or
      (3)   Knowingly or negligently made false or misleading statements on or
knowingly or negligently falsified, altered or allowed a person under his or
her control and/or supervision to falsify or alter any certificate, form,
signed statement, application or report filed with the City, or knowingly or
negligently failed to file a report or obtain any approval, certification,
waiver or reconsideration required by law or the City or willfully impeded or
obstructed such filing, or induced another person to do so; or
      (4)   Been convicted of a criminal offense where the underlying act
arises out of the architect or engineer's professional occupation or business
dealings; or
      (5)   Had knowledge that any project or application filed with the
Department with which the architect or engineer is involved in any capacity was
fraudulent or dishonest in character and failed to report such fraudulence or
dishonesty to the Department, the Department of Investigation or other relevant
authority; or
      (6)   Engaged in misconduct regarding his or her Department-issued Photo
Identification Card; or
      (7)   Engaged in any conduct related to any activity performed in
connection with his or her profession that evidences a failure to comply with
the provisions of Federal, State or local law, rules or regulations or a
Department order or requirement; or
      (8)   Impeded, obstructed or failed to cooperate with an investigation or
inquiry of or failed to provide documents requested by the Commissioner or his
or her designee or the Department; or
      (9)   Made a material misrepresentation to persons not affiliated with
the Department regarding the status of applications and/or plans filed with the
Department; or
      (10)   Altered, defaced or destroyed Department property, or removed
Department property, including permitted folders, from Department premises; or
      (11)   Offered or attempted to offer a bribe or unlawful gratuity to a
Department employee or other public servant; or
      (12)   Failed to maintain a copy of plans and/or related documents
approved by the Department for six years after the applicant has been issued a
letter of completion, a Certificate of Occupancy, or an application sign-off,
whichever occurs later; or
      (13)   Permitted the improper use of, or had knowledge of or failed to
promptly report to the Department any improper use of his or her professional
stamp, signature, or license number; or
      (14)   Within a period of six months, failed two Department audits that
resulted in revocations.
   (b)   Procedures.
      (1)   Administrative charges outlining the basis for such action to
exclude from the limited supervisory check and/or professional certification
program shall be served upon the architect or engineer by certified mail,
return receipt requested, pursuant to the Office of Administrative Trials and
Hearings' (OATH's) Rules of Practice (
Title 48 of the Rules of the City of New York).
      (2)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the Commissioner finds that
continued use of the programs for limited supervisory check and/or professional
certification by the architect or engineer would likely create a serious and
immediate threat to public safety or property, the Commissioner shall have the
power, pending service of administrative charges, to issue an order immediately
suspending the architect or engineer and his or her associates, if applicable,
from limited supervisory check and/or professional certification.
   (c)   Hearing.
      (1)   Upon a filing of the administrative charges, the architect or
engineer will be scheduled for a hearing upon submitting any written objections
to the administrative charges and the grounds for such objections to the
Commissioner within fifteen days after the date that the notice of charges is
served.
      (2)   All hearings are to be held at OATH. The architect or engineer may
be represented by counsel or by a duly authorized representative and may
present evidence on his or her behalf.
      (3)   When the Commissioner suspends an architect's or an engineer's
limited supervisory check and/or professional certification privileges pursuant
to 1 RCNY §
21-02(b)(2), the architect or engineer shall have fifteen days from the date
the order is served to object and request a hearing on the order and any
forthcoming administrative charges. The written objection shall include the
grounds for such objection(s). Failure to make a timely objection shall result
in a waiver of the right to a hearing and the Commissioner's order shall
thereupon be considered a final determination. Upon receipt of a timely
objection to the order, the Commissioner or his or her representative shall
promptly schedule a hearing at OATH, with due consideration given to the
current OATH calendar, and serve the architect or engineer with charges and
notice of such hearing pursuant to OATH's Rules of Practice.
      (4)   After the conclusion of a hearing, the OATH Administrative Law
Judge shall issue proposed findings of fact and proposed conclusions of law,
along with a report and recommendation to the Commissioner. The Commissioner
shall review the report and recommendation issued by the OATH Administrative
Law Judge and shall issue a final determination. The Commissioner shall notify
the architect or engineer in writing of the final determination. Such notice
shall include a written statement indicating the reason for the final
determination.
      (5)   After the Commissioner has rendered a final determination excluding
a particular professional, all applications and plans submitted by that
architect or engineer shall be subject to full review by the Department.
Chapter 22: Pressure Tanks
§ 22-01 Installation and Maintenance of Pressure Tanks Operating at a Pressure
in Excess of 15 PSI and Their Proximity to Gas Supply or Service Lines.
   (a)   Applicability. These regulations shall apply to tanks containing water
and air in combination, under pressure exceeding 15 psi above atmospheric
pressure, where the pressure is supplied and maintained by pumps connected
directly to the tanks.
   (b)   Design. The system shall be designed by a registered Architect or a
Licensed Professional Engineer. An application and plans shall be filed and the
approval of the department obtained. The plans and application shall contain,
but not be limited to:
      (1)   Size and location of high pressure tanks.
      (2)   The operating pressures and temperatures.
      (3)   The location, type and specifications of pressure relief valves.
   (c)   Location.
      (1)   All high pressure tanks shall be located a clear distance of at
least five feet horizontally from a gas service or distribution line or its
vertical projection upon the floor.
      (2)   All new high pressure tanks installations shall be located in rooms
separated from gas service or distribution lines.
      (3)   In cases where the spatial relationship between tanks and gas
services does not comply with the regulations, it shall be the responsibility
of the party responsible for the last installation to correct the violation.
   (d)   Installation.
      (1)   Installation with the exception of welding, shall be under
controlled inspection by the engineer responsible for the design, or by a
Professional Engineer acceptable to him.
      (2)   The welding shall be under controlled inspection of an Engineer,
supervising a welding inspection agency acceptable to the Department of
Buildings.
      (3)   Welders shall be qualified for all pipe sizes, wall thicknesses and
positions in accordance with either the American Petroleum Institute, 1801 K
Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20006, Standard for Welding Pipelines and
Related Facilities, Fourteenth Edition, January 1977, (API STD 1104-1977), or
the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, Welding and Brazing
Qualification, Section VIII, Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code, 1980, (ANSI/ASTM
BPV-IX-1980), and requalified on an annual basis.
      (4)   The qualification testing shall be performed by an agency listed
with the Department of Buildings, and the inspector shall have a minimum
radiography qualification of Level II in accordance with the American Society
for Nondestructive Testing, 3200 Riverside Drive, Columbus, Ohio 43221,
Recommended Practice, Document No. SNT-TC-1A-1980.
      (5)   Copies of the certified welder qualification reports shall be
maintained by the responsible welding agency and shall be made available upon
request to the Department of Buildings.
      (6)   No reports from any welding inspection agency shall be accepted
unless such agency has first requested and obtained approval from this Office,
in accordance with Rule 2511(G)(1) of the Board of Standards and Appeals
Welding Rules.
      (7)   All welded piping shall be butt welded.
      (8)   Radiography shall be performed on all butt welds in accordance with
API STD 1104-1977 or ANSI/ASTM BPV-IX-1980.
      (9)   Testing – A hydrostatic test of the completed installation at 150
percent of the design pressure adjusted to compensate for the difference in gas
or fluid pressure and the ambient temperature shall be conducted. Where the
changes in an existing system incorporating high pressure tanks involves less
than 30 percent of the piping system, the testing may be in accordance with
Standard Power Piping, ANSI B31.1-1980.
Chapter 23: Noncommercial Greenhouses
§ 23-01 Noncommercial Greenhouses Accessory to Residential Uses as a Permitted
Obstruction in Required Rear Yards or Rear Yard Equivalents.
   (a)   Definitions.
Greenhouse. A greenhouse shall be defined as a glass or slow burning plastic
enclosed building used for cultivating plants.
   (b)   Detached accessory noncommercial greenhouse. A detached accessory
noncommercial greenhouse is a permitted obstruction in a required rear yard or
rear yard equivalent, pursuant to § 23-44(b) of the Zoning Resolution, when it
complies with the following conditions:
      (1)   no portion of the greenhouse is located in a rear yard equivalent
which also is a required front or side yard,
      (2)   the greenhouse does not exceed ten feet above the level of the rear
yard or rear yard equivalent,
      (3)   the floor area of the greenhouse is included in the total floor
area on the zoning lot,
      (4)   the greenhouse use does not create offensive odors or dust,
      (5)   the wall of the greenhouse closest to the appurtenant residential
use building shall be a minimum distance of six feet from the exterior wall of
such residential use building,
      (6)   the greenhouse shall not be located less than 3 feet from a lot
line,
      (7)   the greenhouse shall be constructed of non-combustible materials
and glazed with plain or wire glass or slow burning plastic,
      (8)   the glass or slow burning plastic constructed roof shall be capable
of supporting the live load prescribed in § 27-561(a) of the Building Code.
   (c)   Attached accessory noncommercial greenhouse. An attached accessory
noncommercial greenhouse is a permitted obstruction in a required rear yard or
rear yard equivalent, pursuant to § 23-44(b) of the Zoning Resolution when it
complies with the following conditions:
      (1)   no portion of the greenhouse is located in a rear yard equivalent
which also is a required front or side yard,
      (2)   the greenhouse roof shall be no higher than the level of the floor
above the lowest residential level,
      (3)   the floor area of the greenhouse is included in the total floor
area on the zoning lot,
      (4)   the greenhouse use does not create offensive odors or dust,
      (5)   in no event shall the greenhouse project more than six feet from
the plane surface of the building wall,
      (6)   the greenhouse shall be constructed of noncombustible materials and
glazed with plain or wire glass or slow burning plastic. The floor of the
greenhouse shall be constructed as required in Table 3-4 of the Building Code,
for the construction classification of the building to which it is attached and
if not on grade shall be capable of sustaining a minimum live load of 75 pounds
per square foot,
      (7)   the roof of the greenhouse shall be constructed of glass or slow
burning plastic and capable of supporting the live load prescribed in § 27-561
(a) of the Building Code,
      (8)   the depth of the greenhouse need not be included in the maximum
permitted depth of a room, pursuant to § 30(3) of the Multiple Dwelling Law,
      (9)   the greenhouse shall be provided with operable windows or
jalousies, whose free openable area shall be equal to at least five percent of
the combined floor area of the greenhouse, as prescribed in § 27-750 of the
Building Code.
Chapter 24: Refuse Chutes and Refuse Rooms
§ 24-01 Construction and Maintenance of Refuse Chutes and Refuse Rooms.
   (a)   Refuse chute enclosures. Refuse chutes used for conveyance of garbage
and rubbish from upper floors of a building to a cellar or other location shall
be constructed with an enclosure of brick masonry at least eight inches in
thickness or of reinforced concrete at least six inches in thickness, except as
otherwise provided in this section.
   (b)   Height and service openings. Refuse chutes shall extend from the
refuse collection room to a height of at least six feet above the roof. A spark
arrester shall be provided at the top of the chute above the roof. Service
openings into the chute shall be equipped with approved self-closing hoppers so
constructed that the chute is closed off while the hopper is being loaded and
so that no part will project into the chute. The area of service opening shall
not exceed one third the area of the chute. Hopper doors shall have a fire
resistive rating of at least one hour, unless separated from the corridor by a
fireproof, self-closing door in which case they shall be constructed of
incombustible material.
   (c)   Existing flues and refuse chutes. Flues for existing incinerators may
be used for refuse chutes provided such flues are in good condition and
provided the flues comply with the provisions of subdivisions (a) and (b) of
this section. Existing refuse chutes may be continued in use provided they
conform to the provisions of subdivisions (a) and (b) of this section, except
that existing refuse chutes of other construction, which have been approved by
the Department may be retained.
   (d)   Refuse chutes in new construction. Where refuse compacting systems are
required hereafter in new construction, refuse chutes shall be required for
conveyance of garbage and rubbish to refuse collection rooms, except that
refuse chutes will not be required in class A multiple dwellings which are four
stories or less in height. Refuse chutes erected hereafter in new construction
shall be of a type approved by the board or shall comply with the requirements
of subdivisions (a) and (b) of this section. Chutes shall be constructed
straight and plumb, without projections of any kind within the chute. Refuse
chutes shall have an inside dimension of at least twenty-four inches for the
full height of the chute. All chutes shall be supported on fireproof
construction having at least a three hour resistive rating.
   (e)   Refuse collection rooms. A refuse collection room shall be provided at
the bottom of all chutes at the cellar or lowest story level to receive the
refuse. Such rooms shall be enclosed with walls and roofs constructed of
material having a minimum fire resistive rating of three hours, except that
gypsum masonry may not be used for such enclosure walls. Openings to such rooms
shall be provided with fireproof, self-closing doors having a minimum fire
resistive rating of one and one-half hours. It shall be unlawful to keep such
doors open. Refuse chutes shall extend to the underside of the roof of the
refuse room or lower. Roofs shall be at least six inches away from combustible
floor or wall construction. Refuse rooms shall be used only for receipt of
refuse and for refuse compacting equipment. Refuse rooms shall be provided with
sufficient sprinklers to sprinkle all parts of the room, with at least two
sprinkler heads provided and with sprinklers so separated as to sprinkle a
maximum area of the room when one of the sprinklers is blocked or not
operating. A hose connection shall be provided within the refuse room. Existing
refuse rooms and incinerator rooms that have been approved by the Department
for such use may be retained as approved.
   (f)   Collection room floors. The floor within the room for the collection
of refuse shall be constructed of concrete and shall be sloped to a floor drain
within the room connected to the house drain. The drain shall be provided with
a protective screen to retain solid material. Floor drain traps shall be
readily accessible for cleaning.
   (g)   Use of existing combustion chambers. Existing incinerator combustion
chambers may be used in whole or in part as refuse collecting rooms for
collection of refuse and for compacting equipment provided the grates are
removed and provided they comply with the provisions of subdivision (e) of this
section.
   (h)   Sprinkler operation and water supply. Sprinklers shall be designed to
operate automatically at a temperature not exceeding one hundred sixty-five
degrees Fahrenheit. They may be electrically controlled provided such
sprinklers are approved by the Board of Standards and Appeals. Sprinklers may
be connected to the cold water supply of the building at the point where such
service enters the building or at the base of a water supply riser provided the
piping of such service or riser is of adequate size. No connections, except
those for sprinklers, shall be made to the sprinkler piping.
   (i)   Hoppers, cut off doors and compactors. A hopper and cut off door shall
be provided at the bottom of the refuse chute to regulate and guide the flow of
refuse into containers. Where compactors are installed so that the refuse flows
directly into the compacting equipment, the equipment may be used in place of
the hopper and cut off door. Compacting equipment shall be arranged to operate
automatically when the level of rubbish is not higher than three feet below the
lowest door. Compactors shall be located entirely within the enclosure of the
refuse room and former combustion chamber where the latter is retained, except
that motors, pumps and controls may be installed in adjacent rooms. Where
refuse is removed manually, the refuse shall be removed with sufficient
frequency so that it will at no time extend less than three feet below the
level of the lowest hopper door opening into the chute.
   (j)   Number of sprinkler heads. Sufficient sprinklers shall be installed in
the refuse room and former combustion chamber to provide sprinkler coverage for
the entire area of each unit.
      (1)   Adequate lighting shall be provided in refuse rooms.
      (2)   Refuse chutes, refuse rooms, hoppers and all parts of the refuse
collecting system shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition at all
times, free of vermin, odors and defects, and shall be maintained in good
operating condition. Fused sprinkler heads shall be replaced promptly.
      (3)   The owner shall establish a program to ensure that the refuse chute
and the refuse room and appurtenances will be treated as often as may be
necessary to prevent infestation with insects or rodents. The owner shall
maintain a record of such treatments which shall be available at all times for
inspection by the Department.
   (k)   These rules shall apply only to refuse chutes in new construction and
to refuse chutes resulting from the conversion of existing incinerator flues
and to existing refuse chutes.
      (1)   Collection and disposal of refuse within premises. The collection
and disposal of refuse within any building or on any premises shall be
performed as deemed necessary to provide for the safety, health and well being
of the occupants of buildings and of the public. The construction, operation,
maintenance, cleanliness and sanitation of refuse chutes and refuse rooms and
extermination treatment for insects and rodents, and the keeping of records of
such treatments for refuse chutes and refuse rooms shall be in accordance with
regulations established by this Department in consultation with the Department
of Health.
Chapter 27: Signs
§ 27-01 Stair and Elevator Signs in Buildings Which Have at Least One Elevator.
   (a)   Applicability. These rules and regulations shall apply to all
buildings which have at least one elevator including:
      (1)   Any existing office buildings occupied or arranged to be occupied
for an occupant load of more than one hundred (100) persons above or below the
street level or more than a total of five hundred (500) persons in the entire
building, and
      (2)   All other existing buildings which have at least one elevator,
pursuant to § 27-390 of the Administrative (Building) Code, as enacted by Local
Law 16 of 1984.
   (b)   Signs at elevator landings.
      (1)   Elevator landing sign. On all floors other than the main entrance
floor, a sign shall be posted and maintained on every floor at the elevator
landing. The sign shall read "IN CASE OF FIRE, USE STAIRS UNLESS OTHERWISE
INSTRUCTED."
      (2)   Floor diagram sign. The sign shall contain a floor diagram showing
the location where it is posted and the location and letter identification of
the stairs on the floor and each elevator bank.
      (3)   J-2 multiple dwellings. The floor diagram sign may be omitted on
all residential floors in J-2 multiple dwellings provided that:
         (i)   The stair is in the line of sight from the elevator call button,
and
         (ii)   The stair is located a maximum of twenty (20) feet from the
elevator call button, and
            (A)   There is not more than one stair, or
            (B)   Two sissor stairs, or
            (C)   A stair or fire escape serves only an individual apartment
and directional signs with arrows and reading "TO STAIRS" are provided.
   (c)   Location. The sign(s) shall be located:
      (1)   Directly above the call button, and
      (2)   Its top shall not be above six (6) feet from the floor level.
      (3)   The sign(s) may be placed on the wall or an adjacent conspicuous
place where there is insufficient wall space at the call button, or
      (4)   The sign(s) may be placed on the elevator door(s) where there is
insufficient wall space or an adjacent conspicuous place at the elevator
landing. Exception: Raised signs on horizontal sliding flush type elevator
doors.
   (d)   Floor number sign(s). Floor numbering sign(s) shall be posted and
maintained within each stair enclosure on every floor. The floor numbering sign
shall be posted and maintained on the stair side of the door, or if no door,
nearby on the wall or an adjacent conspicuous place.
   (e)   Stair and elevator identification signs. Each stair and each bank of
elevators shall be identified by an alphabetic letter. A sign indicating the
letter of identification for the elevator bank shall be posted and maintained
at each elevator landing directly above or as part of the sign specified in 1
RCNY §
27-01(b). The stair identification signs shall be posted and maintained on the
occupancy and stair sides of the door, or if no door, nearby on the wall or an
adjacent conspicuous place.
   (f)   Stair re-entry signs. Stair re-entry signs shall be posted and
maintained on the stair door at each floor in buildings classified in Occupancy
Group E, occupied or arranged to be occupied for an occupant load of more than
a total of 500 persons in the entire building indicating re-entry is provided.
The signs shall be attached approximately five feet above the floor. The signs
shall read as follows and may be either independent or combined with the
corresponding sign required by §§ 27-392 and 27-393:
      (1)   Where no re-entry is provided:
         (i)   Where no re-entry is provided from the stairs to any floor, the
sign shall read "NO RE-ENTRY FROM THIS STAIR" and such sign shall be posted and
maintained on the occupancy side of the stair door at each floor. No re-entry
sign shall be required on the stair side of the door.
         (ii)   On every floor where failsafe re-entry locking devices are
installed on exit doors, a sign reading "NO RE-ENTRY FROM THIS STAIR EXCEPT
DURING FIRE OR EMERGENCY" shall be posted on the occupancy side of the stair
door.
      (2)   Where re-entry is provided to specified floors:
         (i)   On the stair side of the door at floors where re-entry is
provided, the sign shall read "RE-ENTRY ON THIS FLOOR."
         (ii)   Where no re-entry is provided on that floor, the sign on the
stair side of the door shall read, "NO RE-ENTRY, NEAREST RE-ENTRY ON THE ____
AND ____ FLOORS." The floor numbers of the nearest re-entry below and the
nearest re-entry floor above shall be entered in the blank spaces.
   (g)   Size of signs.
      (1)   Signs for new buildings shall be limited to combined elevator
landing and floor diagram signs, conforming with paragraph (4) below. Signs for
existing buildings in Occupancy Group J-2 may be either independent signs as
required or combined signs, conforming with the size requirements as set forth
in the following subdivisions.
      (2)   Elevator landing signs. Elevator landing signs shall be at least
two and one-half (2 1/2) inches by ten (10) inches.
      (3)   Floor diagram signs. Floor diagram signs shall be at least eight
(8) inches by twelve (12) inches.
      (4)   Combined elevator landing and floor diagram signs. Combined
elevator landing and diagram signs shall be at least ten (10) inches by twelve
(12) inches.
   (h)   Lettering and coloring of signs.
      (1)   Lettering and background shall be in contrasting colors.
      (2)   Lettering shall be of bold-type and properly spaced to provide good
legibility.
      (3)   The lettering and numerals of the signs shall be at least one-half
inch high, except that:
         (i)   Floor numbering sign numerals shall be at least three inches
high.
         (ii)   Elevator identification sign letters shall be at least three
inches high.
   (i)   Material for signs.
      (1)   Signs shall be of metal or other durable materials.
      (2)   Fire resistive pressure sensitive vinyl decals may be permitted if
the plastic is printed on the reverse side.
   (j)   Attachment of signs. Signs shall be securely attached to the wall or
partition.
   (k)   Signs in existing buildings.
      (1)   Signs installed prior to March 27, 1984 may be accepted by the
Commissioner, provided that such signs will adequately accomplish the intended
purpose.
      (2)   In buildings existing prior to March 27, 1984, the Commissioner may
modify the requirements as to location of signs where compliance would cause
practical difficulty or undue hardship.
      (3)   All existing buildings not already subject to the requirements of
Local Law 5 as of January 18, 1983 shall comply with these requirements on or
before October 1, 1985.
   (l)   Compliance date. Signs shall be installed on or before October 1,
1985.
   (m)   Report of compliance. Owners shall file a report with the Department
of Buildings certifying that they have posted the signs in compliance with the
Building Code requirements on or before October 1, 1985.
§ 27-02 Caution Sign Tapes Required on Elevators Being Serviced. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 11/7/2022, eff. 12/7/2022)
§ 27-03 Signs on any Sidewalk Shed, Fence, Railing, Footbridge, Catch Platform,
Builder's Sidewalk Shanty, and Over-the-Sidewalk Chute Erected at Demolition or
Construction Sites. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 12/3/2015, eff. 1/2/2016)
§ 27-04 311 Advisory Signs Required on Construction Sites. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 12/3/2015, eff. 1/2/2016)
Chapter 28: Smoke Detecting Devices and Systems and Carbon Monoxide Detecting
Devices and Systems [Repealed]
§ 28-01 Required Smoke Detecting Devices and Systems. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 1/22/2018, eff. 2/21/2018)
§ 28-02 Required Carbon Monoxide Detecting Devices and Systems. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 1/22/2018, eff. 2/21/2018)
Chapter 29: Sprinkler Systems
§ 29-01 Installation of Automatic Sprinklers in Halls and Rooms in Class "A"
Multiple Dwellings Used for Single-Room Occupancy Under the Provisions of
Subdivision 7-A of § 4 and § 248 of the Multiple Dwelling Law.
   (a)   Before the installation of any sprinkler system in any single-room
occupancy building is begun, an application, together with plans and
specifications for such installation shall be filed with and approved by the
Department of Buildings. Plans shall show accurately, both horizontally and
vertically, the arrangement and dimensions of the private halls and rooms and
the areas to be sprayed by each sprinkler head. Application and specification
forms may be obtained at the borough office of the Department of Buildings.
Applications shall be filed in the department office in the borough in which
the premises are located. Applications and specifications shall be in
triplicate. Preliminary plans may be on paper. Final plans shall be filed in
triplicate on paper and microfilmed. When it is proposed to supply a sprinkler
system by means of a direct connection to a public water supply main, the
specifications shall be accompanied by a letter from the Department of
Environmental Protection, establishing the fact that the water-supply
conditions and pressures are suitable to meet the requirements of these rules
for water supplies for sprinklers.
   (b)   Sprinkler systems shall be of the automatic wet type.
   (c)   Water supply from public water mains will be acceptable when such
supply will provide a minimum static pressure at the highest sprinkler head or
heads of not less than 15 pounds per square inch. Taps connecting to public
water mains must be equal in size to the main pipe line, except that: A two-
inch (2") tap connecting to the public water main and immediately increased to
two-and-one-half inches (2 1/2") direct connection to the public water main
and, A one-and-one-half inch (1 1/2") tap connecting to the public water main
and immediately increased to two inches (2") in diameter, with piping of the
same diameter extending into the building, shall be considered the same as a
two-inch (2") direct connection to the public water main. The sprinkler system
of each building shall have a separate and independent source of supply. When a
sprinkler system is supplied direct from a public water main, it shall be
separately and independently connected to the public water main. However, a
house service water supply connection may be taken from the sprinkler water
supply connection to the public main, on the house side of the main shut-off
valve for the building, provided the diameter of the house service water supply
connection does not exceed one-half of the diameter of the sprinkler water
supply connection. Only one connection of the domestic water supply to the
sprinkler water supply line shall be permitted and no shut-off valve shall be
placed on the sprinkler supply line other than the main shut-off valve for the
building on the street side of the house service water supply connection.
   (d)   A gravity tank upon the roof will be required when the normal minimum
water pressure from the public mains is insufficient, or, in lieu of a gravity
tank, a pressure tank may be installed in the basement or cellar in accordance
with the requirements hereafter specified in these rules. The bottom of each
gravity tank supplying the sprinkler system shall be elevated at least 20 feet
above the roof. Each gravity tank shall be filled through a fixed water supply
tank of at least one-and-one-half inch (1 1/2") diameter and independent of the
sprinkler pipe system, by means of an automatically controlled pump of a
discharge capacity of at least 65 gallons per minute against the total head,
including friction at the discharge nozzle of the pump. The tank fill line
shall be standard weight pipe, galvanized steel, or brass or copper pipe. A
gravity tank, if used exclusively to supply the sprinkler system, shall have an
effective capacity of not less than 1,500 gallons. Gravity tanks which serve
both the house supply and the sprinkler system shall have a capacity of not
less than 2,500 gallons. All exposed water supply piping connecting with roof
gravity tanks shall be properly protected against frost action by four layers
of one inch (1") high-grade hair felt, and each layer of hair felt shall be
covered with a layer of heavy tar paper. Each wrapping must be securely
fastened with heavy twine, and wrapping joints shall have a lap of not less
than two inches (2"), staggered with the laps of adjacent layers. All coverings
shall be finally covered with heavy canvas, and painted with two coats of
water-proof paint. In lieu of the foregoing, three inch thick fiberglass in a
metal shield may be used.
   (e)   Pressure tanks when used shall be capable of supplying actual water
volume as required in subdivision (j) of this section of these rules. The
required water volume shall be two-thirds of the tank capacity and that air
pressure one-third. For the pressure to be maintained, pressure tanks shall be
constructed and tested in accordance with the requirements of the ANSI/NFiPA 22
of Reference Standard RS 17-10 of the Administrative (Building) Code. At the
end of each pressure tank there shall be a glass water level gauge, and the
pressure tank must also be provided with a pressure gauge and manhole for
access to the tank. The filing pump for the pressure tank shall have a capacity
of 65 gallons per minute with sufficient strength to pump water into the
pressure tank against full air pressure. The air compressor for the pressure
tank must be capable of delivering ten cubic feet of air per minute for the
permanent maintenance of the required maximum air pressure in the tank. The
filling pipe from pump to air compressor must be provided with a relief valve
set at 15 pounds in excess of the maximum air pressure carried in the tank.
   (f)   All tanks shall be supported in accordance with the provisions of the
Administrative (Building) Code. All tanks shall be provided with emergency
outlets in conformity with § P107.8(c) of Reference Standard RS-16 of the
Administrative (Building) Code.
   (g)   Standard one-half inch (1/2") spray type sprinkler heads. Each private
hall and room within an apartment having single-room occupancy shall be
sprinklered as hereinafter provided. In private halls within apartments,
sprinkler heads shall be placed not more than fourteen feet (14') apart. No
sprinkler head in a hallway shall be distant more than seven feet (7') from a
wall, partition or end of the hall. No sprinkler protection will be required
within any closet with a floor area of not more than 20 square feet provided
such closet is within a room and the area of the closet is considered as part
of the room area in computing the required number of heads.
   (h)   The term "protected area" shall be construed to mean that single-room
occupancy apartment within the building requiring the greatest number of
sprinkler heads. In computing the required number of heads within a "protected
area," the number of heads within the same apartment may be used on the
condition that there is no connection to another apartment or private hall.
Whenever there is a direct connection between two adjoining apartments, either
or both of which are used for single-room occupancy, the combined connected
apartments and private halls shall be considered as the "protected area." In
computing the required number of heads in a "protected area" of this type, the
number of heads within the rooms in the connected apartments or the number of
heads required in the private halls of such connected apartments, whichever is
greater, shall be used.
   (i)   The total number of heads in the "protected area" requiring the
greatest number of heads shall determine the required size of the main supply,
including service mains, main branch, tank, down feed and riser, but in no case
shall the size of the main supply be less than two inches.
   (j)   There shall be sufficient actual water volume to supply 25 percent of
the heads in the "protected area" requiring the greatest number of heads for a
period of 20 minutes at 20 gallons per minute.
   (k)   The number of sprinkler heads on a given size of piping shall not
exceed the following:
Size of pipe diameters Maximum number or sprinkler heads allowed
1 inch                 2 heads
1 1/4 inch             3 heads
1 1/2 inch             5 heads
2 inch                 10 heads
2 1/2 inch             30 heads
3 inch                 60 heads
3 1/2 inch             100 heads
4 inch                 Unlimited heads
   (l)   The sprinkler main shall not be less in size than the sprinkler rise
the check valve of equal diameter to the main and the riser shall be provided
on the sprinkler main. For draining the sprinkler system, a 3/4" plugged valve
shall be provided on the sprinkler main just inside the aforesaid check valve.
All sprinkler piping and fittings shall be so installed that they can be
thoroughly drained. On the sprinkler main, an outside screw and yoke gate
valve, readily accessible, must be provided near the front of the front of the
building and located so as to control the water supply to all the interior
sprinkler systems. The said outside screw and yoke gate valve must be sealed in
an open position. If tank water supply is used for sprinklers, an outside screw
and yoke gate valve shall be provided on the piping leading from the tank to
the sprinkler system under conditions similar to those specified for such
valves on sprinkler mains.
   (m)   Sprinkler risers shall not be located close to windows and all
sprinkler piping shall be properly supported.
   (n)   Sprinkler systems shall be maintained for sprinkler use only, and
connections to such sprinkler systems for any other purposes are prohibited.
   (o)   All piping used in sprinkler systems shall be full weight standard
steel threaded pipe, well reamed and screwed up tight into fittings without
reducing the waterway. Fittings shall be standard cast iron. All fittings
placed inside of tank shall be of brass or other non-corroding material.
   (p)   Sprinkler risers shall be provided at the top for testing purposes,
with a connection not less than one inch in diameter, with a valved outlet so
located that same will be readily accessible at all times. When not in use, the
valve shall be provided with an iron or brass plug screwed in tight.
   (q)   Sprinkler systems when completed shall be subjected to a hydrostatic
test at a pressure of not less than 30 pounds in excess of the normal pressure
required for such sprinkler systems when in service, and shall remain uncovered
in every part until they have successfully passed the test. The Department of
Buildings, in the borough in which the test is to be conducted, shall be
notified when such test is to take place. Tests shall be conducted by the
contractor or the owner of the owner's representative, in the presence of a
representative of the Building Department.
   (r)   Sprinkler systems shall be inspected at least once in each month by a
competent representative of the owner, to ascertain that all parts of the
system are in perfect working order. A detailed record of each inspection shall
be kept on the premises for examination by the Fire Department, the Department
of Housing Preservation and Development, and the Department of Buildings.
   (s)   There shall be kept available on the premises at all times a
sufficient supply of extra sprinkler heads and also a sprinkler wrench for use
to replace promptly any fused or damaged sprinkler heads. Any head which has
opened or has been damaged shall be replaced immediately with a good sprinkler
head. Sprinkler heads shall be of a type and manufacture approved by the Board
of Standards and Appeals. The minimum operating temperature of all sprinkler
heads shall be in the ordinary degree range. Appropriate higher degree
operating temperatures shall be required in cooking spaces.
§ 29-02 Installation of Automatic Wet-Pipe Sprinklers in Certain Class A and
Class B Multiple Dwellings, Including Hotels, Under the Provisions of § 67,
Multiple Dwelling Law.
Effective February 25, 1949, automatic wet-pipe sprinklers used in certain
Class A and Class B multiple dwellings, including hotels, shall be installed in
conformity with the provisions of the Administrative Code, Subchapter 17 of
Chapter 1 of Title 27, except as modified herein. These rules do not apply to
sprinkler installations in converted dwellings, lodging houses or multiple
dwellings used for single room occupancy.
   (a)   In lieu of one of the four alternate automatic sources of water supply
specified in § 27-961, of the Administrative (Building) Code, a connection may
be made to the domestic water supply system on the condition that:
      (1)   It can be established from information obtainable from the
Department of Environmental Protection that the pressure at the top of the
highest riser will be 15 pounds per square inch (except as provided in 1 RCNY §
29-02(f).
      (2)   If the pressure from this source is insufficient to provide a
pressure of 15 pounds at the highest line of sprinklers, but is sufficient to
supply a pressure of 15 pounds or more at the highest line of sprinklers, an
automatic booster pump is provided, the capacity of which shall be sufficient
to supply 25 percent of the standard one-half inch (1/2") heads in the
sprinkler area having the maximum number of heads, and in no event shall such
supply be less than 250 gallons per minute at a pressure of at least 15 pounds
at the highest sprinkler line.
      (3)   A local approved type of water-flow alarm is provided, the gong so
located that when it operates it may be heard by the occupants or employees,
and the gong also plainly marked "Sprinkler Alarm", in red letters one inch in
height on a white background. Exception: In a sprinkler area which does not
contain more than 36 heads, no water-flow alarm shall be required.
      (4)   A sprinkler shut-off valve is provided conveniently accessible and
its purpose clearly indicated by the words "Automatic Sprinkler Shut-Off Valve"
on a sign affixed thereto.
      (5)   The size of the domestic water supply line is at least equal to the
size of the main sprinkler connection. Note: The provisions of Paragraph c of §
27-964 shall not apply to sprinklers installed in conformity with the
provisions of 1 RCNY §
29-02(a).
   (b)   The capacity of gravity tanks for sprinklers shall be in conformity
with the provisions of § 27-965 or such tank may be supplied by an automatic
filing pump of at least 65 gallons per minute capacity, which shall be
sufficient to supply 25 percent of the sprinkler heads in the largest sprinkler
area for 20 minutes. The capacity of such tank shall be not less than 1,000
gallons. The bottom of the gravity tank or sprinkler supply pipe shall be not
less than 20 feet above the highest supplied sprinkler line. When such
elevation is not practicable, an automatic booster pump may be installed in the
main sprinkler supply line in conformity with 1 RCNY §
29-02(a)(2).
   (c)   In lieu of complying with the provisions of § 27-965, a pressure tank
located not more than one story below the highest supplied sprinkler line,
filled by an automatic pump, and with a supply of water, all as described in 1
RCNY §
29-02(b) may be installed. In addition, a high-and-low air alarm shall be
provided.
   (d)   The provisions of § 27-963(a) may be construed to permit the sprinkler
connection to the street main to be the same size as main sprinkler riser, but
in no instance shall it be less than two inches. A tap may be one pipe size
less than the sprinkler main.
   (e)   § 27-935 shall apply only when the number of heads in any sprinkler
area as defined in these rules exceeds 36.
   (f)   Standard 1/2-inch sprinkler heads. In lieu of applying the provisions
of § 27-956, sprinkler heads shall be so spaced that there shall be one head
for approximately 168 square feet of floor area, and shall also be spaced not
more than 14 feet on centers. The distance from a wall or partition to the
first sprinkler head shall not exceed seven feet, measured at right angles to
the wall or partition. In multiple dwellings that are presently equipped with
sprinklers, the heads in the public halls may be spaced 14 feet on centers,
with the first head not more than seven feet from any wall or partition. A 12
pound static pressure will be accepted at the topmost sprinkler line, provided
the sprinkler heads are spaced to cover 100 square feet or less. Sprinkler
heads may be installed in covered shafts in lieu of fire-retarding on the
condition that:
      (1)   Such shafts are not exposed to freezing temperatures;
      (2)   If ventilating louvres, windows or skylights are present in such
shafts, the highest head is located a sufficient distance from such openings to
prevent freezing;
      (3)   One head is centered at the top of such shaft at the level of the
highest ceiling;
      (4)   In shafts constructed in incombustible materials, excepting windows
or doors opening thereon, sprinkler heads are placed at each floor level and
are staggered at alternate levels;
      (5)   In shafts constructed of combustible materials, and which exceed 60
square feet in cross-sectioned area, sprinkler heads are placed at each floor
level and are staggered at alternate floor levels.
   (g)   The protection afforded by sprinklers to stairs, halls, corridors, and
other passageways shall also apply to their soffits and overlaps.
   (h)   These rules shall also apply to a store or other space used for
business on any story where there are no sleeping rooms and which is not
provided with sprinkler heads, unless such spaces are otherwise arranged in
conformity with the provisions of § 61, Multiple Dwelling Law.
   (i)   In lieu of complying with the provisions of § 3.9.1.1 of ANSI/NFiPA 13
of Reference Standard RS 17-2 of the Administrative (Building) Code, a 1 inch
valved pipe may be extended from the top of the riser to the outside of the
building, or inside the building to a deep sink for testing the system, pump
and alarm under water-flow conditions.
   (j)   Check valves, gate valves, and water meters shall be installed as and
when directed by the Department of Environmental Protection.
   (k)   The term "sprinkler area" as used in these rules shall mean any floor
space within a structure enclosed on all sides by exterior walls, fire walls,
fire partitions, fire-retarded partitions, or fire-resistive partitions and
doors acceptable to the Department of Housing and Buildings. The term "fire-
resistive partition" as used in these rules shall mean a partition which is
constructed of incombustible materials or wood studs covered on both sides with
lath and plaster, plaster board, or other fire-resistive materials acceptable
to the Department. Such partitions shall extend from the floor to the ceiling.
All doors in such partitions shall be self closing.
   (l)   The sprinkler control valve shall be inspected at least once weekly by
a competent person, who is employed by the owner to see that such valves are
sealed open, and who holds a certificate of fitness. A record of each
inspection shall be kept for examination by a representative of the Department.
The provisions of § 27-957, in relation to alarm devices shall not apply to a
sprinkler area which does not contain more than 36 heads in multiple dwellings,
in which such weekly inspections are made.
   (m)   Systems installed before July 1, 1928 shall be subject to inspection
and if found adequate may be accepted by the Department of Buildings. However,
in such cases, a copy of the plans approved by the Fire Department shall be
filed with the Department of Buildings.
   (n)   Where there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out
these rules, the Superintendent may permit modifications, provided that the
spirit of these rules are observed and safety secured.
§ 29-03 Installation of Automatic Wet-Pipe Sprinkler Systems and Alarm Systems
in Certain Class B Multiple Dwellings (Lodging Houses).
   (a)   Notice is hereby given that, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 713
of the Laws of 1929, and Section 4 of Chapter 553 of the Laws of 1944,
effective April 5, 1944, automatic wet pipe sprinkler systems installed in
"lodging houses", shall be installed in conformity with the provisions of the
Administrative Code of the city of New York.
   (b)   An automatic closed-circuit water-flow and valve-tamper alarm system,
having at least one manual fire alarm station shall be provided in connection
with the sprinkler system. This alarm system shall be connected to an approved
central station which provided supervisory and maintenance service satisfactory
to the fire commissioner. In connection therewith, there shall be an approved
transmitter so arranged as to actuate all gongs of the interior fire alarm
system whenever a water flow through the sprinkler system occurs. Interior fire
alarm systems of the closed-circuit type previously installed under the rules
then in force and approved by the fire commissioner may be accepted if, after
inspection and test the systems are found to be adequate and in proper
operating condition. Battery operated interior fire alarm systems of the open-
circuit type shall be replaced with an approved closed-circuit system. In
connection with these rules, the persons affected are advised to consult
Article 5 of Subchapter 17 of Chapter 1 of Title 27 of the Administrative
(Building) Code and §§ 15-126, 15-127 and 15-214, of the Administrative (Fire
Prevention) Code of the city of New York, concerning interior fire alarm
system, watchmen's time detector system and telegraphic communication.
§ 29-04 Installation of Automatic Wet-Pipe Sprinkler Systems and Alarm Systems
in Certain Class B Multiple Dwellings (Lodging Houses).
   (a)   Automatic wet-pipe sprinkler systems installed in lodging houses in
compliance with Subdivision 3, of § 66, of the Multiple Dwelling Law shall be
in conformity with the provisions of the Administrative Code, Subchapter 17 of
Chapter 1 of Title 27, only to the extent that such article is not inconsistent
with these amended rules.
      (1)   Sprinkler systems shall be automatic wet-pipe with one automatic
source of water supply.
      (2)   Acceptable automatic sources of water supply shall be any one of
the following:
         (i)   Elevated gravity tank having a minimum capacity of 5,000 gallons
and installed in accordance with § 27-965 of the Administrative (Building)
Code. Effective capacity shall be determined by the largest number of heads in
any floor area multiplied by 75 gallons, and shall never be less than 5,000
gallons.
         (ii)   Pressure tank having a minimum capacity of 2,500 gallons and
installed in accordance with § 27-965 of the Administrative (Building) Code.
Effective water capacity shall be determined by the largest number of heads in
any floor area multiplied by 37.5 gallons, and shall never be less than 2,500
gallons.
         (iii)   Automatic fire pump having a capacity of not less than 250
gallons per minute and installed in accordance with § 27-964 of the
Administrative (Building) Code.
         (iv)   A direct connection to the public water main, provided it is
capable of maintaining a pressure of at least 15 pounds per square inch at the
top of the highest sprinkler riser, with 250 gallons of water flowing per
minute at a 2-1/2-inch outlet from a hydrant at the street level within 250
feet of the building. The hydrant test shall be made between the hours of 8
a.m. and 5 p.m. on a working day. If the public water main pressure is
incapable of maintaining a minimum pressure of 15 pounds per square inch as
specified herein, a booster pump may be installed in conformity with these
rules; or, in lieu of such booster pump, the sprinkler spacing and pipe sizes
for the area not having the required minimum water pressure of 15 pounds per
square inch shall be in conformity with the provisions of § 27-956 of the
Administrative (Building) Code, provided that in no event the minimum water
pressure at the highest sprinkler riser be less than 2 pounds per square inch.
Booster pumps, if required, shall have a capacity sufficient to supply 250
gallons per minute, at a pressure of at least 15 pounds at the top of the
highest sprinkler riser. All shall be installed in accordance with § 27-964 of
the Administrative (Building) Code. A letter from the Department of
Environmental Protection shall be filed with the application for the
installation of a sprinkler system, stating the water pressure and supply
conditions of the street main to which the sprinkler supply is to be connected.
      (3)   One common source of water supply shall be acceptable for any
contiguous buildings under the same ownership or leasehold and under the same
lodging-house management, provided that each such building is fully separated
by fire walls with automatic fire doors on any connecting openings. Supply
mains shall be at least the size of the largest main riser in any one building
and shall be arranged to be centrally located and run as directly as possible
from the source of water supply to the respective risers in each building. Each
building shall be provided with a separate alarm valve in accordance with 1
RCNY §
29-04(a)(8). In all other respects, the installation in each building shall
comply with these rules. Supply mains shall be increased in size as may be
required for adequate water supply and pressure requirements in accordance with
1 RCNY §
29-04(a)(2).
      (4)   Sprinkler spacing for standard 1/2-inch heads under sheathed or
plaster ceilings shall not exceed 168 square feet of protection area, with the
distance between lines and between sprinklers on lines not in excess of 14
feet.
      (5)   The maximum permissible number of standard 1/2-inch sprinkler heads
on a given pipe-size, in one fire area, on any one story shall be as follows:
 
1 inch pipe     2 sprinkler heads
1 1/4 inch pipe 3 sprinkler heads
1 1/2 inch pipe 5 sprinkler heads
2 inch pipe     10 sprinkler heads
3 inch pipe     30 sprinkler heads
4 inch pipe     60 No Limit
Branch lines should not exceed eight sprinkler heads on either side of a cross
main. Areas within fire walls may be subdivided into separate fire areas by
one-hour partitions. Openings in such partitions shall be protected with
fireproof doors and assemblies, and such doors shall be self-closing. Areas
within such subdivisions may be considered independent fire areas.
      (6)   Each riser shall be of sufficient size to supply all the sprinkler
heads on that riser in any one fire area according to 1 RCNY §
29-04(a)(5). The supply main shall be at least the size of the riser it serves,
except that no main shall be less than two inches and shall be installed in
accordance with § 27-956 of the Administrative (Building) Code.
      (7)   Taps in the public water main may be one standard pipe-size smaller
than the required supply main according to 1 RCNY §
29-04(a)(6), provided the supply main immediately increases at the tap to its
full required size. All water main installations shall be subject to the
approval of the Department of Environmental Protection.
      (8)   Systems shall be equipped with an alarm valve so constructed that
any flow of water in any part of the system, or the closure of any valve
controlling water supply will automatically cause the interior fire alarm
system and the central station alarm to operate.
      (9)   Prior to the issuance of a letter of approval from the Department
of Buildings as to the satisfactory installation of any system, a letter from
the Department of Environmental Protection must be filed with the Department as
to the size of tap and service main and its satisfactory installation.
   (b)   An automatic closed-circuit water-flow and valve-tamper alarm system,
having at least one manual fire alarm station shall be provided in connection
with the sprinkler system. This alarm system shall be connected to an approved
central station which provided supervisory and maintenance service satisfactory
to the fire commissioner. In connection therewith, there shall be an approved
transmitter so arranged as to actuate all gongs of the interior fire alarm
system whenever a water flow through the sprinkler system occurs. Interior fire
alarm systems of the closed-circuit type previously installed under the rules
then in force and approved by the fire commissioner may be accepted, if, after
inspection and test the systems are found to be adequate and in proper
operating condition. Battery operated interior fire alarm systems of the open-
circuit type shall be replaced with an approved closed-circuit system. In
connection with these rules, the persons affected are advised to consult
Article 5 of Subchapter 17 of Chapter 1 of Title 27 of the Administrative
(Building) Code and §§ 15-126, 15-127 and 15-214 of the Administrative (Fire
Prevention) Code of the city of New York, concerning interior fire alarm
system, watchmen's time detector system and telegraphic communication.
§ 29-05 Installation of Automatic Wet-Pipe Sprinklers in Fireproof Multiple
Dwellings Converted to Business Use. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 11/7/2022, eff. 12/7/2022)
§ 29-06 Installation of Automatic Sprinklers in the Public Halls of Multiple
Dwellings Under the Provisions of § 187 (Converted Dwellings) and § 218,
Subdivision 5 (Old-Law Tenements), of the Multiple Dwelling Law, and of the
Sprinklers in Cooking Spaces in all Types of Multiple Dwellings Under the
Provisions of § 33 of the Multiple Dwelling Law.
   (a)   Certification from the Department of Environmental Protection. When it
is proposed to supply a sprinkler system by means of a direct connection to a
public water supply main, the specifications shall be accompanied by a letter
or other approved certification from the Department of Environmental
Protection, establishing the fact that the water supply conditions and pressure
are such that will meet the requirements of these rules for water suppliers for
sprinklers.
   (b)   Type of system required. Sprinkler system shall be of the automatic
wet type.
   (c)   Connection to water main. The sprinkler system of each building shall
have a separate and independent source of supply except as herein otherwise
specifically provided. When a sprinkler system is supplied direct from a public
water main, it shall be separately and independently connected to the public
water main except that one street main supply will be accepted for not more
than three contiguous buildings under one ownership where such buildings are
separated by fire walls, provided that the supply is brought into the center
building of a group of three, and provided further, that the supply shall be
adequate for the total number of sprinklers in any two buildings, but not less
than 50 percent of the total number of sprinklers in all the buildings in any
case. In all other respects, the installation in each building shall comply
with these rules. When one street supply serves more than one building, there
shall be submitted to the department evidence that an easement has been created
in favor of each building for the continued use of such supply for each
building. A house service water supply connection may be taken from the
sprinkler water supply connection to the city main, on the house side of the
main shut-off valve for the building provided the diameter of the house service
water supply connection does not exceed one-half of the diameter of the
sprinkler water supply connection. Only one connection of the domestic water
supply to the sprinkler water supply line shall be permitted and no shut-off
valve shall be placed on the sprinkler supply line, other than the main shut-
off valve for the building on the street side of the house service water supply
connection. (1 RCNY §
29-06(c) amended by resolution filed with City Clerk February 9, 1956.)
   (d)   Water pressure and supply. Water supply from public water mains will
be acceptable when such supply will provide a minimum static pressure at the
highest sprinkler of not less than 15 pounds per square inch. For computation
of the required water pressure at the curb level to provide adequate pressure
at the highest sprinkler, the following formula shall be used: Required water
pressure in pounds per square inch = 0.434 H plus 15. Where H = height in feet
from the curb level to the level of the highest sprinkler. When the minimum
pressure in the water supply is insufficient to provide the required pressure,
but is capable of providing a pressure of not less than five pounds per square
inch at the highest sprinkler, an automatic centrifugal booster pump for the
purpose of increasing the water pressure will be accepted under the following
conditions:
      (1)   The rated capacity of the pump shall be not less than 250 gallons
per minute and shall be sufficient to supply at least 25 percent of the total
number of sprinklers, or where there is insufficient pressure in the top story
only, all the sprinklers on the top floor, at the rate of 20 gallons per minute
per sprinkler. A 2 1/2-inch diameter test tee shall be attached to the
discharge pipe from the pump for the purpose of testing its capacity.
      (2)   There shall be a pressure regulator attached to the pump which
shall be set so that the pump will automatically start operating when the water
pressure at the highest sprinkler falls below 20 pounds per square inch, and
cease to operate when the said pressure reaches 30 pounds per square inch.
      (3)   The pump shall be attached on bypass properly valved to the
sprinkler main on the house side of the main control valve. The intake and
discharge pipes to the pump shall be of sufficient size to deliver the required
volume of water to the system at the stated minimum pressure.
      (4)   Drain valves shall be installed on the main between the main
(O.S.&Y.) control valve and the intake connection to the pump and on the house
side of the discharge connection to the pump. Such drain valves shall be closed
by means of screw plugs.
      (5)   A check valve shall be installed on the main on the inside service
between the intake and discharge connections to the pump.
      (6)   The intake and discharge pipes from the pump shall each be provided
with an O.S.&Y. valve.
      (7)   A variation of not more than two pounds per square inch, in the
minimum pressure, in the street supply below the required pressure for the
sprinkler system without the introduction of a booster pump or increased size
in piping may be accepted by the Superintendent if in his opinion the supply is
adequate. There shall be sufficient actual water volume to supply 25 percent of
the heads for a period of 20 minutes at 20 gallons per minute.
   (e)   Roof tanks. Except as otherwise specifically provided in 1 RCNY §
29-06(d), a gravity tank upon the roof will be required when the normal minimum
water pressure from the public water main is insufficient. The bottom of each
gravity tank supplying a sprinkler system shall be elevated at least 20 feet
above the roof. Each gravity tank shall be filled through a fixed water supply
pipe of at least one and one-half inch diameter and independent of the
sprinkler pipe system, by means of an automatically controlled pump of a
capacity at the discharge nozzle of the pump of at least 65 gallons per minute
against the total head, including friction. The tank fill line shall be
standard weight pipe, galvanized steel, brass or copper pipe. The pump shall be
equipped with control apparatus which will automatically start operation when
the effective capacity of the tank falls below the minimum reserve supply for
the sprinkler system. A gravity tank, if used exclusively to supply the
sprinkler system, shall have an effective capacity of not less than fifteen
hundred (1,500) gallons. Gravity tanks which serve both the house supply and
the sprinkler system shall have an effective capacity of not less than twenty-
five hundred (2,500) gallons with a minimum of fifteen hundred (1,500) gallons
reserved for the sprinkler system. All exposed water supply piping connecting
with roof gravity tanks shall be properly protected against freezing by four
layers of one inch high-grade hair felt, and each layer of hair felt shall be
covered with a layer of heavy tar paper. Each wrapping shall be securely
fastened with heavy twine, and wrapping joints shall have a lap of not less
than two inches staggered into the laps of the adjacent layers. All coverings
shall be finally covered with heavy canvas sewed at seams and painted with two
coats of waterproof paint. In lieu of the foregoing, three inch thick
fiberglass in a metal shield may be used. Exposed gravity tanks on the roof
shall be protected against freezing by means of an approved enclosure,
insulation, heating coil or other means acceptable to the Superintendent.
Gravity tanks shall be supported in accordance with the provisions of § P107.8
of Reference Standard RS-16 of the Administrative (Building) Code. Gravity
tanks shall be provided with emergency outlets in conformity with § P107.8 of
Reference Standard RS-16 of the Administrative (Building) Code.
   (f)   Pressure tanks. Except as otherwise specifically provided in 1 RCNY §§
29-06(d) and (e), a pressure tank will be required when the normal minimum
water pressure from the public main is insufficient. Such pressure tank may be
installed in the basement or cellar. Pressure tanks when used shall be capable
of supplying actual water volume as required in 1 RCNY §
29-06(d) at a pressure of not less than 15 pounds per square inch. Pressure
tanks shall be constructed and tested in accordance with the requirements of
ANSI/NFiPA 22 of Reference Standard RS 17-10 of the Administrative (Building)
Code. Pressure tanks shall be at least two-thirds filled with water and an air
pressure by gauge shall be maintained in the tank of not less than 75 pounds
plus the pressure caused by the column of water in the sprinkler system above
the bottom of the tank. At the end of each pressure tank there shall be a glass
water-level gauge, and the pressure tank shall also be provided with a pressure
gauge and a manhole for access to the interior of the tank. The filling pump
for the pressure tank shall have a capacity of not less than 65 gallons per
minute against the total head including friction and air pressure of the tank.
The compressor shall be powered by an electric motor which shall be equipped
with control apparatus, which will automatically start the motor when the
pressure in the tank drops to 75 pounds per square inch and will cut out the
motor when the pressure in the tank reaches the total required pressure. The
air compressor shall be capable of delivering not less than 10 cubic feet of
air per minute. The filling pipe from the pump or air compressor shall be
provided with a relief valve set to open at 15 pounds in excess of the maximum
air pressure required in the tank.
   (g)   Sprinkler pressure, where required. Sprinklers shall be arranged to
spray all parts of the public stairways, service stairways, their hallways,
landings and soffits. Sprinkler protection shall be provided also in each
closet opening on a public hall and in any permanent telephone booth placed in
a public hall, but no sprinkler protection shall be required in any bathroom,
water-closet compartment or shower room opening upon a public hall. There shall
be two or more sprinklers installed under the soffit of each public stairs
spaced not more than fourteen (14) feet apart. Sprinklers shall be provided
over and under the stairway leading from the basement or cellar to the first
floor, except that where the under part of the cellar stairway is completely
enclosed with fireproof material, sprinklers will not be required under the
soffit of such cellar stairway. Sprinkler protection shall be provided in
spaces exceeding three (3) feet in height, above a public hall between the
ceiling of the top story and the roof unless such spaces are properly cut off
from the public hall by means of fire retarded partitions. Sprinkler protection
shall be provided also on the underside of public stairhalls, stair landings
and soffits which are not within stair enclosures except when such surfaces are
fire-retarded. Sprinklers shall not be required in roof bulkheads or in
unheated outside street vestibules. Sprinkler protection shall not be required
in any auxiliary stairway extending from the lowest story to the next higher
story above, on condition that such stairway is not located under any stairway
leading to upper stories nor terminates in a public hall. Deflectors of
sprinklers shall be placed not less than three inches nor more than ten inches
below ceilings or soffits. Sprinklers shall not be located within 12 inches
distance of any obstruction such as hanger, lighting fixture, etc.
   (h)   Tap sizes required. Taps connecting to public water mains shall be
equal in size to the main pipe lines, except that: A two and one-half inch tap
connecting to the public water main and immediately increased to three inches
in diameter, with piping of the same diameter extending into the building,
shall be considered the same as a three inch direct connection to the public
water main. A two inch tap connecting to the public water main and immediately
increased to two and one-half inches in diameter, with piping of the same
diameter extending into the building, shall be considered the same as a two and
one-half inch direct connection to the public water main. A one and one-half
inch tap connecting to the public water main and immediately increased to two
inches in diameter, with piping of the same diameter extending into the
building, shall be considered the same as a two inch direct connection to the
public water main.
   (i)   Pipe schedules. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the
number of sprinklers on a given size of piping shall not exceed the following:
Diameter of Pipe Maximum number of sprinklers allowed
1 inch           2 sprinklers
1 1/4 inch       3 sprinklers
1 1/2 inch       5 sprinklers
2 inch           10 sprinklers
2 1/2 inch       30 sprinklers
3 inch           60 sprinklers
3 1/2 inch       100 sprinklers
4 inch           Unlimited sprinklers
The sprinkler main shall not be less in size than the sprinkler riser and shall
not be less in size than any branch it serves. Except as otherwise specifically
provided in 1 RCNY §
29-06(h), the total number of sprinklers in a structure shall determine the
required size of the tap, service main, risers and branches, but in no case
shall the size of the main supply be less than two inches. The following
sprinklers will not be counted in computing the size of the taps, mains and
risers:
      (1)   One sprinkler of the required sprinklers placed under the soffits
of the stairs in each story when more than one sprinkler is provided.
      (2)   Sprinklers placed in any closet or telephone booth opening upon a
public hall.
      (3)   Sprinklers placed (in lieu of fire retarding) on the underside of
public stairhalls, stair landings and soffits not within the stair enclosure.
The permissible number of heads may at the discretion of the Superintendent be
increased by not more than 10 percent.
   (j)   Siamese. A sprinkler system containing 55 or more sprinklers in one
building or fire area, shall be provided with an approved Fire Department
Siamese Connection installed in accordance with § 27-940 of the Administrative
(Building) Code.
   (k)   Sprinkler in existing cooking spaces. When a sprinkler is installed in
the ceiling over an existing cooking space, pursuant to § 33 of the Multiple
Dwelling Law, the sprinkler shall be connected with the domestic water supply
of the building through a pipe of at least one inch diameter, at a point either
side of the valve controlling the supply to the plumbing fixture in the cooking
space. There shall be at least one sprinkler for every 49 square feet or
fraction thereof of the floor area of the cooking space. Such sprinklers shall
not be included in the computations for determining the size of the sprinkler
piping or the necessity of a siamese as outlined in 1 RCNY §§
29-06(i) and
29-06(j). No sprinkler shall be installed in a cooking space without a written
approval from the Department of Buildings. The Superintendent may, however,
waive the requirement as to the filing of the plans when, in his opinion, the
nature of the alteration may be fully explained in the application.
   (l)   Valves. Each valve controlling water supply and each valve controlling
drainage of system or test flow, shall bear a metal plate securely attached to
the valve and indicating clearly the purpose of each such valve. On the
sprinkler main, an outside screw and yoke gate valve, readily accessible, shall
be provided near the front wall of the building and located so as to control
the water supply to all of the interior sprinkler system. The said outside
screw and yoke gate valve shall be sealed in an open position. If a roof tank
is used as a supply for sprinklers, an outside screw and yoke gate valve shall
be provided in the piping leading from the tank to the sprinkler system, under
conditions similar to those specified for such valves on sprinkler mains. A
check valve of equal diameter to the main shall be installed in all sprinkler
mains where a building is supplied by services connected to different street
mains, or where a building is equipped with a siamese connection. Such check
valve shall be placed within two feet of the outlet side of the main control
valve. Where a sprinkler system is supplied with both a gravity tank and a
street main, a check valve shall be placed in the independent supply pipe to
the tank (on the tank side of the pump) and in the main at the outlet end of
the main control valve. Such check valves shall be of equal diameter to the
supply pipe and the main respectively. When the sprinkler system has an
auxiliary supply in the form of a siamese connection, a check valve shall be
placed in a horizontal position in the down feed from the gravity tank and
immediately below the roof. When a building is supplied through a pressure tank
in the cellar or basement, a check valve of equal diameter to the main shall be
placed in the sprinkler main on the inside service between the intake and
discharge connections to the pump feeding the pressure tank. Where a sprinkler
system is equipped with a booster pump, valves shall be provided in accordance
with 1 RCNY §
29-06(d). All control valves in supplies to the sprinkler system shall be
sealed in an open position in an approved manner. Where an underground main is
used, the main control valve shall be located where readily accessible.
   (m)   Drainage. All sprinkler pipe and fittings shall be so installed that
the system can be thoroughly drained. Where practicable, all piping shall be
arranged to drain to the main drain valve. Where this is impracticable, as in
the case of sprinkler piping under stair soffits, a three-quarter inch screw
plug shall be provided in the lower end of such piping to permit drainage.
Except where otherwise provided in the previous paragraph, sprinkler pipes
shall be pitched not less than one-quarter inch in the 10 feet. Pipe shall be
straightened before installation to prevent pockets which would interfere with
proper drainage. For draining the sprinkler system, a three-quarter inch tee
branch with a three-quarter inch plugged valve shall be provided on the
sprinkler main on the house side of the main (O.S.&Y.) control valve. Where a
sprinkler system is provided with check valves, the intermediate pipe between
check valves shall be so arranged as to properly drain.
   (n)   Sprinkler specifications. Sprinklers shall be of a type and
manufacture approved by the Board of Standards and Appeals and of current
issue. The operating temperature of all sprinklers shall be in the ordinary
degree range. Appropriate higher degree operating temperatures shall be
required in cooking spaces. Any sprinkler which has opened or has been damaged
shall be replaced immediately with a good sprinkler. There shall be kept
available on the premises at all times at least three extra sprinklers and also
a sprinkler wrench for use to replace any fused or damaged sprinklers.
   (o)   Pipe specifications – sleeves. All piping except underground piping
used in sprinkler systems shall be full weight standard steel threaded pipe,
well reamed and screwed up tight into fittings without reducing the waterway.
Fittings shall be standard weight cast-iron. All fittings and pipes placed
inside of tanks shall be of brass or other non-corroding material. Underground
piping shall be of Extra Heavy Cast Iron Corporation pipe with bell and spriget
or mechanical joints. Sprinkler piping passing through floors (other than
floors in public halls) of concrete or waterproof construction, shall have
properly designed substantial thimbles or sleeves projecting three to six
inches above the floor to prevent possible floor leakage. The space between the
pipe and sleeve should be caulked with oakum or equivalent material. If floors
are of cinder concrete, thimbles or sleeves should extend all the way through
to protect the piping against corrosion.
   (p)   Hangers and support of piping. All branches shall be adequately
supported. There shall be at least one hanger for each length of pipe between
sprinklers, with one hanger within 30 inches of the end sprinkler and with
hangers not over 12 feet apart. Vertical piping shall be securely supported at
the base and at maximum intervals of every other floor, provided that such
maximum intervals are 20 feet or less. The maximum spacing between hangers on
horizontal mains and risers shall be 12 feet. Hangers shall be of a substantial
metal type. Sprinkler risers shall not be located within 12 inches of a window
or other exterior wall opening.
   (q)   Frost protection. When necessary for the protection of a sprinkler
system against frost, the Superintendent shall require that the public halls be
heated. Exposed water supply piping shall be protected against frost in
accordance with 1 RCNY §
29-06(e).
   (r)   Tests. Sprinkler systems when completed shall be subjected to a
hydrostatic test at a pressure of not less than 30 pounds per square inch, in
excess of the normal pressure required for such sprinkler system when in
service, except that where a siamese is required, the test pressure shall be
not less than 200 pounds per square inch. All piping shall remain uncovered in
every part until it has successfully passed the test. The Department of
Buildings, in the borough in which the test is to be conducted, shall be
notified when such test is to take place. Tests shall be conducted by the
contractor or the owner or the owner's representative, in the presence of a
representative of the Building Department. Sprinkler risers shall be provided
at the top for testing purposes, with a connection not less than one inch in
diameter, with a valve outlet so located that same will be readily accessible
at all times. When not in use the valve shall be provided with an iron or brass
plug screwed in tight.
   (s)   Maintenance. Each sprinkler system shall be maintained in good
condition and in such manner that it will function effectively in the event of
fire on the premises. The owner is responsible for the condition of his
sprinkler system and shall use due diligence in keeping the system in good
operating condition. Sprinkler systems shall be inspected at least once in each
six months by the owner, to ascertain that all parts of the system are in
perfect working order. A detailed record of each such inspection shall be kept
on the premises for examination by the Department of Housing Preservation and
Development, the Department of Buildings and the Fire Department.
   (t)   Painting. When the sprinkler system is given any kind of coating, such
as whitewash or paint, care shall be exercised to see that no portion of the
automatic sprinklers is covered.
   (u)   Alterations. No additional sprinklers shall be installed and no part
of a sprinkler system shall be altered without a written approval from the
Department of Buildings.
   (v)   Issuance of approval. Before the installation of a sprinkler system is
approved and prior to the issuance of a letter of approval, there shall be
filed with the Department of Buildings, in the borough in which the work has
been installed, a letter from the Department of Environmental Protection
indicating the size of the tap and service main and whether same has been
installed in an approved manner.
§ 29-07 Installation of Wet-Pipe Sprinklers.
Rules and Regulations for the Installation of Wet-Pipe Sprinklers under the
provisions of § 248, Subdivision 4, Paragraph b, Multiple Dwelling Law, in
Certain Fireproof Multiple Dwellings Erected before May 16, 1913, and Converted
in Whole or in Part to Single Room Occupancy Prior to December 9, 1955.
Extract from the Multiple Dwelling Law
Section 248, Subdivision 4, Paragraph b. "There shall be access to a second
means of egress within the apartment without passing through any public stair
or public hall. On and after July first, nineteen hundred fifty-seven, every
tenement used or occupied for single room occupancy in whole or part under the
provisions of this section, and which does not have at least two means of
egress accessible to each apartment, and extending from the ground story to the
roof, shall be provided with at least two means of egress or, in lieu of such
egress, every stair hall or public hall, and every hall or passage within an
apartment, shall be equipped on each story with one or more automatic sprinkler
heads approved by the department. Elevator shafts in such tenements shall be
completely enclosed with fireproof or other incombustible material and the
doors to such shafts shall be fireproof or shall be covered on all sides with
incombustible material."
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided herein, automatic wet-pipe sprinklers
installed under the provisions of § 248, Subdivision 4, Paragraph b, Multiple
Dwelling Law, in certain fireproof dwellings erected before May 16, 1913, and
converted in whole or in part to single room occupancy prior to December 9,
1955, shall be installed in conformity with Subchapter 17 of Chapter 1 of Title
27 of the Administrative Code.
   (b)   In lieu of one of the four alternate automatic sources of water supply
specified in § 27-961, Subdivision b, of the Administrative (Building) Code, a
connection may be made to the domestic water supply system under the following
conditions:
      (1)   It can be established from the information obtainable from the
Department of Environmental Protection that the minimum static pressure at the
top of the highest riser will be at least 15 pounds per square inch, except as
otherwise provided in 1 RCNY §
29-07(g).
      (2)   If the pressure from this source is insufficient to provide a
minimum static pressure of 15 pounds per square inch, at the highest line of
sprinklers, but is sufficient to supply a pressure of 5 pounds per square inch
or more at the highest line of sprinklers, an automatic booster pump shall be
provided, the capacity of which shall be 250 gallons per minute at a pressure
of at least 15 pounds per square inch at the highest sprinkler line.
      (3)   A sprinkler shut-off valve is provided conveniently accessible, and
its purpose is clearly indicated by the words "Automatic Sprinkler Shut-Off
Valve" on a sign affixed thereto, and that such valve is sealed open.
      (4)   The side of the domestic water supply line is at least equal to the
size of the main sprinkler connection.
      (5)   The provisions of Paragraph c of § 27-964 shall not apply to
sprinklers installed in conformity with the provisions of this 1 RCNY §
29-07(b).
      (6)   Where the length of pipe from the furthermost sprinkler to the
riser exceeds 100 feet, the pipe beyond the 100 foot distance shall be
increased in size one pipe size above the size of otherwise required, for each
100 feet of additional length or part thereof. This provision shall not require
an increase in the size of the risers.
   (c)   The capacity for gravity tanks for sprinklers shall be in conformity
with provisions of § 27-965, or such tank may be supplied by an automatic
filling pump, capable of delivering at least 65 gallons per minute to the tank
and shall have sufficient capacity to supply 25 percent of the sprinkler heads
in the largest sprinkler area for 20 minutes, at 20 gallons per minute. The
capacity of such tank shall not be less than 1,500 gallons. The bottom of the
gravity tank or the sprinkler supply pipe shall not be less than 20 feet above
the highest supplied sprinkler line. When such elevation is not practicable, an
automatic booster pump may be installed in the main sprinkler supply line in
conformity with 1 RCNY §
29-07(b)(2).
   (d)   In lieu of complying with the provisions of § 27-965, a pressure tank
located not more than one story below the highest supplied sprinkler line,
filled by an automatic pump, and with a supply of water, all as described in 1
RCNY §
29-07(c), may be installed. In addition, a high-and-low air-alarm shall be
provided.
   (e)   Subdivision b of § 27-963(a) may be construed to permit the sprinkler
connection to the street main to be the same size as the main sprinkler riser,
but in no instance shall it be less than 2 inches. A tap may be one pipe-size
less than the sprinkler main.
   (f)   When the number of sprinkler heads in any fire area as defined in
these rules exceeds fifty-five (55), an approved Fire Department siamese
connection shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of § 27-940
of the Administrative (Building) Code.
   (g)   In lieu of applying the provisions of § 27-956, sprinkler heads shall
be so spaced that there shall be one head for approximately 144 square feet of
floor area, and heads shall be spaced not more than 14 feet on centers. The
distance from a wall or partition to the first sprinkler head shall not exceed
7 feet, measured at right angles to the wall or partition. A 12-pound minimum
static pressure will be accepted at the topmost sprinkler line, provided the
sprinkler heads are spaced to cover 100 square feet or less.
   (h)   In lieu of complying with the provisions of ANSI/NFPA 13 of Reference
Standard RS 17-2 of the Administrative (Building) Code, a l-inch valve pipe may
be extended from the top of the riser to the outside of the building, or inside
the building to a deep sink for testing the system, pump and alarm under water-
flow conditions.
   (i)   Check valves, gate valves, and water meters shall be installed as and
when directed by the Department of Environmental Protection.
   (j)   Definition.
      Sprinkler area. The term "sprinkler area" as used in these rules shall
mean any floor space within a structure enclosed on all sides by exterior
walls, fire walls, fire partitions, or fire-proof partitions and self-closing
doors acceptable to the Department of Buildings.
   (k)   The sprinkler control valves shall be inspected at least once weekly,
by a competent person, who is employed by the owner and who holds a Certificate
of Fitness to see that such valves are sealed open. A record of each inspection
shall be kept for examination by a representative of the Department. The
provisions of § 27-957, in relation to alarm devices, shall not apply to those
buildings having more than 36 heads in any sprinkler area.
   (l)   In conformity with the provisions of § 27-957, sprinkler alarm devices
shall be required when more than 36 heads are installed in any fire area.
   (m)   Where there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out
these rules, the Superintendent may permit modification, provided that the
spirit of these rules are observed and safely secured.
§ 29-08 Installation of Sprinklers in Rooms of Class B Non-Fireproof Converted
Dwellings and in Rooms Used for Class B Occupancy in Non-Fireproof Class A
Converted Dwellings Under the Provisions of § 194 of the Multiple Dwelling Law.
   (a)   Applicability. Sprinklers installed in rooms of class B non-fireproof
converted dwellings, and in rooms used for class B occupancy in non-fireproof
class A converted dwellings shall conform to the "sprinkler rules governing the
installation of automatic sprinklers in the public halls of multiple dwellings
under the provisions of § 187 (Converted Dwellings) and § 218(7) (Old Law
Tenements) of the Multiple Dwelling Law, and of sprinklers in cooking spaces in
all types of multiple dwellings under the provisions of § 33 of the Multiple
Dwelling Law," except as provided otherwise in these rules.
   (b)   Sprinkler protection – when required. In every room in a class B non-
fireproof converted dwelling, and in every room used for class B occupancy in
any non-fireproof class A converted dwelling, there shall be one or more
sprinkler heads so arranged as to sprinkle all parts of such rooms. A sprinkler
system in the public stairway or in the service stairway shall not be required
by these rules, but sprinklers shall be provided for such stairways where
required by the Multiple Dwelling Law or the provisions of other rules.
   (c)   Spray type sprinklers. Where approved spray type sprinkler heads are
used, they shall conform to the requirements of the rules specified in
subdivision (a) of this section, except that the protected area for approved 1/
2 inch spray type sprinklers shall not exceed 168 square feet in area, and the
distance between heads shall not exceed 14 feet and the maximum distance
between such heads and a wall or partition shall not exceed 7 feet.
   (d)   Connection to existing sprinkler systems. Where a separate sprinkler
system exists in a building and such sprinkler system was installed prior to
December 15, 1956, and the sprinkler system was approved by the Department of
Buildings and is in good operating condition, piping for the sprinklers in
rooms may be taken from the existing sprinkler riser at each story, provided
the riser has a diameter of not less than one inch. The size of the branch
piping between the sprinklers and the riser shall be determined according to
the number of sprinklers supplied but shall not be required to be greater in
size than 1 1/4 inches in diameter, except that if the length of pipe exceeds
50 feet, the entire length of pipe shall be increased one pipe size for each 50
feet of length. Existing risers and mains of sprinkler systems shall not be
required to be increased. The sprinkler heads installed in rooms shall not be
counted in determining whether a siamese hose connection is required.
   (e)   Installation where no sprinkler system exists. Where it is required
that sprinklers be provided in rooms and there is no existing approved
sprinkler system in the building, a system of sprinklers shall be provided
which shall conform to the requirements of the rules specified in subdivision
(a) of this section and to the requirements of these rules in the same manner
as if such sprinklers were existing except that mains shall be not less than 1
1/4 inches in diameter and that a siamese hose connection shall not be
required, and except as follows: Where the existing water supply piping is
tested at any location within the dwelling and discharges at least 20 gallons
of water per minute, at a flow pressure of not less than 10 pounds per square
inch at the point of delivery, the existing house water supply main may be used
provided the diameter of the main is not less than 3/4 inch, and provided a
static pressure of at least 15 pounds per square inch is provided at the
highest sprinkler. In such case, a riser for the sprinkler system shall be
connected to the water main not more than 12 inches from the point where the
main enters the building and on the house side of the main house control valve.
No additional branch control valves shall be permitted. The size of the riser
shall be determined by the number of sprinkler heads as required by the rules
specified in subdivision (a) of this section, except that the riser shall not
be required to be more than 1 1/4 inches in diameter regardless of the number
of sprinkler heads provided. The size of branches shall be determined by the
number of sprinkler heads, except that branches shall not be required larger
than 1 1/4 inches in size. Risers and branches provided for the sprinkler
system shall be used for no other purpose.
§ 29-09 Installation of Chlorinated Poly Vinyl Chloride (CPVC) Sprinkler Pipe
and Fittings.
   (a)   Storage and handling. CPVC piping shall be stored and carried in the
original shipment containers whenever possible. Reasonable care should be
exercised in handling the pipes. If improper handling results in splits, gouges
or cuts and scratches that are not superficial in nature, the damaged section
shall be cut out and discarded. Pipes must be covered with non-transparent
material when stored outdoors without the original containers.
   (b)   Safety precautions. All solvent cements and primers for CPVC piping
are flammable and shall not be used or stored near heat, spark or open flames.
Cement shall be stored in closed containers at temperatures between 40°F
(4.4°C) and 110°F (43°C). They shall be used only with adequate ventilation.
Containers shall be kept tightly closed when not in use and covered as much as
possible when in use.
   (c)   Certification. Individuals installing CPVC piping shall be trained and
certified by the manufacturer. Documentation of such certification of the
individual shall be on the job site at all times when installation work is
performed.
   (d)   Installation.
      (1)   General. Sprinkler piping systems shall be laid out so that the
piping is not located adjacent to heat producing sources such as light fixtures
and ballasts, steam lines, etc. which can produce an ambient temperature
exceeding 150°F (66°C). CPVC pipes shall not be threaded, grooved or drilled.
      (2)   Concealed installation.
         (i)   For concealed installation, the minimum protection shall consist
of one layer of 3/8" (10mm) gypsum wallboard or a suspended membrane ceiling
with lay-in panels or tiles having a weight of not less than 0.35 pounds per
square foot (1.71kg/m 2 ) when installed with metallic support grids, or 1/2"
(13mm) plywood pipe enclosure. Plywood used for pipe enclosure shall be fire-
retardant treated when used in buildings of non-combustible construction.
         (ii)   When pipes and fittings are installed in a plenum space, they
shall not be positioned directly over open ventilation grills.
         (iii)   System risers shall not be installed exposed, and shall be
provided with minimum protection for concealed installation as stated above.
      (3)   Exposed installation.
         (i)   Exposed sprinkler piping shall be installed below a smooth,
flat, horizontal ceiling construction. Positioning of sprinkler heads relative
to obstructions such as, but not limited to, beams, light fixtures or
decorations shall be in accordance with Reference Standard RS 17-2, 17-2A and
17-2B.
         (ii)   Only quick-response sprinkler heads shall be used on exposed
piping.
         (iii)   Deflectors of pendent sprinklers when installed shall be not
more than 4" (102mm) from the ceiling, and sidewall sprinklers not more than 6"
(152mm) from the ceiling and not more than 4" (102mm) from the sidewall.
         (iv)   Upright quick-response sprinklers when installed on exposed
piping shall meet the following conditions:
            (a)   The deflectors shall be not more than 4" (102mm) from the
ceiling.
            (b)   The maximum temperature rating shall be 155°F (68°C).
            (c)   The maximum distance from the ceiling to the centerline of
the main run of pipe shall be 7 1/2" (191mm).
            (d)   The maximum distance from the centerline of a sprinkler head
to a hanger shall be 3" (76mm).
      (4)   Hangers and supports. The pipe hangers shall comply with all the
requirements of RS 17-2, 17-2A and 17-2B. The hanger shall not have rough or
sharp edges which come in contact with the pipe. Hangers shall not bind the
pipe from movement.
         (i)   The support spacing shall be as shown on the following tables
and diagram:
Hangers and Supports 
Nominal Pipe Size    Maximum Support Spacing
Inches (millimeters) Feet   (meters)
1 3/4  (19)          5 1/2  (1.675)
1 3/4  (25)          6 1/2  (1.830)
1 1/4  (32)          6 1/2  (1.980)
1 1/2  (38)          7 1/2  (2.135)
2 1/2  (51)          8 1/2  (2.440)
2 1/2  (64)          9 1/2  (2.745)
3 1/2  (76)          10 1/2 (3.050)
 
Table A
Maximum Support Spacing Distance End Line Sprinkler Head Drop Elbow
 
Nominal Pipe Size (In)   Less than 100 psi (689 More than 100 psi (689 kPa)
                         kPa)
3/4" (19 mm)             9" (229 mm)            6" (152 mm)
1" (25 mm)               12" (305 mm)           9" (229 mm)
1 1/4" (32 mm)           16" (406 mm)           12" (305 mm)
1 1/2" - 3" (38 - 76 mm) 24" (610 mm)           12" (305 mm)
 
Table B
Maximum Support Spacing Distance Inline Sprinkler Head Drop Tee
 
Nominal Pipe Size (In)   Less than 100 psi (689 More than 100 psi (689 kPa)
                         kPa)
3/4" (19 mm)             4' (1.220 m)           3' (0.915 m)
1" (25 mm)               5' (1.525 m)           4' (1.220 m)
1 1/4" (32 mm)           6' (1.830 m)           5' (1.525 m)
1 1/2" - 3" (38 - 76 mm) 7' (2.135 m)           7' (2.135 m)
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1e024518ebfb3921ec38bc2ecfa58f65299ca12d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-50.gif]
 
         (ii)   Vertical pipes shall be supported at each floor level or at 10
feet (3.050m) intervals whichever is less.
         (iii)   Other methods of pipe support shall be as recommended by the
manufacturer.
      (5)   Pipe cutting. Pipes shall be cut with a wheel-type plastic-tubing
cutter. If any indication of damage or cracking is evident cut off at least 2"
(51mm) beyond any visible crack. Burrs and filings can prevent contact between
pipe and fittings during assembly, and must be removed from the outside and
inside of the pipe. A slight bevel shall be placed at the end of the pipe to
ease entry of the pipe into the socket.
      (6)   Pipe joints.
         (i)   Primer and cement application. The pipe and fittings shall be
clean and free of any moisture and debris. Primer and cement shall be applied
to the joining surfaces using an applicator. Puddling of cement or primer on or
within fitting and pipe must be avoided. When cementing in temperatures below
40°F (4.4°C) make certain cement has not gelled. Gelled cement must be
discarded. A bead of cement should be evident around the pipe and fitting
juncture. If this bead is not continuous around the socket shoulder, it should
be rejected and the joint must be cut out, discarded and begun again.
         (ii)   Set and cure time. The assembly must be allowed to set, without
any stress on the joint, in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations,
which may vary from 1 to 5 minutes depending upon the pipe size and
temperature. Refer to manufacturer's recommendation for minimum cure times
prior to pressure testing.
      (7)   Sprinkler installation. Sprinklers shall be installed only after
all pipes and fittings, including sprinkler head adopters, are solvent welded
to the piping system and allowed to cure for a minimum of 30 minutes. Sprinkler
head fittings should be visually inspected and probed with a wooden dowel to
insure that the waterway and threads are clear of any excess cement. Only
Teflon tape or equivalent approved by the Commissioner shall be used when
installing the sprinkler heads. If a leak is detected on the sprinkler head
drop when the system is pressure tested, the sprinkler head must be removed and
the joint redone before reinstalling the head.
      (8)   Firestopping. Pipe penetration through fire rated construction
shall be firestopped as per § 27-343 of the Building Code.
   (e)   Hydrostatic pressure testing. After the installation is completed and
cured, the system shall be pressure tested as per § 27-967 of the Building
Code. Air or compressed gas must never be used for pressure testing.
Chapter 30: Storage of Certain Waste Materials
§ 30-01 Enclosures of Premises Used for Automobile Wrecking, Storage of Scrap
Metal, Junk, Scrap Paper or Rags, Storage of Lumber, and Building Material or
Contractors' Yards.
   (a)   All existing or hereafter established yards or areas used for
automobile wrecking, storage of scrap metal, junk, scrap paper or rags,
including sorting of same, storage of lumber and other building materials, and
open contractors' yards, unless the use is conducted entirely within a building
enclosed on all sides, shall be completely enclosed by a solid fence or wall,
of suitable uniform material and color at least eight feet high conforming to
these rules, the Administrative Code and the applicable provisions of the
Zoning Resolution.
   (b)   Fences or walls shall be constructed or painted uniformly with one
color.
   (c)   No material or racks shall be placed outside of, nor extend above the
height of, the enclosing wall or fence.
   (d)   Fences and walls shall be maintained in good condition and appearance,
and weakened or broken parts shall be repaired or replaced. Where paint has
peeled or weathered to disclose the material under the paint or where the paint
is dirty or faded, the wall or fence shall be repainted. Paint shall cover
completely the material underneath.
   (e)   Walls or fences shall not encroach upon the public street nor upon the
adjoining property.
   (f)   The following establishments are exempt from the requirements of these
rules:
      (1)   Electrical, glazing, heating, painting, paper hanging, plumbing,
roofing, or ventilating contractors' establishments, open or enclosed with open
storage limited to 5,000 square feet of lot area.
      (2)   Fuel, ice, coal, or wood sales, open or enclosed limited to 5,000
square feet of area per establishment.
§ 30-02 Open Lots Used for Storage or Sale of Motor Vehicles.
   (a)   General.
      (1)   (i)   These rules shall apply to all open premises used for the
storage or sale of more than four motor vehicles except as otherwise noted,
including public parking lots, motor vehicle sales lots, accessory open parking
spaces, etc. hereafter established and to all such existing premises hereafter
enlarged or changed in location.
         (ii)   Before any premises is occupied for the storage or sale of
motor vehicles, plans or diagrams and application shall be filed with the
Department of Buildings by an applicant and a Certificate of Occupancy obtained
from the Department. Application shall be made on forms furnished by the
Department. Such Certificate of Occupancy shall contain inter alia, the maximum
number of vehicles to be accommodated and the type of vehicle (private
passenger or commercial).
      (2)   An application for or including an open parking lot shall be
accompanied by a plan showing:
         (i)   dimensions of the plot and its location in relation to adjoining
streets;
         (ii)   any structure existing or to be erected on the plot;
         (iii)   the relative elevations of the parking area, curbs and
adjoining yards or courts;
         (iv)   the nature of the walls of adjoining structures, if any, i.e.,
whether masonry, frame, metal, etc.;
         (v)   retaining walls to be built;
         (vi)   retaining walls and open spaces, if any, on adjoining premises;
         (vii)   existing curb cuts and fences;
         (viii)   method of providing drainage of the lot;
         (ix)   material used to surface lot;
         (x)   etc. The application shall also submit such other information as
may be requested by the Commissioner.
      (3)   (i)   Construction of curb cuts and sidewalks shall comply with the
provisions of § 27-558 of the Administrative Code. No Certificate of Occupancy
shall be issued unless a drop curb permit has been obtained.
         (ii)   Curb cuts must be a minimum of five feet from the intersection
of two street lines.
         (iii)   For passenger vehicles with a capacity of not more than nine
persons, the minimum width of a curb cut shall be 10 feet including splays, and
the minimum width of all entrances and driveways leading to parking spaces
shall be eight feet. For all other motor vehicles the minimum width of all
driveways shall be 10 feet.
         (iv)   No motor vehicle may be stored or parked in any location where
it would obstruct a required window or required exit.
      (4)   Openings in enclosures shall be restricted to vehicular entrances
and exits on the street frontages. The width of a vehicular entrance and exit
shall not exceed the length of the curb cut plus eight feet on each side or 46
feet, whichever is smaller.
      (5)   (i)   Open parking lots shall be graded to conform approximately to
the elevation of the abutting sidewalks and properties and shall be maintained
so that no drainage will flow onto abutting sidewalks and adjoining properties.
Grade separation between the parking lot and properties may be established if
masonry retaining walls approved by the Commissioner are installed.
         (ii)   No resurfacing of porous surfaces shall be done which would
increase the thickness to more than 1 1/2 inches after compaction. Maintenance
repairs to maintain level surface or to insure adequate drainability of porous
surfaces shall be preceded by breaking up and removal of existing asphaltic
concrete. The Commissioner of Buildings may require suitable tests to be
submitted of the materials used.
         (iii)   The entrance and exit driveways between the curb line and the
open parking lot shall be paved in accordance with the provisions of § 27-558
of the Administrative Code. The width of the driveway shall be the width of the
opening in the enclosure.
      (6)   A sign which does not comply with all the requirements of the
Administrative Code and the Zoning Resolution shall not be erected or
maintained. Signs which may be erected shall be made secure, neatly lettered
and properly maintained.
      (7)   (i)   An open parking lot shall be occupied and used for the
purpose stated on the Certificate of Occupancy; no other use, occupancy or
service shall be conducted on the premises.
         (ii)   Space used for parking shall be entirely within the lot lines
of the premises. Vehicles shall not encroach upon the sidewalks. Where a zoning
restriction limits parking to a portion of the plot, the limit of the parking
area shall be defined by a fence, wall milling or screening erected and
maintained to the satisfaction of the Commissioner.
         (iii)   Every open parking lot shall be maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition. The accumulation of rubbish or the storage of any kind of
junk or waste is prohibited. Where a wood frame shelter, wood fence or railing
are permitted, they shall be painted periodically in neat, workmanlike manner
and shall be properly maintained.
   (b)   Additional rules to be applied where there are 10 or more motor
vehicles.
      (1)   Curb cuts shall conform to the requirements of § 27-480(b), except
for additional street frontage over 100 feet, there may be an additional curb
cut for each 50 feet of frontage or major fraction thereof.
      (2)   (i)   The premises shall have an enclosure on all interior lot
lines and on street lines consisting of a substantial woven wire fence, iron
picket fence, or masonry wall. A wood fence or railing may be acceptable at the
discretion of the Commissioner in sparsely settled areas or outlying sections
of the City. All enclosures shall be substantial and at least four feet high
but may be omitted in cases where masonry walls of adjoining buildings abut the
parking space. Such fences shall be installed in a permanent manner.
         (ii)   Bumpers shall be situated not less than one foot from adjacent
property liens when vehicles are parked parallel to such adjacent property
lines. Bumpers shall be situated not less than four feet from adjacent property
lines when parked other than parallel to such adjacent property lines.
         (iii)   A steel guard rail or other substantial barrier designed in
accordance with the provisions of § 27-558(b) of the Administrative Code which
will prevent any part of a vehicle from extending across a property line, may
be accepted m lieu of bumpers.
      (3)   (i)   Open parking lots which are to be operated during any portion
of the time from 6 p.m. through 6 a.m. shall be adequately illuminated, and the
minimum illumination shall be one-tenth of one watt per square foot of parking
area, distributed over the entire area. Lights shall be provided with
reflectors arranged so that the illumination is directed downward and away from
adjacent buildings. Floodlights may also be used where such floodlights do not
project light upon adjacent or nearby property.
         (ii)   For a public parking lot, an attendant's shelter conforming to
the Construction Classification I-E of § 27-271 of the Administrative Code, 100
square feet or less in area may be erected three feet from a lot line with no
fire rating of the exterior walls required. Within three (3) feet, a fire
resistive rating of at least two hours is required for the wall nearest the lot
line.
         (iii)   Where there is an attendant's shelter, a copy of the
Certificate of Occupancy shall be posted and maintained under glass in the
shelter and a copy of the plan or diagram approved by the Department of
Buildings shall be kept on the premises. Certified, reduced size, legible
copies may be used for this purpose.
      (4)   Where strict compliance with any of these rules and regulations
will create unnecessary hardship or will serve no useful purpose, the
Commissioner may modify any part of these rules and regulations in a specific
case if, in his opinion, the public health, safety and general welfare will not
be endangered thereby, and such modification is in conformity with the general
purpose of these rules and regulations.
   (c)   Parking lots for four or fewer motor vehicles. Where there is
hereafter established, provision for 4 or less motor vehicles, the premises
shall comply with the applicable provisions of the Zoning Resolution in
addition to sections of the above rules numbered (a)(1)(ii), (a)(2), (a)(3)(i),
(a)(3)(ii), (a)(3)(iii), (a)(3)(iv)-(a)(5)(i), (a)(5)(ii)-(6)-(a)(7)(i), (a)(7)
(ii), (a)(7)(iii)-(b)(4).
   (d)   Existing open parking lots. Existing Open Parking Lots shall comply
with the condition of their prior approval and with sections of the above rules
numbered (a)(3)(i), (a)(3)(iv)-(a)(4)-(a)(5)(i), (a)(5)(ii), (a)(5)(iii)-(a)(7)
(ii), (a)(7)(iii)-(b)(1)-(b)(2), (b)(2)(ii), (b)(2)(iii)-(b)(3)(i)-(b)(4).
Note: Before any business is conducted on any premises coming within the scope
of these regulations, the person conducting or maintaining the business shall
obtain such licenses as may be necessary from the Commissioner of Licenses,
Department of Consumer Affairs, as required by § 20-321 of the Administrative
Code. In addition to compliance with these rules, open parking lots shall
comply with applicable provisions of the Zoning Resolution and such other laws
as may apply. The following rules previously promulgated by the Commissioner of
Buildings will be repealed:
      (1)   Public Parking Lots, filed with City Clerk October 13, 1964.
      (2)   Use of Vacant Land for Outdoor Motor Vehicle Sales Lot, filed with
City Clerk April 22, 1955.
      (3)   Parking Spaces Accessory to Permissible Uses, filed with City
Clerk, January 11, 1955.
      (4)   Accessory Garages and Parking Spaces for Dwellings, filed with the
City Clerk January 22, 1951.
      (5)   Open Parking Lots – Proposed Rules as published in November, 1968.
Chapter 34: Electrical Code Rules
Subchapter A: Phase-in of Electrical Code Technical Standards
§ 34-01 Phase-in of New Standards for Electrical Work. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 6/11/2019, eff. 7/11/2019)
§ 34-02 Review of Applications for Electrical Permits and Certificates of
Electrical Inspection During the Phase-in Period. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 6/11/2019, eff. 7/11/2019)
§ 34-03 Temporary Certification to Perform Low Voltage Electrical Work.
[Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 6/11/2019, eff. 7/11/2019)
§ 34-04 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
   Electrical Code. The term "Electrical Code" means Chapter 3 of Title 27 of
the Administrative Code of the City of New York. Such term shall include the
Electrical Code Technical Standards.
   Electrical Code Technical Standards. The term "Electrical Code Technical
Standards" means the edition of the National Fire Protection Association NFPA
70 National Electrical Code ("NEC") currently adopted by New York City with
such amendments as may be enacted by local law.
§ 34-05 Electrical Advisory Board. [Renumbered]
(Renumbered* City Record 6/11/2019, eff. 7/11/2019)
* Editor's note: See 1 RCNY §
4000-01 for current provisions.
§ 34-06 Electrical Code Revision and Interpretation Committee.
In accordance with section 27-3005(a)(7) of the Administrative Code, the
Commissioner shall appoint a special committee to be known as the "electrical
code revision and interpretation committee". The committee may propose to the
commissioner local amendments to the NEC and shall, upon request, provide
interpretations and clarifications of the Electrical Code Technical Standards.
The number of members and their organizational affiliations shall be at the
discretion of the Commissioner. The members of the committee shall be appointed
annually and shall serve at the pleasure of the Commissioner. The Committee
shall have a Chair, Vice-Chair and Secretary appointed annually by the
Commissioner. All proposed local amendments to the NEC adopted or considered
for adoption by the city shall be submitted to the committee for review.
§ 34-07 Electrical Code Advisory Committee.
In accordance with section 27-3005(a)(7) of the Administrative Code the
Commissioner shall appoint a special committee to be known as the "electrical
code advisory committee". The committee shall advise the Commissioner regarding
the approval of local amendments to the NEC proposed by the Electrical Code
Revision and Interpretation Committee and the implementation of such
amendments, and shall act as a conduit between the Department and the
electrical industry regarding such proposed amendments and their
implementation. The members of the committee shall be appointed annually and
shall serve at the pleasure of the Commissioner. The number of members and
their organizational affiliations shall be at the discretion of the
Commissioner. The Committee shall have a Chair, Vice-Chair and Secretary
appointed annually by the Commissioner. The Commissioner shall submit all local
amendments to the edition of the National Fire Protection Association NFPA 70
NEC currently adopted or being considered for adoption by the city to the
committee for review.
Chapter 35: Electrical Inspection
§ 35-01 Designation of Private Agencies to Perform Electrical Inspections in
the City of New York.
   (a)   Grounds for certification and renewal of certification. The
commissioner may grant and each January thereafter renew certification of
private electrical inspection agencies, provided:
      (1)   the agency applying for certification certifies in writing that
each of the inspectors it shall employ to conduct the inspections permitted by
§ 27-3005(2)(b) of the Administrative Code shall possess five years experience
as an electrician or inspector of electrical installation; or three years of
experience as an electrician or inspector of electrical installation plus two
years of education at an accredited college technical school in a program
emphasizing courses in electrical installations or education toward a
baccalaureate degree in Electrical Engineering or Engineering Technology with
an emphasis on electrical installation or repair. Two of the requisite years of
working experience as an electrician or inspector of electrical installation
shall be experience in the installation of lighting, heating and power.
Experience and education must be acceptable to the Department of Buildings and
is subject to the Commissioner's review and approval; and
      (2)   the agency possesses
         (i)   a general liability insurance policy in excess of $5 million,
and
         (ii)   worker's compensation insurance for its employees and submits
copies of the Insurance Certificates to the Commissioner; and
      (3)   the agency furnishes the names of its inspectors and documentation
supporting the experience required by 1 RCNY §
35-01(a)(1) hereof, and thereafter promptly advises the commissioner of any
changes in personnel affecting the inspection permitted; and
      (4)   the agency prohibits its inspectors and other employees from
accepting any gratuities or other benefit for work performed pursuant to these
regulations and § 27-3005(2)(b) of the Administrative Code; and
      (5)   the agency does not conduct an inspection pursuant to § 27-3005(2)
(b) of the Administrative Code of any work performed by any of its own
officers, employees, or any other person associated with the agency; and
      (6)   the agency has a legal place of business within the city of New
York (P.O. Box not acceptable).
   (b)   Right to deny or revoke certification.
      (1)   The commissioner or his designee may deny or revoke certification
where investigation reveals any of the following:
         (i)   the agency has failed to comply with any of the provisions
enumerated in 1 RCNY §
35-01(a);
         (ii)   the agency has knowingly made false or misleading statements,
or knowingly falsified or allowed to be falsified any certificate, form, signed
statement, application, or report filed with the department, or failed to file
a report required by law or the department or willfully impeded or obstructed
such filing, or induced another person to do so; (iii) the agency engages in
any other conduct evidencing a willful or grossly negligent failure to comply
with provisions of state or local law, or rules or regulations promulgated
pursuant to statutory authority; or
         (iv)   the agency engages in any other conduct evidencing a departure
from the standard or good character applicable to the trade of licensed
electrician.
      (2)   Where the commissioner or his designee, in his or her discretion,
deems the certification of the agency shall be revoked, the agency shall be
entitled to a hearing before the Office of Administrative Trials and Hearings
as provided by rules promulgated by the department.
      (3)   Where the commissioner or his designee, in his or her discretion,
deems that continued certification of the agency would be likely to create a
condition of imminent peril to public safety, the revocation determination
shall be effective immediately. In such an instance, the agency shall be
entitled to a hearing pursuant to 1 RCNY §
35-01(b)(2) at the next available scheduled hearing session before the Office
of Administrative Trials and Hearings.
   (c)   Contractual obligation.
      (1)   A contractual agreement between the agency and the City of New York
is required in order for the agency to perform electrical inspections for the
City of New York.
      (2)   Certification by the Commissioner is a prerequisite for
participation in the contracting process.
§ 35-02 Payment of Fees for Certificates of Electrical Inspection.
   (a)   All applications for a certificate of electrical inspection for
electrical work filed with the Department of Buildings shall specify a
completion date for such work. No certificates of electrical inspection, other
than temporary certificates for electrical service, shall be issued, unless and
until the required total application fee or fees therefor shall have been paid
to the commissioner.
   (b)   The fees required to be paid pursuant to 27-3018(b) of the
Administrative Code shall be paid as follows:
      (1)   The filing fee set forth in 27-3018, subdivision (b) of the
Administrative Code shall be paid upon the filing of the application for a
certificate of electrical inspection.
      (2)   (i)   The licensee shall schedule an inspection within thirty (30)
days after the completion date specified on the application in accordance with
procedures established by the Department. The remainder of the total fee, based
upon the work listed on the application, shall be due and payable upon
completion of the scheduled inspection by the Department. Upon completion of
the inspection and the Department's determination that the work performed is
complete and in compliance with the applicable provisions of the Electrical
Code and upon the Department's having received full payment of applicable fees,
including any additional fee payable under paragraph (4) of this subdivision, a
certificate of electrical inspection shall be issued to the licensee.
         (ii)   if the licensee fails to schedule an inspection in accordance
with Department's procedures within thirty days after the completion date
specified on the application for a certificate of electrical inspection, or
such date as extended by the Department, or cancels a scheduled inspection
appointment with less than forty-eight (48) hours notice, or cancels a
scheduled inspection more than forty-eight (48) hours prior to the inspection
without scheduling an alternative date in accordance with Department
procedures, or fails to provide access for the scheduled inspection, or if upon
inspection it is determined by the Department that the work is not complete, or
the scope of the work exceeds the scope of work indicated on the application or
the work is not in compliance with the Electrical Code, the remainder of the
total fee shall be due and payable immediately.
      (3)   Where the remainder of the total fee is due and payable
immediately, as provided in paragraph (2)(ii) above, the licensee shall
continue to be required to schedule an inspection(s) in the same manner as the
initial inspection until the Department determines that the work performed
conforms with the scope of the work indicated on the application and is in
compliance with the applicable provisions of the Electrical Code. Upon such a
determination and upon the Department's having received full payment of
applicable fees, including any additional fee payable under paragraph (4) of
this subdivision, a certificate of electrical inspection shall be issued to the
licensee.
      (4)   Any additional fee, based on amendments to the original application
that include additional work, must be paid prior to the issuance of a
certificate of electrical inspection.
Chapter 36: Electrical Contractors
§ 36-01 Evaluation of Educational Experience of Applicants for Electrical
Contractor Licenses.
   (a)   Experience. Any applicant for an electrical contractor's license must
have experience in the installation, alteration and repair of wiring and
appliances for electrical light, heat and power in or on buildings as set forth
in New York City Administrative Code § 27-3010. In evaluating this experience,
credit may be given for the educational experience of applicants who have
attended courses in a recognized vocational, industrial or trade school in
electrical wiring, installation and design, or applied electricity.
   (b)   Description of course credit in recognized vocational, industrial or
trade schools in electrical wiring, installation and design, or applied
electricity.
      (1)   A recognized vocational, industrial or trade school in electrical
wiring, installation and design, or applied electricity, is one offering a
comprehensive curriculum of classes and practical laboratories taught in a
logical progression to complete a specific course of study in electricity, as
set forth in the description of the instructional program in residential,
industrial and commercial electricity contained in the New York State Education
Department guidelines for trade and industrial education, or the equivalent as
determined by the Commissioner of Buildings upon the recommendation of the New
York City Electrical License Board.
      (2)   A curriculum year of credit shall be no less than 200 classroom
hours comprised of 20 percent lecture hours and 80 percent practical laboratory
hours, or the equivalent as determined by the Commissioner of Buildings upon
the recommendation of the New York City Electrical License Board.
§ 36-02 Impact of Periods of Unemployment upon Applications for Electrician's
Licenses.
   (a)   Applicability. Pursuant to New York City Administrative Code § 27-
3010, any applicant for a master or special electrician's license shall have
had, immediately preceding his or her application, at least seven and one-half
(7 1/2) years of experience in the installation, alteration and repair of
wiring and appliances for electric light, heat and power in or on buildings. In
evaluating this experience, the Department recognizes that periods of
unemployment may make continuous employment for the seven and one-half (7 1/2)
years preceding his or her application impossible. Thus, in evaluating whether
a master or special electrician's license applicant has sufficient work
experience, the Department may exclude periods of unemployment when considering
whether work experience immediately preceded the application date, as set forth
in this rule.
   (b)   In accordance with the above, the Commissioner may grant a master or
special electrician's license application where the applicant's work experience
has occurred within the ten years immediately preceding the application date,
if: (i) the applicant has had at least seven and one-half years of such
experience, and during such time, a minimum of seventy-five hundred (7,500)
hours or the equivalent experience in the legal installation, alteration and
repair of wiring and appliances for electric light, heat and power in or on
buildings in such ten years immediately preceding the application date; and
(ii) during the two calendar years immediately preceding the application date,
the applicant has been employed in the legal installation, alteration and
repair of wiring and appliances for electric light, heat and power in or on
buildings for at least a total of twelve months.
   (c)   Subdivision (b) shall not apply to electrician's license applicants
whose work experience includes electrical work that was not supervised by a
licensed electrician, or that was otherwise illegal.
   (d)   Nothing in this rule shall affect how credit for the seven and one-
half (7 1/2) years of work experience is computed pursuant to New York City
Administrative Code § 27-3010(a) - (e).
Chapter 38: Ventilation
§ 38-01 Ventilation of Garage Spaces Below Grade. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 11/7/2022, eff. 12/7/2022)
Chapter 39: Cooling Towers and Evaporative Condensers
§ 39-01 Cooling Towers and Evaporative Condensers. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 7/13/2016, eff. 8/12/2016)
Chapter 40: Installation and Maintenance of Gas-Fueled Water and Space Heaters
in All Portions of Dwellings Used or Occupied for Living Purposes
Subchapter A: Scope
§ 40-01 Installation and Maintenance of Gas-Fueled Water and Space Heaters in
all Portions of Dwellings Used or Occupied for Living Purposes.
These rules shall govern the installation and maintenance of gas-fueled space
and water heaters in the residence portions of multiple dwellings in the City
of New York, including but not limited to the installation of such devices in
multiple dwellings which are installed in lieu of centrally supplied heat and
hot water under the provisions of § 27-2028 and § 27-2032 of the Administrative
Code and in one and two family residences not heated by a central heating
system.
Subchapter B: Departmental Procedure
§ 40-11 Applications and Plans. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 11/7/2022, eff. 12/7/2022)
§ 40-12 Examination and Approval of Applications. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 11/7/2022, eff. 12/7/2022)
§ 40-13 Commencement of Work. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 11/7/2022, eff. 12/7/2022)
§ 40-14 Inspection of Gas-Fueled Space and Water Heaters. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 11/7/2022, eff. 12/7/2022)
§ 40-15 Issuing Approvals. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 11/7/2022, eff. 12/7/2022)
Subchapter C: Where Heaters May Be Used
§ 40-21 Substitution for Central Heating or Hot Water Supply. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 11/7/2022, eff. 12/7/2022)
Subchapter D: Installation of Gas-Fueled Heaters
§ 40-31 Required Approvals of Appliances. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 11/7/2022, eff. 12/7/2022)
§ 40-32 Prohibited Types of Water Heaters. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 11/7/2022, eff. 12/7/2022)
§ 40-33 Number and Capacity of Gas-Fueled Heaters.
   (a)   Where gas-fueled heaters are permitted to be installed in lieu of the
required centrally supplied heat, each "living room," as such term is defined
in subdivision 18 of § 4 of the Multiple Dwelling Law, shall be heated by a
heater placed in such room or in an adjoining room which connects with it
except that a room whose exterior walls are exposed only on a fully enclosed
inner court may be heated by a heater located one room removed from such room.
For this purpose, an inner court shall be considered fully enclosed even though
some of the enclosure walls are located on an adjoining lot. The aggregate
input capacity of the heater or heaters installed in any apartment shall not be
less than the number of living room times ten thousand (10,000) British thermal
units per hour.
   (b)   Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision (a) of this section,
there shall be installed and continuously maintained by the owner in each
apartment gas-fueled heaters in such numbers and at such locations as shall be
sufficient to heat such apartment to the minimum temperature which would be
required to be maintained therein by the owner under the provisions of the
Health Code of the city relating to the heating of buildings, if such owner
were required to furnish centrally supplied heat in such apartment.
   (c)   The requirements of subdivision (a) and (b) of this section are not
applicable when an apartment in a multiple dwelling is heated by gas-fueled
space heater or heaters which were installed by a tenant prior to December 18,
1957, and in a one or two family dwelling prior to October 1, 1964 and owned by
such tenant or successor tenant.
§ 40-34 Capacity of Water Heaters. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 11/7/2022, eff. 12/7/2022)
§ 40-35 Shut-Off Devices. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 11/7/2022, eff. 12/7/2022)
§ 40-36 Gas Piping. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 11/7/2022, eff. 12/7/2022)
§ 40-37 Appliances in Sleeping Rooms.
   (a)   Gas-fueled water heaters shall not be installed in a room occupied for
sleeping purposes, in bathrooms, or in any occupied room normally kept closed.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful to install a gas-fueled space heater in a room
occupied for sleeping purposes except when the space heater is so designed,
installed and operated for it:
      (1)   Obtains combustion air directly from the outside of the building or
through a duct leading to the outside.
      (2)   It vents directly to space outside of the building other than an
inner court, or is connected through a flue or outlet pipe with an outside
chimney which conforms with the requirements of Subchapter 15 of Chapter 1 of
Title 27 of the Administrative Code (Building Code). A flue in an existing
brick chimney may be used if it is in good condition and tests show that it
will provide adequate draft.
§ 40-38 Clearances from Combustible Materials. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 11/7/2022, eff. 12/7/2022)
§ 40-39 Venting of Gas Appliances. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 11/7/2022, eff. 12/7/2022)
§ 40-40 Gas-Fueled Space Heaters Installed Prior to December 18, 1957.
[Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 11/7/2022, eff. 12/7/2022)
§ 40-41 Gas-Fueled Water Heaters Installed Prior to December 18, 1957.
[Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 11/7/2022, eff. 12/7/2022)
§ 40-42 Maintenance of Space and Water Heaters. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 11/7/2022, eff. 12/7/2022)
§ 40-43 Existing Appliances in Ineligible Locations. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 11/7/2022, eff. 12/7/2022)
§ 40-44 [Reserved.]
§ 40-45 Variations. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 11/7/2022, eff. 12/7/2022)
Chapter 41: Venting of Gas Water Heaters and Other Gas Appliances In Multiple
Dwellings
§ 41-01 Venting of Gas Water Heaters and Other Gas Appliances in Multiple
Dwellings.
   (a)   This section shall apply to vents for gas burning water heaters within
apartments of multiple dwellings as required by § 27-887(d) of the
Administrative Code (Building Code) and to gas appliances in rooms or spaces
without a window opening to the outer air, used for living or sleeping within a
multiple dwelling, where required by the provisions of § 64 of the Multiple
Dwelling Law.
   (b)   Vents shall consist of galvanized iron of not less than No. 26 U.S.
gauge in thickness, cement-asbestos pipe, metal-asbestos pipe, enamelled steel
pipe of a quality acceptable to the Department as heat and corrosion resistant,
or other materials satisfactory to the superintendent.
   (c)   Vents shall have a cross-sectional area at least equal to the area of
the vent outlet of the appliance and shall have a minimum diameter or dimension
of three (3) inches.
   (d)   Vents shall lead to a flue or to the outer air as follows:
      (1)   Several vents may be connected to a flue if the cross-sectional
area of the flue is equal to or greater than the total cross-sectional area of
all vents so connected. No vent from a water heater or other gas appliance
within an apartment may be connected to a flue serving a central heating plant.
      (2)   Vents may be connected to a flue serving appliances burning other
than gas fuel provided the connection of the gas appliance to the flue is at
least nine (9) inches above the connection of the other heat producing device,
or through a suitable "Y" connection in a common vent pipe of proper diameter.
      (3)   Every flue to which a vent from a gas water heater is attached,
shall extend to a distance of not less than four (4) feet above a flat roof, or
two (2) feet above a pitched roof. Such flues on the exterior of a building,
and the portions of the vent pipes on the exterior of a building, shall consist
of standard water, steam or soil pipe, cement-asbestos pipe, metal-asbestos
pipe, or other corrosion resistant material satisfactory to the Department.
Flues and vent pipes on the exterior of buildings shall be adequately supported
and braced. Flues within buildings shall be constructed as low temperature
chimneys.
      (4)   Vents leading to an outside flue or terminating at the exterior of
the building may pass through the upper part of a window if the vent is
adequately secured in place and provided the vent is so arranged as to give
minimum interference with the operation of the window, provided the area of the
windows in the room after alteration equals or exceeds that required by law.
Vents may also pass through an exterior wall by means of a metal sleeve placed
in the wall. The metal sleeve shall consist of standard water, steam, or soil
pipe, cement-asbestos pipe, or other approved material. The space between the
sleeve and the vent shall be filled with incombustible material.
      (5)   Vent pipes may be terminated at the exterior of an outside wall of
a building in which case the vents shall be turned upward for not less than ten
(10) inches, except that for any vent pipes installed after June 30, 1955, the
vertical rise of the vent pipe shall not be less than one and one-third times
the length of the horizontal run of the vent pipe. No vent pipe shall terminate
below the level of the top of a window unless at least three (3) feet distant
from any part of the window. Vents shall be capped with an approved tee. Vents
on the exterior of a building shall comply with the provisions of paragraph
(4), subdivision (d) of this section as to the material that may be used.
   (e)   Vent pipes shall be installed so as to provide a minimum clearance of
three (3) inches on all sides from combustible material. Vent pipes shall not
pass through a floor unless approved by the superintendent.
   (f)   Where a vent pipe passes through a partition or roof constructed
wholly or in part of combustible material, a ventilated metal thimble not less
than six (6) inches larger in diameter than the pipe, shall be provided. Any
material used to fill the space between the vent pipe and the thimble shall be
incombustible.
   (g)   Every vent pipe serving as a gas water heater shall be provided with a
draft hood unless the water heater has an approved built-in draft hood. The
draft hood shall be approved by a recognized testing laboratory as conforming
to nationally accepted standards. The draft hood shall be installed at the flue
collar or as near to the appliance as possible and in the position for which it
was designed, with reference to horizontal and vertical planes. The relief
opening of the draft hood shall not be obstructed.
   (h)   The horizontal run of vent pipe shall not exceed three-fourths of the
vertical rise of the flue to which the vent is attached. The vent pipe shall be
pitched upward from the water heater with a slope of not less than one-fourth
inch vertically for each foot of horizontal run.
   (i)   No dampers, steel wool or other obstructions shall be placed in any
vent pipe or flue.
   (j)   A permit shall be obtained from the Department of Buildings before any
vertical flue or chimney is constructed.
Chapter 42: Entrance Doors, Locks and Intercommunication Systems
§ 42-01 Entrance Doors, Locks and Intercommunication Systems.
   (a)   Bulkhead doors and scuttles shall have no key locks and shall not be
locked by a key at any time. The only permissible and acceptable means of
securing a bulkhead door or scuttle is by means of a movable bolt or hook on
the inside.
   (b)   Section 15.10(n) of the current departmental rules and regulations in
its last un-numbered paragraph provides as follows: "All passageways required
under these rules shall be not less than seven feet (7'0") in height and not
less than three feet (3'0") in width and shall at all times be kept dear and
unobstructed. Doors and gates at the end of such passageways are prohibited,
except that a door or gate equipped with an approved-type knob or panic bolt
which shall be readily openable from the inside will be permitted at the
building line. Doors and gates provided with key locks or padlocks are
prohibited."
   (c)   Where an entrance door leading from a vestibule to the main entrance
hall or lobby is equipped with one or more automatic self-closing and self-
locking doors, the entrance door from the street to the vestibule need not be
equipped with automatic self-closing and self-locking doors.
   (d)   Every entrance from the street, court, yard or cellar to a class A
multiple dwelling erected or converted after January 1, 1968 containing eight
or more apartments shall be equipped with automatic self-closing and self-
locking doors. Such multiple dwelling, as aforesaid, shall also be equipped
with an intercommunication system to be located at the required main entrance
door.
   (e)   On or after January 1, 1969, every entrance from the street, court,
yard or cellar to a class A multiple dwelling erected or converted prior to
January 1, 1968 containing eight or more apartments, shall be equipped with
automatic self-closing and self-locking doors and shall also be equipped with
an intercommunication system.
   (f)   Every self-locking door required under this section shall be installed
and maintained so as to be readily openable from the inside without the use of
keys.
   (g)   The minimal devices acceptable for the intercommunication system shall
be a bell or buzzer system, or a speaking and listening device to permit
communication by voice between the occupant of each apartment and a person
outside such required main entrance door, and a return buzzer mechanism to
release or open the lock to the aforesaid required door.
   (h)   The bell and intercommunication system shall be located at the
required main entrance door so that a person may readily reach the door when
the unlocking buzzer is activated.
   (i)   No push button device shall be more than six feet from the floor and
the speaking and listening device shall be installed to be not less than four
feet and not more than five feet from the floor.
   (j)   The device or devices for the intercommunication system installed in
the apartment shall be readily accessible to the occupant.
   (k)   The device or devices for the intercommunication system installed
hereunder under shall be of a type and kind approved by the Department of
Buildings or previously approved by the Board of Standards and Appeals.
   (l)   Devices which have been previously installed and which are in good
condition and performing in an adequate manner may, in the discretion of the
department, be accepted.
Chapter 43: Installation of Security Items in Multiple Dwellings
§ 43-01 Installation of Peepholes.
   (a)   These new peepholes, or door interviewers, must bear a label showing
the approval of the Department of Buildings or the previous approval of the
Board of Standards and Appeals.
   (b)   The peepholes must be so located as to enable a person in such housing
unit to view from the inside of the entrance door any person immediately
outside.
   (c)   The distance above the inside finished floor to the center of the
peephole shall be approximately 5 feet.
   (d)   The cutout shall not affect the adequacy of any stiffening member of
the door.
   (e)   Peepholes installed prior to the enactment of the legislation will be
acceptable unless the cutout for the peephole has affected the adequacy of any
stiffening member of the door.
§ 43-02 Installation of Two 50 Watt Lights at Front Entrance Way.
   (a)   All electrical work shall be done in accordance with the requirements
and approval of the Department of Buildings.
   (b)   The installation shall be a separate circuit or connected to the house
line servicing the public halls.
   (c)   The lights shall be encased in a metal guard or shatterproof globe.
   (d)   The lights of at least 50 watts of incandescent or equivalent
illumination shall be placed on each side of the front entrance-way at a height
of between 7 to 11 feet above floor level adjacent to such entrance-way and
adequate to light same.
§ 43-03 Installation of Viewing Mirrors in Self-Service Elevators.
   (a)   Mirrors shall be made of polished metal.
   (b)   Mirrors shall be of such size and so located on the car wall opposite
the car entrance so that a person entering the elevator may have a complete
view of the interior of the car. It shall not be necessary to provide a view of
the floor and ceiling.
   (c)   The mirror shall be so located as not to interfere with or endanger
passengers in the elevator.
   (d)   Mirrors shall be mounted and secured so that they cannot be readily
removed by the public.
§ 43-04 Installation of Lights in Rear Yards, Side Yards, Front Yards and
Courts.
   (a)   All electrical work shall be done in accordance with requirements and
approval of the Department of Buildings.
   (b)   The installation shall be a separate circuit or connected to the house
line servicing the public halls.
   (c)   The light or lights, shall be of at least 40 watts of incandescent or
equivalent illumination.
   (d)   The lights shall be so located as to adequately light all portions of
the rear yards, side yards, front yards and courts.
   (e)   Lights are not required in an inner court that is accessible only from
the interior of the building and to which access is restricted for clean-out
purposes.
Chapter 45: Building Permit Application Procedures
§ 45-01 Microfilming of Application Folders and Associated Documentation for
Temporary and Final Certificates of Occupancy and Letters of Completion.
[Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 11/7/2022, eff. 12/7/2022)
Chapter 46: Authorized Representatives
§ 46-01 Persons Authorized to Perform Inspections, Tests, Certifications, and
Other Functions on Behalf of the Department. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 11/7/2022, eff. 12/7/2022)
Chapter 47: Licensed Oil-Burning Equipment Installers
§ 47-01 Requirement for a seal for use by licensed oil-burning equipment
installers.
Editor's note: renumbered as 1 RCNY §
104-25.
Chapter 49: Outdoor Signs
Subchapter A: General Provisions
§ 49-01 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
   Accessory sign. The term "accessory sign" shall mean an accessory sign
within the meaning and intent of the term "accessory use" as defined in § 12-10
of the Zoning Resolution.
   Advertising sign. The term "advertising sign" shall mean an "advertising
sign" as defined in § 12-10 of the Zoning Resolution.
   Affiliate outdoor advertising companies. The term "affiliate outdoor
advertising companies" or "affiliate OACs" shall mean two or more outdoor
advertising companies interrelated with one another such that one or more of
such outdoor advertising companies maintains an interest in the others as
hereinafter described: An outdoor advertising company ("OAC") (A) has an
interest in another OAC (B) where one or more of the following are present:
      (1)   A owns 10 percent or more of the voting stock of B, where B is a
stock-issuing entity;
      (2)   A is a general partner in B, where B is a partnership or joint
venture;
      (3)   A has an ownership interest of 10 percent or more in B, in a form
not otherwise described in (1) or (2) above, where such ownership interest
confers a power or right to vote or exercise similar control over the affairs
of B proportionate to such ownership interest;
      (4)   A has one or more officers in common with B;
      (5)   A has one or more key managers (chief executive officer; chief
financial officer; chief operating officer; or persons with equivalent
functions, irrespective of organizational title) in common with B;
      (6)   A, by agency or other agreement, whether written or oral, conducts
part or all of B's outdoor advertising business or has the power or right to
direct part or all of B's outdoor advertising business;
      (7)   A, by way of advertising, promotions or other methods, holds itself
out as having the authority to, via a shared inventory arrangement, sell or
lease space on signs situated on buildings or premises within the city, for
outdoor advertising purposes, where the ownership, leasehold, license or other
form of site control with respect to such signs is held by B. For the purposes
of this chapter both A and B shall be known and referred to individually by the
term "affiliate OAC" or "affiliate" and collectively by the term "affiliate
OACs" or "affiliates." Affiliates shall be jointly and severally liable for
compliance with this chapter. Where affiliation is established only by virtue
of a shared inventory of signs, sign structures or sign locations as described
in example (7) above, responsibility for compliance and any resulting liability
shall be limited to the extent of such shared inventory.
   Affiliated outdoor advertising company. The term "affiliated outdoor
advertising company" or "affiliated OAC" shall mean a single OAC that has
authorized a responsible affiliate to act on its behalf for registration in
accordance with this chapter.
   Applicant. The term "applicant" shall mean an OAC that has filed an
application for registration with the Department as required by § 26-260 of the
Administrative Code and Subchapter B of this chapter. Except where application
is made pursuant to 1 RCNY §
49-12(a)(3), the party holding fee or the dominant lease to a sign, sign
structure or sign location, shall act as the applicant. With respect to an
application for registration filed on behalf of an affiliated OAC the term
"applicant" shall mean the responsible affiliate.
   Approach. The term "approach" as found within the description of arterial
highways indicated within appendix C of the Zoning Resolution, shall mean that
portion of a roadway connecting the local street network to a bridge or tunnel
and from which there is no entry or exit to such network.
   Arterial highways. The term "arterial highways" shall mean arterial highways
as defined by § 26-253(c) of the Administrative Code.
   Commissioner. The term "Commissioner" shall mean the Commissioner of
Buildings or his/her designee.
   Days. The term "days" shall mean calendar days.
   Department. The term "Department" shall mean the Department of Buildings.
   Material change. The term "material change" shall mean a change in
information supplied to the Department on an application form where the
Department has indicated on such form by asterisk or otherwise that the
information to be supplied is considered by the Department to be significant.
   Non-conforming sign. The term "non-conforming sign" shall mean a sign that
is "non-conforming" as defined by § 12-10 of the Zoning Resolution. The extent
of the "non-conforming" use status shall be as set forth in §§ 32-66, 42-55,
and 42-58 of the Zoning Resolution.
   Outdoor advertising business. The term "outdoor advertising business" shall
mean "outdoor advertising business" as defined by § 26-259(c) of the
Administrative Code. For the purposes of this rule, property owners and
managers shall not be considered engaged in the outdoor advertising business
where they are involved strictly to the extent of leasing space on property
they control to an independent registered OAC that has registered the sign
within its sign inventory. Such exclusion shall not apply where the property
owner/manager has any interest in an OAC or role in any aspect of the OAC's
operation or management.
   Outdoor advertising company. The term "outdoor advertising company" or "OAC"
shall mean "outdoor advertising company" as defined by § 26-259(b) of the
Administrative Code.
   Responsible affiliate. The term "responsible affiliate" shall mean the
applicant that is authorized, by written instrument filed with the Department,
to file an application for registration and to otherwise act on behalf of an
affiliated OAC and receive all notices required to be sent under this chapter
on behalf of such affiliated OAC. For the purposes of this chapter any
direction or requirement imposed upon an OAC shall, with respect to an
affiliated OAC, be undertaken by the responsible affiliate on behalf of the
affiliated OAC and such affiliated OAC shall be bound by the act or failure to
act of such responsible affiliate.
   Responsible officer. The term "responsible officer" shall mean an officer or
official of an OAC who is authorized to bind and commit such OAC and any
affiliate(s).
   Sign. The term "sign" shall mean a sign as defined in § 12-10 of the Zoning
Resolution. Such term shall not include any sign erected upon property not
subject to Department jurisdiction. Each sign face shall be a sign.
   Sign inventory. The term "sign inventory" shall mean the list of signs, sign
structures and sign locations under the control of an OAC, responsible
affiliate or affiliated OACs as required and specified by § 26-261 of the
Administrative Code and 1 RCNY §
49-15.
   Sign location. The term "sign location" shall mean sign location as defined
by § 26-259(f) of the Administrative Code.
   Sign structure. The term "sign structure" shall mean the supports or
uprights, including the sign face(s), whether attached to a building or other
structure or freestanding, of a sign.
   Within view. The term "within view" shall mean that part or all of the sign
copy, sign structure, or sign location that is discernable.
   Work permit. The term "work permit" shall mean a permit to erect, alter or
install signs or sign structures issued pursuant to § 27-177 of the
Administrative Code.
§ 49-02 Obligation to Cooperate with Inquiries.
All OACs and all principals thereof, shall cooperate with Department
investigations into the conduct of the outdoor advertising business within the
City of New York, and shall provide prompt, accurate and complete responses to
reasonable inquiries by the Department about the conduct of such business.
§ 49-03 Obligation to Comply with an Order of the Commissioner.
OACs shall be obligated to comply with any order issued by the Commissioner
pursuant to this chapter.
§ 49-04 Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this rule or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance shall for any reason be
adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment
shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of this rule or the
application thereof to other persons or circumstances, but shall be confined in
its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part thereof
directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered and to the person or circumstance involved.
Subchapter B: Registration of Outdoor Advertising Companies
§ 49-11 Effective Dates.
   (a)   On and after the 60th day after the effective date of this chapter, it
shall be unlawful for an OAC to engage in the outdoor advertising business, or,
by way of advertising, promotions or other methods, hold itself out as engaging
in the outdoor advertising business, unless such OAC is registered with and has
been issued a registration number by the Department and such registration has
not expired or been revoked. Notwithstanding the foregoing provision, an OAC
that is in existence on the effective date of this chapter may continue to do
business as an OAC pending the issuance of a registration number if such OAC
has filed a registration application pursuant to 1 RCNY §
49-12 on or prior to the 60th day after the effective date of this chapter and
such application has not been rejected by the Department in accordance with
subdivision c of such section.
   (b)   On and after the 60th day after the effective date of this chapter, it
shall be unlawful for an OAC to sell or otherwise transfer control of a sign,
sign structure, or sign location or any right of such OAC to sell, lease,
market, manage, or otherwise make space on a sign, or sign structure, or at a
sign location available to others for advertising purposes, to an OAC other
than one that is registered in accordance with this chapter and that has been
issued a registration number by the Department and such registration has not
expired or been revoked, or to a OAC that has timely filed for registration
pursuant to 1 RCNY §
49-12 and such application has not been rejected by the Department.
   (c)   On and after the 60th day after the effective date of this chapter it
shall be unlawful to erect, alter, install, maintain, attach, affix, paint on,
or in any other manner represent on a building or premises any sign that is
under the control of an OAC unless such OAC is registered in accordance with
this chapter, and has been issued a registration number by the Department and
such registration has not expired or been revoked or, with respect to an OAC
that is in existence on the effective date of this chapter, such OAC has filed
a registration application pursuant to 1 RCNY §
49-12 on or prior to the 60th day after the effective date of this chapter and
such application has not been rejected by the Department in accordance with
subdivision c of such section.
§ 49-12 Application for Registration.
   (a)   The application for registration or the renewal of registration shall
contain all of the information required by the application form and these
rules. Except where an application is filed pursuant to subsection (3) below,
the party holding fee or the dominant lease to the sign, sign structure or sign
location, shall act as the applicant for registration. An applicant shall:
      (1)   file an application for registration and be issued an OAC
registration number; or,
      (2)   where an affiliated OAC exists, file an application for
registration on behalf of itself and any affiliated OAC only to the extent of
their shared control of any sign(s), sign structure(s), and sign location(s),
and each such shared inventory shall be issued the OAC registration number that
has been assigned to the applicant; or,
      (3)   file a single application for registration on behalf of itself and
every affiliated OAC, including all signs, sign structures, and sign locations
under the control of the applicant and every affiliated OAC. A responsible
officer of the applicant shall certify the completeness and accuracy of the
application and accompanying documents. A responsible officer of the affiliated
OAC shall authorize the applicant to submit an application and act on behalf of
the affiliated OAC. The Department shall act upon the application either by
accepting the application or by notifying the applicant of deficiency in
accordance with subdivision c of this section promptly but not later than 60
days after the date of receipt of the application, except that on or before
such 60th day, the Commissioner may on good cause shown and upon notification
to the applicant, extend such time for an additional 45 days. If the Department
fails to act upon the application within such 60-day period or, where
applicable, within such further 45-day period, the application shall be deemed
accepted.
   (b)   The Department shall accept applications complying with the provisions
of these rules and other applicable law. An OAC registration number shall be
issued to the applicant of each accepted registration application. Where the
application is for the renewal of an existing registration, the applicant shall
be notified of such acceptance.
   (c)   The Department may reject an application for registration or for the
renewal of registration if it finds that the application, including the
accompanying listing of sign inventory required by 1 RCNY §
49-15, is not complete and accurate or all required documents have not been
submitted with the application. Before rejecting an application, the Department
shall provide the applicant with an explanation of the deficiency and a period
of time, but not more than 45 days, within which the applicant may submit a
corrected application and any missing documents. Upon written request and for
good cause, the Commissioner may extend the time for submitting a corrected
application.
   (d)   An OAC registration number issued by the Department pursuant to this
section shall not be transferable.
   (e)   An OAC shall notify the Department within 30 days thereof of any
material change in the information provided in the most recent registration or
renewal application submitted pursuant to this chapter. Where the material
change involves the addition of an affiliated OAC, such additional affiliated
OAC shall not do business as an OAC until notice of such material change is
received.
§ 49-13 Term and Fees.
   (a)   The term of the registration shall be for two years commencing on the
date of issuance of an OAC registration number. The fee for the initial
registration shall be $1,500 per applicant, plus $125 for each: sign; sign
structure vacant of signage; and tax lot vacant of both signage and sign
structures, listed in the sign inventory. The biennial registration renewal fee
shall be $750 per applicant, plus $50 for each: sign; sign structure vacant of
signage; and tax lot vacant of both signage and sign structures, listed in the
sign inventory. The fee per material change shall be $25.
   (b)   A registration renewal application shall be filed no sooner than 90 or
later than 60 days prior to the expiration date of the current term of the
registration. Notwithstanding the renewal fee set forth in subdivision (a),
where a registration renewal application is submitted later than 60 days before
the expiration of the current term of the registration, the renewal fee shall
be $1,500 per applicant OAC, plus $125 for each: sign; sign structure vacant of
signage; and tax lot vacant of both signage and sign structures, listed in the
sign inventory. A registration renewal application may not be submitted after
the expiration of the current term of the registration. Nothing in this section
shall prohibit an OAC with an expired registration from filing a new
application for registration, subject to the filing requirements and fees of an
initial registration application.
§ 49-14 Acceptable Type of Security.
   (a)   An applicant shall maintain security in the form of a letter of credit
from an issuing bank or other security acceptable to the Department for all
signs included in its inventory. Proof of such security must be filed with the
Department with the initial application for registration and with all
registration renewal applications. OACs may post one letter of credit or other
security acceptable to the Department with respect to all affiliates or
separate security for each affiliated OAC. The maximum number of letters of
credit or other security acceptable to the Department shall not exceed the
total number of signs in the inventory. The security must be in full force and
effect from and after the date of registration. When a letter of credit or
other security acceptable to the Department expires, is cancelled, is not
renewed or for any reason becomes unenforceable, it shall be replaced forthwith
and notice of such replacement shall be filed with the Department within 30
days thereafter. The bank shall be required to notify the Department promptly
in the event of cancellation, failure to renew or other event that would render
the security unavailable to the Department.
   (b)   The amount of security shall be $25,000 for the first 20 signs in the
sign inventory, plus $10,000 for each additional 20 signs, or part thereof.
   (c)   Replenishment. The Department shall draw upon the security in
accordance with applicable law. Upon the Department drawing upon the security,
the OAC or responsible affiliate shall replenish the amount within 14 days of
notice by regular mail from the Department to the OAC, or, if applicable, such
responsible affiliate. Evidence thereof shall be submitted to the Department
within 30 days.
§ 49-15 Sign Inventory to be Submitted with Registration Application.
   (a)   In addition to the information and documentation required by 1 RCNY §
49-12(a), an applicant shall submit, pursuant to § 26-261 of the Administrative
Code, a sign inventory that shall include all signs, sign structures and sign
locations located (1) within a distance of 900 linear feet from and within view
of an arterial highway; or (2) within 200 linear feet from and within view of a
public park of one-half acre or more. Such sign inventory shall be filed
together with the registration application and each renewal registration
application. The sign inventory submitted in connection with the renewal
registration application shall include all material changes since the last
registration or renewal registration application, and shall be accompanied by a
statement that identifies all material changes since such prior registration. A
registration application or renewal application submitted without such sign
inventory or statement shall not be considered complete and may be rejected in
accordance with subdivision (c) of 1 RCNY §
49-12.
   (b)   A sign inventory submitted by a responsible affiliate on behalf of:
      (1)   an affiliated OAC, in accordance with subdivision (a)(2) of 1 RCNY
§
49-12, shall include all signs, sign structures and sign locations under the
shared control of such responsible affiliate and affiliated OAC; or,
      (2)   every affiliated OAC, in accordance with subdivision (a)(3) of 1
RCNY §
49-12, shall include all signs, sign structures and sign locations under the
control of such responsible affiliate and every affiliated OAC.
   (c)   The sign inventory shall be accompanied by a signed statement of a
responsible officer of the OAC or, if applicable, the responsible affiliate,
stating that the listing of its inventory is a complete listing of all signs,
sign structures and sign locations under its control, subject to § 26-261 of
the Administrative Code.
   (d)   The sign inventory shall be submitted on forms to be prescribed by the
Department and shall include the information specified on such forms for each
sign, sign structure and sign location including, but not limited to, the
following:
      (1)   For each sign, sign structure and sign location, the public park
and/or arterial highway to which it is proximate pursuant to 1 RCNY §
49-15(a) shall be identified, and its distance in feet from such public park or
arterial highway shall be listed. Such distance shall be calculated as the
length of a horizontal plane extending between a vertical plane reflecting the
edge of the sign, sign structure or sign location closest to the park or
arterial highway and a vertical plane reflecting the portion of the park or
highway closest to the sign, sign structure or sign location. Where a sign
location is vacant of buildings or other structures to support signage, the
measurement shall be from the edge of its tax lot closest to the public park
and/or arterial highway.
      (2)   The block and lot numbers and the address, if one exists, for the
premises of each sign, sign structure and sign location.
      (3)   The size of each sign and sign structure described in linear feet
and inches.
      (4)   The height in feet and inches of the highest portion of each sign
and sign structure above the curb level.
      (5)   Each sign shall be identified as either "advertising" or "non-
advertising." To the extent a sign is a non-conforming sign, it must further be
identified as "non-conforming advertising" or "non-conforming non-advertising."
A sign identified as "non-conforming advertising" or "non-conforming non-
advertising" shall be submitted to the Department for confirmation of its non-
conforming status, pursuant to 1 RCNY §
49-16.
      (6)   For each accessory sign, the name and mailing address of the
business to which the sign directs attention, the nature of such business and
the square footage of the floor space occupied by such business on the zoning
lot.
      (7)   The name and address of all parties with an interest in the
premises where each sign, sign structure and sign location is situated.
      (8)   The name and address of all parties with an interest in the sign or
sign structure.
      (9)   A diagram, labeled with the information required by (1), (2) and
(3) above, eight and one-half by eleven inches in size, that shows the position
of the sign, sign structure or sign location on the lot with the distance in
feet to the proximate highway or park.
      (10)   Digitized and printed eight inch by ten inch color photographs,
clearly showing a front view and, if practicable, a rear view of the entire
sign and sign structure and the building or other structure to which the sign
or sign structure is attached.
      (11)   The work permit for the erection, installation, or most recent
alteration of the sign or sign structure. To the extent such document is
unavailable, the Department may accept a statement of diligent search.
      (12)   For each conforming sign, the name and license number of the
master or special sign hanger who hung or erected each sign.
      (13)   Whether the sign is illuminated and if so whether such
illumination is indirect as such term is defined in § 12-10 of the Zoning
Resolution. If the sign is illuminated, the sign inventory shall include the
permit number assigned by the Electrical Division of the Department for the
associated power connection and if applicable, the illuminated sign permit
number.
      (14)   Where a sign inventory is submitted on behalf of affiliated OACs,
the legal name of the OAC that markets or manages each sign, sign structure or
sign location and the legal name of the OAC with an ownership interest in each
such sign, sign structure or sign location, if different, shall be identified.
      (15)   With respect to each sign that has been identified in the sign
inventory as a non-conforming sign, the following additional information shall
be included with the registration application:
         a.   The Zoning Resolution section that establishes the sign as a non-
conforming sign.
         b.   Evidence that the non-conforming sign existed and the size of the
sign that existed as of the relevant date set forth in the Zoning Resolution to
establish its lawful status. Acceptable evidence may include permits, sign-offs
of applications after completion, photographs and leases demonstrating that the
non-conforming use existed prior to the relevant date. Affidavits, Department
cashier's receipts and permit applications, without other supporting
documentation, are not sufficient to establish the non-conforming status of a
sign. The submitted evidence must specifically establish the non-conforming
aspect of the sign. For example, where evidence is submitted to establish that
a sign is a non-conforming advertising sign, proof that the sign was erected,
but that does not establish that it was advertising, will not be sufficient.
         c.   Affidavit signed by the registered architect or professional
engineer, that he or she reasonably believes the sign to be non-conforming
based on the evidence submitted.
            (1)   A responsible officer of the OAC shall co-sign the affidavit,
that he or she reasonably believes the sign to be non-conforming based on the
evidence submitted, and that to the best of his or her knowledge there has not
been any discontinuance of the non-conforming use for two or more years.
   (e)   Except as to non-conforming signs, the sign inventory shall be
accompanied by a certification by a registered architect or licensed
professional engineer, co-signed by a responsible officer of the OAC, that he
or she has personal knowledge that the signs in the sign inventory are in
compliance with the Zoning Resolution.
   (f)   The Department shall issue to each sign, or if vacant of signage, each
sign structure and sign location listed in a sign inventory of a registered
OAC, a "sign identification number."
   (g)   The Department's acceptance of an application for registration or for
the renewal of registration, and the issuance of an OAC registration number to
an applicant or a sign identification number for any sign, sign structure or
sign location in the sign inventory, shall not constitute a decision or
determination by the Department that a sign or sign structure is lawful under
the Zoning Resolution or that a sign may lawfully be erected at the sign
location.
   (h)   An OAC shall amend its sign inventory to reflect material changes in
its portfolio of signs. The amendment shall be made within 30 days after such
change.
   (i)   The applicant shall provide a list of signs believed to be exempt from
registration and not subject to Department jurisdiction and located (1) within
a distance of 900 linear feet from and within view of an arterial highway; or
(2) within 200 linear feet from and within view of a public park of one-half
acre or more.
§ 49-16 Non-Conforming Signs.
   (a)   With respect to each sign identified in the sign inventory as non-
conforming, the registered architect or professional engineer shall request
confirmation of its non-conforming status from the Department based on the
evidence submitted in the registration application. The Department shall review
the evidence submitted and accept or deny the request within a reasonable
period of time. A sign that has been identified as non-conforming on the
initial registration application may remain erected unless and until the
Department has issued a determination that it is not non-conforming. The
registration of the OAC and remaining sign inventory shall continue unimpeded
while such a determination is pending.
   (b)   The Department shall maintain a list of all signs that it accepts as
non-conforming.
   (c)   The Department may withdraw its acceptance of a non-conforming sign
upon discovering evidence that the sign was improperly considered, or should no
longer be considered, a non-conforming sign, and upon such withdrawal and after
notice to the OAC, the sign must be removed pursuant to the Zoning Resolution.
§ 49-17 Information Required on Signs.
On and after the 90th day after the approval of the OAC registration, all signs
included in an OAC's inventory shall have posted thereon the name of the OAC to
which it is registered, the OAC registration number and, unless a permit is not
required, the permit identification number for the installation, alteration or
erection of such sign and, if applicable, for the maintenance of such sign. All
required information shall contrast with the background and be visible from the
arterial highway and/or public park.
Subchapter C: Administrative Remedies of the Department Pursuant To Section 26-
260(d) of the Administrative Code
§ 49-21 Department's Discretionary Power to Revoke, Suspend or Refuse to Renew
Registration and Impose Fines Pursuant to § 26-260(d) of the Administrative
Code.
   (a)   The Department may revoke, suspend or refuse to renew the registration
of an OAC on the grounds specified in § 26-260(d) of the Administrative Code.
For the purposes of this section it shall be presumed that an OAC knew or
should have known that such inventory was incomplete or inaccurate if the OAC
or, if applicable, an affiliated OAC thereof, owns or has a contract for
control of the sign, sign structure or sign location that is omitted from or
inaccurately described in the sign inventory.
   (b)   Procedure for revocation of registration. Prior to revoking,
suspending or refusing to renew the registration of an OAC or imposing fines or
other penalties, the Department shall give such OAC notice and opportunity to
be heard as follows:
      (1)   The Department shall serve notice on the OAC by regular mail, to
the address and name provided in the most recent application for registration
or renewal, listing the instances of liability by date, tribunal, section of
law or rule found to have been violated, and title, caption, index number or
other identifying indicator of the violation proceeding, if any.
      (2)   The notice shall advise the OAC of its right to submit papers in
opposition to revocation, suspension of or refusal to renew the registration,
and the deadline to do so, which shall not be less than 10 days after the date
of mailing of such notice.
      (3)   Such notice, when the Department seeks to revoke or suspend the
registration, also shall advise the OAC of its right to a hearing at the Office
of Administrative Trials and Hearings ("OATH"), pursuant to the provisions of 1
RCNY
Chapter 13.
Subchapter D: Removal, Storage, and Disposal of Signs and Sign Structures
§ 49-31 Applicability.
The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to signs and sign structures
removed by the Department or its authorized representatives pursuant to
Administrative Code §§ 26-127.3 and 26-262(d).
§ 49-32 Procedure.
   (a)   Where the signs and sign structures are physically removed, they shall
be vouchered and maintained in a secure location.
   (b)   Within ten days after removal, the Department or an authorized
representative designated by the Department shall send notice of such removal
by regular mail to the owner of the sign and/or sign structure if the address
and identity of such owner is reasonably ascertainable. If applicable, such
notice shall include the place where the sign and/or sign structure may be
claimed and the procedure for making a claim.
   (c)   The owner or other person lawfully entitled to possession of such
property shall submit a claim for the release of such property to the
Department or to an authorized representative designated by the Department.
Such claim shall be accompanied by documentary proof establishing entitlement
to such property.
   (d)   The costs of removal and storage of the sign shall be determined by
the Department. Such costs shall be paid prior to release of the sign and/or
sign structure unless the sign and/or sign structure is under the control of an
OAC and the Department has served notice on such company and drawn upon the
letter of credit or other security acceptable to the Department posted by such
company, in accordance with § 26-127.3 of the Administrative Code.
   (e)   If, after consulting with the Department's enforcement unit, it is
determined that fines or civil penalties have been imposed for a violation
related to such sign or that an action or proceeding is pending in which such
fines or civil penalties may be imposed, the sign and/or sign structure shall
not be released without proof of payment of such fines and civil penalties or,
if the action or proceeding is pending in which such fines or civil penalties
may be imposed, proof that a letter of credit or other security acceptable to
the Department has been provided in an amount sufficient to guarantee such
payment.
§ 49-33 Disposal of Abandoned Signs and/or Sign Structures.
Signs and/or sign structures that are not claimed in accordance with the
procedure set forth above within 30 days after removal shall be deemed
abandoned and shall be sold at public auction or turned over to the Department
of Sanitation in accordance with subdivision i of § 26-127.3 of the
Administrative Code.
Subchapter E: Application for Sign Work Permit
§ 49-41 Application Requirements.
   (a)   An application to erect, alter or install a sign and/or sign structure
in an area that is subject to inclusion on the sign inventory as set forth in 1
RCNY §
49-15 that is larger than 200 square feet shall be accompanied by the following
documentation:
      (1)   A detailed description and/or drawing of the proposed sign,
including its size;
      (2)   A plot plan indicating the block and lot, zoning lot and exact
location and size of the proposed sign and/or sign structure, as well as the
location, size, and, if available, sign permit and OAC identification numbers
for all other signs on the zoning lot, with their size in square feet;
      (3)   A statement indicating whether the proposed sign and/or sign
structure will be within view of a public park of one-half acre or more or of
an arterial highway.
      (4)   A statement indicating the distance in feet to each public park of
one-half acre or more that is within 200 feet of the proposed sign, and to each
road designated as an arterial highway, that is within 900 feet of such
proposed sign. Distance to the public park or arterial highway shall be
calculated as set forth in 1 RCNY §
49-15(d)(1);
      (5)   A statement whether the proposed sign is to be "advertising,"
"accessory" to a business, or "non-commercial."
      (6)   For accessory signs, the following items shall be submitted with
the application in addition to the other required items listed in this section:
         a.   The corporate name and D/B/A name of the use on the zoning lot
that the proposed sign is to advertise and the name of the owner or principal
of such business.
         b.   A written description of the existing or proposed business
operation on the zoning lot, including the size of the business operation in
square feet and average number of daily employees regularly on-site, signed and
notarized by a principal or officer of such business;
         c.   A drawing and/or description of the proposed sign copy;
         d.   A complete lease signed by a principal or officer of the
business, demonstrating the amount of space leased at the zoning lot by the
business being advertised. If the business being advertised at the zoning lot
owns the subject premises, a copy of the deed is to be provided;
         e.   A statement signed by the property owner indicating the parties
with ownership, lease or creditor interest in the sign and sign structure;
         f.   An approved alteration application and/or a certificate of
occupancy or satisfactory historical evidence acceptable to the Borough
Commissioner demonstrating that the specified business use to which the sign
directs attention is permitted on the zoning lot;
         g.   A restrictive declaration, signed by a fee owner of the real
property, that binds the owner and its successors to remove the sign and sign
structure if at any time the use of the premises is changed, or an occupant of
the premises ceases tenancy, such that the sign is no longer an accessory sign.
The declaration shall further provide that if the sign is not removed, the
Declarant consents to allow the City to enter onto the premises to remove the
sign and sign structure and the Declarant agrees to reimburse the City for all
actual costs associated with such removal. Proof of recording of the
restrictive declaration must be submitted prior to approval of the sign work
permit application; and
         h.   Financial statements detailing actual or projected income from
the business at the zoning lot and demonstrating that no income or financial
benefit shall be derived or expected from the sign.
   (b)   The work permit application shall be accompanied by a certification by
a registered architect or licensed professional engineer that he or she has
personal knowledge that the proposed sign and sign structure shall be in
compliance with the zoning resolution and, if accessory, that the requirements
of paragraph (a)(6) of this section have been satisfied.
   (c)   No work permit shall be issued to erect a sign structure, unless a
sign application has been approved to erect a sign thereon.
§ 49-42 Accessory Sign Permits.
   (a)   A sign permit for an accessory sign shall only be issued to a sign
with non-changeable copy, except that the Borough Commissioner may, upon
review, accept changeable copy for a digital sign, provided the name of the
business to which the sign is directing attention appears prominently at all
times on the sign, the changeable copy directs attention only to products sold
at the premises, and the Department is provided with a direct access means to
monitor the copy.
   (b)   The Borough Commissioner may request an inspection prior to issuing a
permit for any accessory sign, to confirm that the sign will direct attention
to a bona fide business on the zoning lot.
   (c)   No sign with a permit for non-changeable copy may be changed,
including a change in its copy, without obtaining a new permit from the
Department. A change in copy on a sign that was permitted for non-changeable
copy may be considered an alteration of the sign for purposes of §§ 27-147 and
27-177 of the Administrative Code.
§ 49-43 Advertising Signs.
Absent evidence that revenue from the sign is clearly incidental to the revenue
generated from the use on the zoning lot to which it directs attention, the
following signs are deemed to be advertising signs for purposes of compliance
with the Zoning Resolution:
   (a)   Signs that direct attention to a business on the zoning lot that is
primarily operating a storage or warehouse use for business activities
conducted off the zoning lot, and that storage or warehouse use occupies less
than the full building on the zoning lot; or
   (b)   All signs, other than non-commercial, larger than 200 square feet,
unless it is apparent from the copy and/or depictions on the sign that it is
used to direct the attention of vehicular and pedestrian traffic to the
business on the zoning lot.
Chapter 50: Distributed Energy Resource Standards
§ 50-01 Requirements for the Installation of High-Pressure Natural Gas-Fired
Microturbine Systems.
   (a)   General requirements. All microturbine systems shall comply with the
following general requirements:
      (1)   Description.
         (i)   The Microturbine System shall include one or more combustion-
based turbine-driven electrical generators with 500 kW or less capacity,
natural gas compressing equipment, heat recovery devices, electrical power
distribution devices, gas vents or chimneys and associated appurtenances.
         (ii)   Microturbine systems shall utilize natural gas at an inlet
pressure to the system of not greater than 3 psig, and shall boost the gas
pressure to an inlet pressure to the combustion device of greater than 15 psig
within the unit or room enclosure.
         (iii)   The total nominal electrical capacity at standardized
operating conditions of all microturbine systems located within a single
building shall not exceed 2,000 kW.
      (2)   Listing or MEA approval. For microturbines with external
compressors, the compressor shall be MEA-approved and all components of the
compressor and the microturbine shall be listed by a nationally recognized
testing laboratory approved by the Commissioner. For microturbines with the
compressor integrated with other elements into the unit, the integrated unit as
well as each of its components shall be listed by a nationally recognized
testing laboratory approved by the Commissioner.
      (3)   Utility ruling. The applicant shall consult the appropriate utility
company regarding the characteristics of existing gas and electrical service to
the site before installing the microturbine system. The applicant shall provide
to the Department prior to plan approval either documentation from the utility
company confirming that the electrical interconnection requirements have been
preliminarily satisfied or an affidavit from the owner that there will be no
interconnection with the electrical grid.
      (4)   Filing and permit. Plans for the complete microturbine system
installation shall be approved by the New York City Department of Buildings and
a work permit shall be obtained. A set of the approved plans shall be provided
to the Fire Department.
      (5)   Installation.
         (i)   Regulation. Installation of microturbine systems shall be in
accordance with all applicable requirements of the New York City Building Code,
the New York City Electrical Code, and Reference Standards. NFPA 37 shall also
apply, except where the Codes or these Rules are more restrictive. Such
regulations include, but are not limited to the following: fuel gas piping,
egress, fire protection, fire detection, electrical power, ventilation, and gas
vent or chimney.
         (ii)   External compressor. For microturbines with an external
compressor, the following requirements shall be satisfied:
            A.   Gas connections between the compressor and the turbine shall
be solid-welded; no threaded joints shall be permitted.
            B.   A flame arrestor shall be installed upstream of the gas
compressor to prevent flame propagating to the natural gas fuel distribution
lines.
            C.   The length of gas piping connecting the gas compressor with
the combustion device, both of which shall be in the same room, shall not
exceed 12 feet.
         (iii)   Annunciation. All annunciations shall be provided locally and
remotely to indicate any abnormal conditions in the system. The remote panel
shall be located in a continuously supervised area on the premises.
         (iv)   Automatic gas shut-off. Gas supply to the microturbine shall be
provided with an automatic shut-off valve that is activated by a malfunction
alarm from any component of the microturbine system.
         (v)   Remotely and manually controlled emergency gas shut-off. A
normally closed solenoid gas shut-off valve shall be located immediately after
the branch connection providing dedicated service to the microturbine
installation. The valve shall be manually controlled at the valve and remotely
controlled both outside the door(s) to the microturbine room and at a
supervised location. The gas shut-off valve and the controls shall each be
clearly identified with signage indicating "emergency gas shut-off to
microturbine."
         (vi)   Fuel shut-off valve diagram. A diagram shall be conspicuously
posted on any door or gate leading to a microturbine indicating the locations
of all manual and automatic fuel shut-off valves.
         (vii)   Security. The microturbine shall be provided with adequate
protection from theft, tampering and unauthorized use. Access to microturbine
systems shall be restricted by locked doors but shall be readily accessible for
maintenance, repair and Fire Department access. Microturbines shall be
adequately protected from vehicle impact.
         (viii)   Manufacturer's requirements. All manufacturer's requirements
and recommendations shall be satisfied.
         (ix)   Signage. Signage clearly stating "HIGH PRESSURE GAS" shall be
posted on or in front of the microturbine or microturbine system, and on the
outside of all doors accessing any microturbine room.
         (x)   Existing buildings. For installation of microturbines in
existing buildings, a structural evaluation of the method of support of the
microturbine system shall be performed by a licensed engineer. Vibration
isolation shall be provided for the microturbine system as required to mitigate
vibration impact on the building structure.
      (6)   Inspection. Gas piping serving the microturbine shall be inspected
by the Department. No self-certification of inspection shall be permitted. The
inspection shall include a pipe integrity pressure test of all distribution
piping. Installation and assembly of all system components shall be subject to
a controlled inspection, in accordance with Section 27-132 of the New York City
Building Code. Gas will be turned on only after successful completion of all
testing.
      (7)   Fire Department permit. A Fire Department permit is required to
operate the equipment.
      (8)   Fire Department Certificate of Fitness. A certificate of fitness
("C of F") holder, as authorized by the Fire Department, shall be required on
the premises during regular business hours. The C of F holder shall be trained
by the manufacturer or his authorized agent to shut down the equipment in an
emergency.
      (9)   Service contract. The owner shall obtain a service contract from
the microturbine manufacturer or a service company qualified by the
manufacturer upon approval of the microturbine installation, and shall maintain
it during the life of the installation.
   (b)   Permitted locations.
      (1)   Outdoors at grade, on a roof or on a roof setback, within an
integral weatherproof or lightweight enclosure acceptable to the manufacturer,
subject to the following:
         (i)   Clearances. All components of the microturbine system shall be
located a minimum of 4 feet from a wall or parapet, 8 feet from any building
opening, including any door, operable window or intake opening and 5 feet from
any exhaust termination or chimney. All microturbine systems located at grade
shall satisfy the following clearances:
            A.   50 feet from any subway entrance, exit, vent or other opening;
            B.   20 feet from any above-ground flammable or combustible liquid
storage tank;
            C.   10 feet from any lot line, except 4 feet from any lot line in
and adjacent to a manufacturing district;
            D.   5 feet from any vent or fill line of any flammable or
combustible liquid storage tank;
            E.   5 feet from any parked motor vehicle.
         (ii)   Enclosure. All microturbine system components shall be
contained within integral weather-proof enclosures pursuant to the listing of
the device. The unit enclosure or the lightweight constructed enclosure shall
be provided with a gas detection system with an alarm that annunciates in a
supervised location. Equipment not directly associated with the microturbine
system shall not be permitted in the same enclosure.
      (2)   Within a dedicated Mechanical Equipment Penthouse classified as
Occupancy Group D-2, and subject to the following:
         (i)   Enclosure. The mechanical equipment penthouse shall be enclosed
within 2-hour fire-resistance rated walls.
         (ii)   Fire suppression. The equipment room shall be fully sprinklered
or provided with an equivalent fire suppression system acceptable to the
Commissioner.
         (iii)   Mechanical ventilation. Mechanical ventilation shall be
provided for the mechanical equipment penthouse at a rate sufficient to
dissipate sensible heat released from the microturbine system in accordance
with the manufacturer's recommendations, at a rate adequate to dilute the
microturbine system rated flow rate of fuel gas below 25 percent of the lower
flammability limit (LFL) of the fuel gas, or at an exhaust and make-up air rate
of 80 times the maximum leakage rate of natural gas from the high-pressure
system within the room at standard temperature and pressure based on the rated
capacity of the gas compressor, whichever is greater. The ventilation rate
shall not be less than required to maintain the ambient room temperature within
the manufacturer's recommendations but shall not exceed 104 degrees Fahrenheit.
Proper distribution of exhaust and make-up air must be provided to prevent
pockets of increased gas concentration, including exhaust points high in the
room to address the lighter-than-air properties of natural gas. Mechanical
ventilation shall operate continuously.
         (iv)   Gas detection and alarm. The mechanical equipment penthouse
shall be provided with a gas detection system with an alarm that annunciates in
a supervised location. The gas detection system shall also trip the
microturbine.
         (v)   Lighting. The mechanical equipment penthouse shall be provided
with adequate lighting in accordance with the New York City Building Code.
         (vi)   Other equipment. Equipment not directly associated with the
microturbine system, including but not limited to gas meters, shall not be
permitted within the mechanical equipment penthouse.
         (vii)   Storage. No combustible materials shall be stored in the
mechanical equipment penthouse.
      (3)   Within a dedicated room in a building, subject to the following:
         (i)   Capacity. The total installed rated capacity of the microturbine
system in the room shall not exceed 1,000 kW.
         (ii)   Enclosure. The microturbine room shall be enclosed within 2-
hour fire-resistance rated walls.
         (iii)   Fire suppression. The equipment room shall be fully
sprinklered or provided with an equivalent fire suppression system acceptable
to the Commissioner.
         (iv)   Mechanical ventilation. Mechanical ventilation shall be
provided for the microturbine room at a rate sufficient to dissipate sensible
heat released from the microturbine system in accordance with the
manufacturer's recommendations, at a rate adequate to dilute the microturbine
system rated flow rate of fuel gas below 25 percent of the lower flammability
limit (LFL) of the fuel gas, or at an exhaust and make-up air rate of 80 times
the maximum leakage rate of natural gas from the high-pressure system within
the room at standard temperature and pressure based on the rated capacity of
the gas compressor, whichever is greater. The ventilation rate shall not be
less than required to maintain the ambient room temperature within
manufacturer's recommendations but not to exceed 104 degrees Fahrenheit. Proper
distribution of exhaust and make-up air must be provided to prevent pockets of
increased gas concentration, including exhaust points high in the room, to
address the lighter-than-air properties of natural gas. Mechanical ventilation
shall operate continuously.
         (v)   Gas detection and alarm. The microturbine room shall be provided
with a gas detection system with an alarm that annunciates in a supervised
location. The gas detection system shall also trip the microturbine.
         (vi)   Lighting. The microturbine room shall be provided with adequate
lighting in accordance with the New York City Building Code.
         (vii)   Other equipment. Equipment not directly associated with the
microturbine system, including but not limited to gas meters, shall not be
permitted within the microturbine room.
         (viii)   Storage. No combustible materials shall be stored in the
microturbine room.
      (4)   Within a boiler or other mechanical equipment room of a building,
subject to the following:
         (i)   Capacity. The total installed rated capacity of the microturbine
system in this room shall not exceed 500 kW.
         (ii)   Enclosure. The mechanical equipment room shall be enclosed
within 2-hour fire-resistance rated walls.
         (iii)   Fire suppression. The mechanical equipment room shall be fully
sprinklered or provided with an equivalent fire suppression system acceptable
to the Commissioner.
         (iv)   Mechanical ventilation. Mechanical ventilation shall be
provided for the mechanical equipment room at the rate sufficient to dissipate
sensible heat released from all gas-burning equipment located within the
mechanical equipment room in accordance with the microturbine manufacturer's
recommendations, at a rate adequate to dilute the microturbine system rated
flow rate of fuel gas below 25 percent of the lower flammability limit (LFL) of
the fuel gas, or at an exhaust and make-up air rate of 80 times the maximum
leakage rate of natural gas from the high-pressure system within the room at
standard temperature and pressure based on the rated capacity of the gas
compressor, whichever is greater. The ventilation rate shall not be less than
required to maintain the ambient room temperature within the manufacturer's
recommendations but shall not exceed 104 degrees Fahrenheit. Proper
distribution of exhaust and make-up air must be provided to prevent pockets of
increased gas concentration, including exhaust points high in the room, to
address the lighter-than-air properties of natural gas. Mechanical ventilation
shall operate continuously.
         (v)   Gas detection and alarm. The mechanical equipment room shall be
provided with a gas detection system with an alarm that annunciates in a
supervised location. The gas detection system shall also trip the microturbine.
         (vi)   Lighting. The mechanical equipment room shall be provided with
adequate lighting in accordance with the New York City Building Code.
         (vii)   Gas meters shall not be permitted within the mechanical
equipment room.
         (viii)   Storage. No combustible materials, including fuels, shall be
stored in the mechanical equipment room.
Chapter 51: Dormitories
§ 51-01 Classification of Student Dormitory.
   (a)   Applicability. Student dormitory is classified under the Zoning
Resolution of the City of New York as a Use Group 3, community facility use.
The Zoning Resolution allows residences of all kinds, including residences for
students, under a Use Group 2 classification. This rule sets forth the criteria
the Department shall use to designate a Class A building or part of a building
as a Use Group 3 student dormitory. An owner that seeks to classify a rooming
unit as a dormitory shall be subject to the provisions set forth in 1 RCNY
15-04(e).
   (b)   Definition. A student dormitory is a building or part of a building
that is (1) operated by, or on behalf of, institution(s) that provide full-time
day instruction and a course of study that may be pursued in fulfillment of the
requirements of §§ 3204, 3205 and 3210 of the New York State Education Law, or
post-secondary institution(s) authorized to grant a degree by the Regents of
the University of the State of New York; (2) to house students enrolled at such
institution(s). A student dormitory shall not be a single dwelling unit.
   (c)   Required documentation. No permit shall be issued to create a student
dormitory unless the following documentation has been submitted to the
Department:
      (1)   Proof of ownership or control.
         (i)   Copies of documents demonstrating that the owner of the building
or part of the building for which such permit is sought is an educational
institution that provides a course of study that meets the requirements of
subdivision (b) of this section, or
         (ii)   Copies of a lease of the building or part of the building for a
minimum ten year term by an educational institution that meets the requirements
of subdivision (b) of this section, or
         (iii)   Copies of documents evidencing (A) the establishment of a non-
profit entity, all of whose members, directors, trustees, or other individuals
upon whom is conferred the management of the entity, are representatives of
participating educational institutions that meet the requirements of
subdivision (b) of this section to provide dormitory housing for students of
such participating educational institutions; and (B) ownership or control of
the building or part of the building by such non-profit entity for such purpose
in the form of a deed or lease for a minimum ten-year term.
      (2)   Restrictive declaration. Proof of recording of a restrictive
declaration executed by Owner of the real property and any other party who
holds an enforceable recorded interest that could result in such holder
obtaining possession of the building or part of the building designated as a
student dormitory. The agreement shall be binding upon all such parties' heirs,
legal representatives, successors and assigns. The Declaration shall be in a
form acceptable to the Commissioner and shall include the following terms:
         (i)   The facility shall only be used as a student dormitory, as
defined in this chapter, or other Use Group 3 use.
         (ii)   Under no circumstances shall the units in a student dormitory
be offered for sale pursuant to a cooperative or condominium plan.
         (iii)   Owner agrees to forego defenses to the enforcement of the
provisions of this section.
         (iv)   Owner agrees to prominently display the name(s) of the school
(s) operating the student dormitory on the exterior of building.
   (d)   Term of certificate of occupancy. Where the student dormitory is not
owned by an educational institution, but rather is leased, no certificate of
occupancy shall be issued to the building for a term that exceeds the duration
of the lease.
   (e)   Effect on other codes. The designation of a building or a part of a
building as a student dormitory shall not by itself be determinative as to the
occupancy, construction, or multiple dwelling classifications as determined
pursuant to the Building Code, Housing Maintenance Code or Multiple Dwelling
Law.
   (f)   If any clause, sentence, paragraph, subdivision, section, or part of
this rule shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be
invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder
thereof, but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence,
paragraph, subdivision, section, or part thereof directly involved in the
controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered.
Chapter 52: Notification to the Department of Commencement of Work Pursuant to
an Earthwork Permit
§ 52-01 Notification to the Department of Commencement of Work Pursuant to an
Earthwork Permit.
   (a)   Notification to the Department. Pursuant to § 27-195 of the
Administrative Code and subject to the exceptions set forth in subdivision (e)
herein, no earthwork within the property line shall commence unless the permit
holder notifies the Department as here prescribed at least twenty-four (24) but
no more than forty-eight (48) hours prior to the commencement of such work. The
notification shall state the date that such earthwork is to commence. Should
the notification date fall on a weekend or an official holiday, the permit
holder shall notify the Department on the last business day before the
commencement date.
   (b)   Cancellation. In the event that the earthwork does not begin on the
date provided in the notification to the Department, the permit holder shall
notify the Department of its cancellation not more than twenty-four (24) hours
prior to but no later than the date for which the earthwork was scheduled.
Should the cancellation date fall on a weekend or an official holiday, the
permit holder shall notify the Department on the next business day after the
intended commencement date. The permit holder shall notify the Department of
the new intended commencement date pursuant to the provisions of subdivision
(a), above.
   (c)   Method of notification and cancellation. Such notification and
cancellation shall be made by telephone or electronically.
   (d)   Stop work order. The Commissioner may issue a stop work order if there
is a failure to provide notice as required in this section and if the work is
found to violate any of the provisions of the Building Code, the Zoning
Resolution or other applicable law, rule or regulation. Upon issuance of such
stop work order, the work shall be stopped for a minimum of three (3) business
days to enable the Department to take any other appropriate action to ensure
that the earthwork is being performed in a safe manner. The earthwork shall not
recommence until the stop work order has been lifted.
   (e)   Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
      (1)   Hand excavation work that extends five (5) feet or less below the
grade existing at the time of earthwork commencement and is two (2) feet or
more from an existing foundation. This exception shall not apply to any hand
excavation work performed anywhere in existing or demolished basements or
cellars that adjoin existing foundations.
      (2)   Test pits for geotechnical observation that do not exceed ten (10)
feet in length, width or diameter and that are excavated under the supervision
of a licensed professional.
      (3)   Work on cemetery grounds for burials.
      (4)   Emergency work performed by the Department of Housing Preservation
and Development (HPD) or other agency as directed by the Commissioner or work
on unsafe buildings performed by HPD or other agency pursuant to a precept.
Chapter 100: [Administration; Enforcement; Maintenance of Buildings; Licensing;
Miscellaneous Provisions]
Subchapter A: Administration
§ 101-01 Definition of existing building. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 7/13/2016, eff. 8/12/2016)
§ 101-02 Waiver of Certain Construction Documents Required to be Submitted by
Registered Design Professionals for Certain Work.
   (a)   Pursuant to § 28-104.6 of the Administrative Code, the commissioner is
authorized to allow persons other than registered design professionals to be
the applicant for the approval of construction documents. Pursuant to § 28-
104.7.12 of the Administrative Code, the commissioner is authorized to waive
the submission of any of the required construction documents. The commissioner
can waive this submission if review of such documents is not necessary to
ascertain compliance with the Construction Codes or is not required for the
phase of work for which a permit is sought. Notwithstanding the following
provisions, the commissioner reserves the right to require the filing of
narratives or sketches showing compliance with the provisions of this code for
the categories of work described below.
      (1)   Selected plumbing work. In connection with the filing of
applications for construction document approval, the applicant need not be a
registered design professional and required plans need not be submitted for the
following types of plumbing applications:
         (i)   Temporary exhibits. Temporary exhibits, defined for purposes of
this rule as plumbing for temporary installations used for exhibition purposes
when not designed for sanitary use and not directly connected to a sewerage,
water supply, or water distribution system.
         (ii)   Domestic gas dryers in residential occupancies. Domestic gas
dryers in residential occupancies that are vented directly through an exterior
wall and that comply with items A through I, below:
            (A)   Licensed Master Plumber required. The installation
application shall be filed by a Licensed Master Plumber (LMP) as a Limited
Alteration Application (LAA1).
            (B)   Limitation to R-3 occupancies. The installation shall be
limited to a one- or two-family residence, three stories or fewer in height.
            (C)   Testing and installation of gas dryers. The gas dryers shall
comply with the reference standards in Section FGC 613 and the installation
shall comply with the manufacturer's instructions including any special vent
pipe material for relatively low flue gas temperatures as recommended by the
manufacturer.
            (D)   Wall penetration. The vent and combustion air wall
penetration shall be limited to a single penetration of four inches in diameter
or one opening that is a maximum of four inches square. The entire exhaust
system shall be supported and secured in place.
            (E)   Dryer duct. The maximum length of a clothes dryer duct shall
not exceed 25 feet from dryer location to the outlet terminal. Deductions for
bends must be accounted for as outlined in Sections MC 504.6.1 and FGC 614.6.1.
            (F)   Sketches required. The LMP shall submit detailed sketches of
the piping installation and wall penetration. (See Figure 1 below).
            (G)   Vent termination. The location of the vent termination shall
comply with Section FGC 614.4, the manufacturer's specifications, and the
following:
               1.   Vent termination shall not be located at lot line walls or
within three feet of lot lines;
               2.   The front, side or rear wall vent terminations shall be
free of obstructions;
               3.   The vent opening shall not be located or constructed so as
to create a fire or health hazard;
               4.   The LMP shall ensure that the building's structural
integrity is not compromised due to the wall penetration opening. Openings
shall be located so as to avoid cutting into studs, joists, or any other
structural member;
               5.   Clearance from regional snow line. The vent shall be a
minimum of three feet above the adjacent grade; and
               6.   Vent termination shall be thermally sealed in accordance
with section 402.4 of the Energy Conservation Construction Code of New York
State (ECCCNYS).
            (H)   Inspection. A gas roughing-in, gas test and gas finish
inspection by the Department of Buildings or self certification shall be
required on new installations. When filing for existing dryers that vent
through the outer wall, only a finish inspection is required when filed on an
LAA1 form.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1e024518ebfb3921ec38bc2ecfa58f65299ca12d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-52.jpg]
            (I)   Gas authorization. Upon successful inspections, the LMP shall
request gas authorization and an LAA1 sign-off.
         (iii)   In-kind replacement of gas-fired boilers, hot water heaters
and furnaces. In-kind replacement of gas-fired boilers, hot water heaters and
furnaces that are vented directly through exterior walls, and comply with items
A through I, below:
            (A)   Licensed Master Plumber required. The installation
application shall be filed by a Licensed Master Plumber (LMP) as a Limited
Alteration Application (LAA1).
            (B)   Limitation to R-3 occupancies. The installation shall be
limited to a one- or two-family residence, three stories or fewer in height.
            (C)   Testing and installation of gas-fired boiler, hot water
heater or furnace. The gas-fired boiler, hot water heater or furnace shall be
tested in accordance with Section FGC 631.1 and the installation shall comply
with the manufacturer's instructions, including any special vent pipe material
for relatively low flue gas temperatures.
            (D)   Efficiency and input capacity. The boiler, heater, or furnace
must have a minimum efficiency of 85% or as required by the ECCCNYS, whichever
is greater, and an input capacity of 350,000 Btu/hr or less.
            (E)   Wall penetration. The vent and combustion air wall
penetration shall be limited to a single penetration of six inches in diameter
or one opening that is a maximum of six inches square. The Department may
permit two separate penetrations of four inches in diameter, provided the LMP
performing the work certifies in the job description of the LAA1 that no
adapter is available from the manufacturer for the given equipment and provides
valid manufacturer's contact information for verification of the unavailability
of adapters.
            (F)   Sketches required. The LMP shall submit a detailed sketch of
the piping installation and wall penetration. (See Figure 2 below).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1e024518ebfb3921ec38bc2ecfa58f65299ca12d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-54.jpg]
 Figure 2 – Sample sketch to be submitted with LAA1
            (G)   Vent termination. The location of the vent termination shall
comply with ANSI Z21.13, the manufacturer's specifications, and the following:
               1.   Vent termination shall not be located at lot line walls or
within three feet of lot lines;
               2.   The front, side or rear wall vent terminations shall be
free of obstructions;
               3.   The vent opening shall not be located or constructed so as
to create a fire or health hazard;
               4.   The LMP shall ensure that the building's structural
integrity is not compromised due to the wall penetration opening. Openings
shall be located so as to avoid cutting into studs, joists, or any other
structural member;
               5.   Clearance from regional snow line. The vent shall be a
minimum of three feet above the adjacent grade; and
               6.   Vent termination shall be thermally sealed in accordance
with ECCCNYS section 402.4
            (H)   Inspection. A gas roughing-in, gas test and gas finish
inspection by the Department of Buildings shall be required. Self certification
shall not be permitted.
            (I)   Gas authorization. Upon successful inspections, the LMP shall
request gas authorization and an LAA1 sign-off.
      (2)   Selected elevator work. In connection with the filing of
applications for construction document approval, the Applicant is not required
to be a registered design professional and design drawings are not required to
be submitted for work performed, pursuant to Section 3.10.12 of Chapter K3 of
Appendix K of the New York City Building Code. This update applies to the
following items (i) through (v) below:
         (i)   Elevator Agency Director required. The installation application
shall be filed by a Department approved elevator agency director ("Applicant");
         (ii)   Design Approval. The controller manufacturer or a registered
design professional approves the design and/or controller modifications in
accordance with Section 3.10.12 of Chapter K3 of Appendix K, and the Applicant
must submit with the application proof, in a form and manner acceptable to the
commissioner, of such approval.
         (iii)   Design drawings and any controller modifications must be
dated, contain unique drawing numbers, and specify the relevant premises and
elevator device number.
         (iv)   The following documents must be maintained in the subject
premises' machine room and made available to the Department upon request:
            (A)   A copy of the design drawings and any controller
modifications with the controller manufacturer's stamp;
            (B)   A letter on the controller manufacturer or registered design
professional's business letterhead, attesting that the door monitoring system's
design and any controller modifications comply with the Construction Codes and
all ANSI requirements.
         (v)   Inspection. The Applicant inspects and tests such work on behalf
of the owner and in the presence of an independent approved elevator agency not
affiliated with the Applicant, which witnesses the test ("witnessing agency")
with following conditions:
            (A)   The Applicant must notify the department at least 48 hours
prior to such inspection and testing.
            (B)   Pursuant to § 28-304.6.3 of the Administrative Code, the
Applicant must report any unsafe or hazardous conditions to the department.
            (C)   Provided there are no unsafe or hazardous conditions, both
the Applicant and the witnessing agency inspector(s) must sign the inspection
certificate at the site before returning the device to service.
            (D)   Pursuant to § 28-304.6.5 of the Administrative Code, the
Applicant submits an inspection and test report to the department.
      (3)   Selected mechanical work. In connection with the filing of
applications for construction document approval, the applicant need not be a
registered design professional and required plans need not be submitted for the
following types of mechanical applications:
         (i)   Fuel-oil burning equipment. Replacement of or alteration to
existing fuel-oil burning equipment, provided that the applicant is a licensed
oil burner-installer, the aggregate capacity of the equipment does not exceed
600,000 BTU per hour and the number of fuel-oil burning devices does not
increase or decrease by more than one unit.
         (ii)   Fuel-oil storage tanks. Replacement of existing fuel-oil
storage tanks, provided the applicant is a licensed oil burner-installer, the
capacity of each replacement tank does not exceed 330 gallons and each such
replacement tank meets the alternate tank design and construction standards
contained in Section MC 1305.14.
      (4)   Selected fire suppression work. In connection with the filing of
applications for construction document approval, the applicant need not be a
registered design professional and required plans need not be submitted for the
following types of fire suppression applications which shall be classified as
Limited Sprinkler Applications:
         (i)   An alteration to an existing sprinkler system where the total
cost of the proposed work in the building does not exceed twenty five thousand
dollars in any 12-month period and the proposed work is limited to the
following:
            (A)   Replacement of parts required for the operation of a
sprinkler system;
            (B)   Replacement of sprinkler heads, provided that orifice sizes,
type and deflector positions remain the same;
            (C)   Changes that do not alter the type of sprinkler system;
            (D)   Relocation of piping that does not affect the operation of
the sprinkler system;
            (E)   Rearrangement of not more than 20 sprinkler heads in areas
presently sprinklered in light hazard occupancy, as such term is defined in
reference standards, which will remain in such occupancy, provided that the
addition of sprinkler heads in existing systems shall be limited to light
hazard occupancies in rooms or spaces not exceeding 800 feet (74.3 m 2 )
requiring only one head with the maximum spacing allowed by the code, and
provided that the number of new heads does not exceed a total of five; or
            (F)   Rearrangement of not more than 20 sprinkler heads in areas
presently sprinklered in restaurant service areas classified in Group 1
ordinary hazard occupancy or mercantile areas classified in Group 2 ordinary
hazard occupancy, as such term is defined in reference standards as modified by
Appendix Q of the Building Code, which will remain in such occupancy, provided
that the addition of sprinkler heads in existing systems shall be limited to
such occupancies in rooms or spaces not exceeding 800 square feet (74.3 m 2 )
requiring only one head with the maximum spacing allowed by the code, and
provided that the number of new heads does not exceed a total of five.
   (b)   Work shall comply with all requirements of the applicable codes and
other applicable laws and rules, including, where applicable, those imposed by
other governmental agencies.
   (c)   Nothing in this rule is intended to alter or diminish any obligation
otherwise imposed by law on others, including but not limited to, the owner,
construction manager, general contractor, contractor, materialman, architect,
engineer, site safety manager, land surveyor, or other party involved in a
construction project to engage in sound engineering, design, and construction
practices, and to act in a reasonable and responsible manner to maintain a safe
construction site.
(Amended City Record 4/20/2018, eff. 5/20/2018; amended City Record 3/4/2022,
eff. 4/3/2022)
§ 101-03 Fees Payable to the Department of Buildings.
The department shall be authorized to charge the following fees:
Periodic inspection or Reinspection of high-pressure boilers, low-pressure boilers  $65 per                           
and elevators following a violation.                                                device
Acknowledgement.                                                                    $2 each                           
Certificate of occupancy.                                                           $5 per copy                       
Certificate of pending violation: Multiple and private dwellings.                   $30 per copy                      
Certified copy of license.                                                          $5 per copy                       
                                                                                    $45 for one-,
                                                                                    two- or
Records management fee for applications for new buildings and alterations and       three-family
associated documentation.                                                           dwellings                         
                                                                                    $165 for all
                                                                                    other types
                                                                                    of buildings
   •   Exception: Applications that are exempt from fees in accordance with   28-                            
112.1 of the Administrative Code
Boiler filings                                                                                                       
   •   Affirmation of correction                                            $30                               
   •   Filing extension                                                     $15                               
   •   Removal or disconnection                                             $45                               
   •   Waiver of penalties                                                  $30                               
                                                                                    $8.00 for the
                                                                                    first page
                                                                                    and $5.00 for
                                                                                    each
Preparing only or preparing and certifying a copy of a record or document filed in  additional
the department, other than a plan, certificate of occupancy or certificate of       page or part                      
pending violation.                                                                  thereof (a
                                                                                    page consists
                                                                                    of one face
                                                                                    of a card or
                                                                                    other record)
                                                                                    $8.00 per     $5.00 per
Half-size print from microfilm of a plan thirty-six by forty-eight inches or less.  copy          additional           
                                                                                                  copy
Half-size print from microfilm of a plan exceeding thirty-six by forty-eight        $16.00 per    $5.00 per
inches.                                                                             copy          additional           
                                                                                                  copy
                                                                                                              Late
                                                                                                              Renewal:
                                                                                    Initial:      Renewal     $400     Reissuance:
Electrician's license.                                                              $310          $90         (initial $50
                                                                                                              fee plus
                                                                                                              renewal
                                                                                                              fee)
Licensing:                                                                                                           
   •   Written examination                                                  $585                              
   •   Practical examination                                                $530                              
   •   Background investigation class 1 (includes experience)               $500                              
   •   Background investigation class 2 (does not include experience)       $330                              
                                                                                                  Renewal:    Late-    Reissuance:
Elevator agency director / co-director license.                                     Initial: $100 $150        renewal: $50
                                                                                                              $50
                                                                                                  Renewal:    Late-    Reissuance:
Elevator agency inspector license.                                                  Initial: $50  $75         renewal: $50
                                                                                                              $50
                                                                                                  Renewal:    Late-    Reissuance:
Elevator agency technician license card processing.                                 Initial: $50  $50         renewal: $50
                                                                                                              $50
                                                                                                  Renewal:    Late-    Reissuance:
Restricted elevator agency technician license card processing.                      Initial: $50  $50         renewal: $50
                                                                                                              $50
Elevator agency helper card.                                                        Initial: $50                     Reissuance:
                                                                                                                       $50
                                                                                                  Renewal:    Late-    Reissuance:
Concrete safety manager registration.                                               Initial: $150 $100        renewal: $50
                                                                                                              $50
Electrical permit initial application (excluding minor work).                       $40                               
                                                                                    Fee per unit
                                                                                    (NOTE: The
                                                                                    total
                                                                                    additional
                                                                                    fee is
                                                                                    computed by
                                                                                    calculating
                                                                                    the sum of
                                                                                    the units.
                                                                                    The total
                                                                                    additional
Electrical permit (excluding minor work)                                            fee, due                          
                                                                                    prior to
                                                                                    electrical
                                                                                    sign-off or
                                                                                    as otherwise
                                                                                    provided by
                                                                                    the
                                                                                    department's
                                                                                    rules, shall
                                                                                    not exceed
                                                                                    five thousand
                                                                                    dollars):
   •   Each outlet, each fixture, each horsepower or fraction thereof of a motor or
generator, each kilowatt or fraction thereof of a heater, each horsepower or
fraction thereof of an air conditioner, each kilovolt-ampere or fraction thereof of                                  
a transformer installed, altered or repaired shall be assigned the value of one
unit:
1 - 10 units                                                                        $0                                
Over 10 units                                                                       $.25                              
   •   For each service switch installed, altered or repaired:                                               
0 - 100 Amperes                                                                     $8.00                             
101 - 200 Amperes                                                                   $30.00                            
201 - 600 Amperes                                                                   $105.00                           
601 - 1,200 Amperes                                                                 $225.00                           
Over 1,200 Amperes                                                                  $375.00                           
   •   For each set of service entrance cables and for each set of feeder                                    
conductors installed, altered or repaired:
Up to #2 conductors                                                                 $15.00                            
Over #2 to #1/0 conductors                                                          $30.00                            
Over #1/0 to 250 MCM                                                                $45.00                            
Over 250 MCM                                                                        $75.00                            
   •   For each panel installed, altered or repaired:                                                        
1 phase up to 20-1 or 10-2 pole cutouts or breakers                                 $15.00                            
1 phase over 20-1 or 10-2 pole cutouts or breakers                                  $37.50                            
3 Phase up to 225 amperes                                                           $50.00                            
3 Phase over 225 amperes                                                            $75.00                            
   •   For each sign manufactured (in-shop inspections):                    $40.00                            
   •   For each sign manufactured (on-site inspections):                                                     
0 to 30 square feet                                                                 $65.00                            
31 to 60 square feet                                                                $90.00                            
Over 60 square feet                                                                 $115.00                           
   •   For each elevator:                                                                                    
10 floors or less                                                                   $125.00                           
Every additional ten or fewer floors                                                $83.00                            
   •   For wiring or rewiring boiler controls in buildings.                 $12.00                            
Electrical permit (minor work pursuant to § 27-3018(h) of the Administrative Code).$15                               
Duplicate copy of notice of electrical violation.                                   $5                                
Elevator filings                                                                                                     
   •   Category 3 and 5                                                     $40                               
   •   Affirmation of correction                                            $40                               
   •   Waiver of penalties                                                  $35                               
Technical report filings                                                                                             
   •   Concrete                                                             $130 per                          
                                                                                    filing
Facade inspection reports                                                                                            
   •   Initial filing                                                       $425                              
   •   Amended/subsequent filing                                            $425                              
   •   Application for extension of time to complete repairs                $305                              
Reinspection made necessary by a failure to correct a condition or respond to a     $225 each                         
request for corrective action.                                                      inspection
On-site inspection of cranes application renewal.                                   $100 each                         
                                                                                    inspection
                                                                                    $95 each
                                                                                    inspection
                                                                                    plus $50 for
                                                                                    every 2,000
Accelerated inspection made necessary by a request for an after hours inspection.   square feet                       
                                                                                    of floor
                                                                                    area, but not
                                                                                    less than $50
                                                                                    per story.
                                                                                    Initial:      Renewal:
                                                                                    $200 plus a   $90 plus a
                                                                                    $30           $30
Special inspection agency registration.                                             endorsement   endorsement          
                                                                                    fee per       fee per
                                                                                    special       special
                                                                                    inspection    inspection
                                                                                    category      category
Energy efficiency reports                                                                                            
   •   Initial filing                                                       $375                              
   •   Extension request                                                    $155                              
   •   Amendments                                                           $145                              
Energy Code compliance review                                                                                        
   •   One-, two- or three-family dwellings                                 $220                              
   •   Alteration for other than one-, two- or three-family dwellings       $525                              
   •   New buildings and Alteration that changes the C of O for other than o$875                              
two- or three-family dwellings
                                                                                    Initial:      Renewal:
                                                                                    $50 for a 1-  $50 for a
                                                                                    year          1-year      Late-    Reissuance:
Filing representative registration.                                                 registration  renewal or  renewal: $50
                                                                                    or $150 for a $150 for a  $50
                                                                                    3-year        3-year
                                                                                    registration. renewal.
Filing structurally compromised building                                            $500                              
inspection report
Retaining wall inspection reports                                                                                    
   •   Initial filing                                                       $355                              
   •   Amended filing                                                       $130                              
   •   Application for extension of time to complete repairs                $260                              
Registration of energy auditor or retro-commissioning agent who is not a registered Initial:      Renewal:             
design professional.                                                                $200          $90
Individual private on-site sewage disposal system                                   $725                              
                                                                                    Included in
o   First plan examination review                                                the filing                        
                                                                                    fee
                                                                                    Included in
o   Second plan examination - review of objection(s)                             the filing                        
                                                                                    fee
o   Appeal after the above two reviews that consist of (1) a plan examination
objection and (2) an affirmation of that objection after a second plan examination  $1,000                            
(which results in an Appeal Determination)
o   Request for a variation of the Construction Codes                            $1,000                            
o   Request for a variation of the 1968 or prior Building Code                   $1,000                            
o   Request for a variation of Section 277.16 of the New York State Multiple     $1,000                            
Dwelling Law (MDL) for Article 7B buildings
o   Pre-determination request with respect to the Zoning Resolution, Construction$1,000                            
Codes or 1968 or prior Building Code
   •   Exception: No fee will be charged for proposed one-, two-, or three-family
dwellings or for alterations to one-, two- or three-family dwellings (excluding                                      
conversions of one-, two- or three-family dwellings to any structure other than a
one-, two- or three-family dwelling).
   •   Exception: No fee will be charged for any building that the New York City
Department of Housing Preservation and Development certifies is for the
construction or rehabilitation of affordable housing and is expected to receive or
has received (i) a conveyance of municipally owned property, pursuant to Article 15
or 16 of the General Municipal Law, (ii) a loan, grant or tax exemption, pursuant                                    
to the Private Housing Finance Law or the General Municipal Law, (iii) a tax
exemption, pursuant to Section 420-c of the Real Property Tax Law, (iv) a transfer,
pursuant to an in rem foreclosure judgment, pursuant to § 11-412.1 of the code, or
(v) funding for repairs, pursuant to Section 778 of the Real Property Actions and
Proceedings Law.
Appeal from:
o   Denial of a request for a variation of the Construction Codes                $2,500                            
o   Denial of a request for a variation of the 1968 or prior Building Code       $2,500                            
o   Denial of a request for a variation of Section 277.16 of the New York State  $2,500                            
Multiple Dwelling Law (MDL) for Article 7B buildings
o   Pre-determination with respect to the Zoning Resolution, Construction Codes o$2,500                            
1968 or prior Building Code
o   Appeal Determination                                                         $2,500                            
   •   Exception: No fee will be charged for proposed one-, two-, or three-family
dwellings or for alterations to one-, two- or three-family dwellings (excluding                                      
conversions of one-, two- or three-family dwellings to any structure other than a
one-, two- or three-family dwelling).
   •   Exception: No fee will be charged for any building that the New York City
Department of Housing Preservation and Development certifies is for the
construction or rehabilitation of affordable housing and is expected to receive or
has received (i) a conveyance of municipally owned property, pursuant to Article 15
or 16 of the General Municipal Law, (ii) a loan, grant or tax exemption, pursuant
to the Private Housing Finance Law or the General Municipal Law, (iii) a tax
exemption, pursuant to Section 420-c of the Real Property Tax Law, (iv) a transfer,
pursuant to an in rem foreclosure judgment, pursuant to § 11-412.1 of the code, or
(v) funding for repairs, pursuant to Section 778 of the Real Property Actions and
Proceedings Law.
Gas work qualification application fee                                              $15.00
Limited gas work qualification application fee                                      $15.00
Filing an application for a building emissions limit adjustment for calendar years  $2,450
2024 - 2029 pursuant to § 28-320.8 of the Administrative Code
Filing application for a building emissions limit adjustment for not-for-profit
hospitals and healthcare facilities pursuant to § 28-320.9 of the Administrative   $335
Code
Consultations for a major project development covered by the program set out in 1
RCNY §                                                                             $50,000
101-17 regarding all phases of construction including applications, permitting, and
the issuance of a certificate of occupancy
Consultations for a major project development covered by the program set out in 1
RCNY §
101-17 regarding all phases of construction including applications, permitting, and
the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a development that the New York City
Department of Housing Preservation and Development certifies is for the
construction or rehabilitation of affordable housing and has received or, based on
documentation deemed sufficient to the department, reasonably expects to receive    $25,000
(i) a conveyance of municipally owned property pursuant to Article 15 or 16 of the
General Municipal Law, (ii) a loan, grant or tax exemption pursuant to the Private
Housing Finance Law or the General Municipal Law, (iii) a tax exemption pursuant to
Section 420-c of the Real Property Tax Law, (iv) a transfer pursuant to an in rem
foreclosure judgment pursuant to § 11-412.1 of the code, or (v) funding for repairs
pursuant to Section 778 of the Real Property Actions and Proceedings Law
Parking structure compliance reports
• Initial filing                                                                  $305
• Amended/subsequent filing                                                       $85
• Application for extension of time to complete repairs                           $65
Filing fee for periodic boiler inspection report [                                  $30 for each
                                                                                    boiler
Filing fee for report of periodic inspections and category 1 tests of elevator and  $30 for each
other devices [                                                                     device
Site safety plan review [
• Initial filing                                                                  $610
• Amended filing                                                                  $545
Lift Director Registration                                                          Initial: $115 Renewal:
                                                                                                  $115
Filing fee for reporting required upgrades to lighting systems and required         $115
installation of electrical sub-meters pursuant to §§ 28-310.2 and 28-311.5 
Filing fee for annual building emissions reports pursuant to 1 RCNY §
103-14:
• Simple Reports                                                                  $210
• Complex Reports                                                                 $615
• Requests for Extensions                                                         $60
• Good Faith Efforts Report                                                       $950
Annual Emission Limits Compliance Reports for Certain Buildings pursuant to 1 RCNY
§
103-17                                                                             $210
• Compliance Report                                                               $800
• Mediated Resolution Reports
Filing fee for application for adjustment to the annual building emissions limit
pursuant to § 28-320.7 
• External constraints pursuant to 1 RCNY §
103-12(b)                                                                           $3,540
• Financial constraints pursuant to 1 RCNY §                                     $690
103-12(c)(3)                                                                        $300
• Financial constraints pursuant to 1 RCNY §
103-12(c)(4)
Course provider registration                                                        Initial:      Renewal:             
                                                                                    $3,250        $3,185
 
 
[                               Initial Renewal Late Renewal Fee Reissuance Fee
Limited License for             $100    $75     $50              $50
Articulating Boom Crane
Limited License for Boom Trucks $100    $75     $50              $50
Limited License for Mini Cranes $100    $75     $50              $50
Limited License for Sign        $100    $75     $50              $50
Hanging Cranes
Limited License for Telehandler $100    $75     $50              $50
 
(Amended City Record 9/18/2017, eff. 10/18/2017; amended City Record 12/29/
2017, eff. 1/28/2018; amended City Record 11/7/2019, eff. 12/7/2019; amended
City Record 6/15/2020, eff. 7/15/2020; amended City Record 2/11/2021, eff. 3/
13/2021; amended City Record 3/10/2021, eff. 4/9/2021; amended City Record 7/
14/2021, eff. 8/13/2021; amended City Record 10/6/2021, eff. 11/5/2021; amended
City Record 3/4/2022, eff. 4/3/2022; amended City Record 1/27/2022, eff. 5/1/
2022; amended City Record 5/23/2022, eff. 6/22/2022; amended City Record 4/27/
2023, eff. 5/27/2023; amended City Record 12/7/2023, eff. 1/6/2024; amended
City Record 4/29/2024, eff. 5/29/2024; amended City Record 6/25/2024, eff. 7/
25/2024; amended City Record 11/18/2024, eff. 12/18/2024; amended City Record
12/20/2024, eff. 1/19/2025; amended City Record 5/20/2025, eff. 6/19/2025)
§ 101-06 Special Inspectors and Special Inspection Agencies.
   (a)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms
will have the following meanings:
      (1)   Accreditation. Evaluation of agencies, including testing and
calibration laboratories, fabricators and inspection bodies, against
internationally acceptable standards to demonstrate their performance
capability. Such accreditation is required to be conducted by a nationally
recognized accreditation agency accrediting to ISO 17020-12 international
standard, the requirements of this section, and approved by the department.
      (2)   Applicant. An owner, primary director or technical director.
      (3)   Approved Construction Documents. Any and all documents that set
forth the location and entire nature and extent of the proposed work with
sufficient clarity and detail to show that the proposed work conforms to the
provisions of this code and other applicable laws and rules. Such documents
include but are not limited to shop drawings, specifications, manufacturer's
instructions and standards that have been accepted by the design professional
of record or such other design professional retained by the owner for this
purpose.
      (4)   Approved Inspection Agency. This term has the same definition as
established in § 28-101.5 of the Administrative Code.
      (5)   Certification. Documented acknowledgment by a nationally recognized
organization of a technician's competency to perform certain functions.
      (6)   Commissioner. This term has the same definition as established in §
28-101.5 of the Administrative Code.
      (7)   Department. This term has the same definition as established in §
28-101.5 of the Administrative Code.
      (8)   Floor Area, Gross. This term has the same definition as established
in section 202 of the Building Code.
      (9)   Full Demolition. This term has the same definition as established
in section 202 of the Building Code (Demolition, Full).
      (10)   Job. A construction project that is the subject of one (1) or more
department-issued permits.
      (11)   Major Building. This term has the same definition as established
in section 202 of the Building Code.
      (12)   Materials. This term has the same definition as established in §
28-101.5 of the Administrative Code.
      (13)   New York City Construction Codes. The New York City Plumbing Code,
the New York City Building Code, the New York City Mechanical Code, the New
York City Fuel Gas Code, the New York City Energy Code, and Title 28, chapters
1 through 5 of the Administrative Code. Any reference to "this code" or "the
code" is deemed a reference to the New York City Construction Codes as here
defined.
      (14)   Owner. Any person, agent, firm, partnership, corporation or other
legal entity having a legal or equitable interest in or control of the special
inspection agency.
      (15)   Partial Demolition. This term has the same definition as
established in section 202 of the Building Code (Demolition, Partial).
      (16)   Primary Director. An individual possessing one or more of the
following licenses: Master Electrician, Master Fire Suppression Piping
Contractor, Oil Burning Equipment Installer, Master Plumber, or Registered
Design Professional and designated as "Director" in the Department's Special
Inspection Agency registration.
      (17)   Registered Design Professional. A New York State licensed and
registered architect (RA) or a New York State licensed and registered
professional engineer (PE).
      (18)   Registered Design Professional of Record. The registered design
professional who prepared or supervised the preparation of applicable
construction documents filed with the department.
      (19)   Relevant Experience. Direct participation and practice related to
the underlying construction activities that are the subject of the special
inspection where such participation has led to accumulation of knowledge and
skill required for the proper execution of such inspection.
      (20)   Special Inspection. Inspection of selected materials, equipment,
installation, methods of construction, fabrication, erection or placement of
components and connections, to ensure compliance with approved construction
documents and referenced standards as required by Chapter 17 of the Building
Code or elsewhere in the code or its referenced standards.
      (21)   Special Inspection Agency. An approved inspection agency employing
one (1) or more persons who are special inspectors and that has met all
requirements of this section.
      (22)   Special Inspection Category. The specific type(s) of special
inspection(s) that a special inspection agency may perform in accordance with
Appendix A of this section.
      (23)   Special Inspector. An individual employed by a special inspection
agency, who has the required qualifications set forth in this section to
perform or witness particular special inspections required by the code or by
the rules of the department, including but not limited to a qualified
registered design professional.
      (24)   Supervise/Supervision. With respect to a designated primary
inspector or inspection supervisor as provided for in
Appendix A of this section, oversight and responsible control by such primary
inspector or inspection supervisor having the necessary qualifications and
relevant experience to perform responsibilities associated with the special
inspection. Such supervision will include ensuring training and/or education
necessary to qualify the special inspector for his or her duties, including
continued training and education necessary to keep pace with developing
technology.
         Field supervision by the primary inspector or inspection supervisor as
required by
Appendix A of this section includes responsibility for determining competence
of special inspectors for the work they are authorized to inspect and on-site
monitoring of the special inspection activities at the job site to ensure that
a qualified special inspector is performing his or her duties when work
requiring inspection is in progress.
         With respect to a primary director or technical director of a special
inspection agency, oversight and responsible control by such primary director
or technical director who ensures that qualified inspectors are dispatched for
special inspections, that such special inspectors properly document their
activities, and that reports and logs are prepared in accordance with § 28-
114.2 of the Administrative Code. Such supervision includes ensuring training
and/or education necessary to qualify the special inspector for his or her
duties, including continued training and education necessary to keep pace with
developing technology.
      (25)   Technical Director. An individual possessing one or more of the
following licenses: Master Electrician, Master Fire Suppression Piping
Contractor, Oil Burning Equipment Installer, Master Plumber, or Registered
Design Professional and designated as "Technical Director" in the Department's
Special Inspection Agency registration.
      (26)   Technician. A person employed by the special inspection agency
assigned to perform the inspection or testing of construction activities or
materials used in construction or both. See ASTM E 329-21.
      (27)   Work. The construction activity including techniques, tests,
materials and equipment that is subject to special inspection.
   (b)   Duties.
      (1)   Availability and Compliance. A special inspector or special
inspection agency has the responsibilities set forth in Chapter 17 of the New
York City Building Code and elsewhere in the codes where special inspections
are required. The responsibilities of the special inspector or special
inspection agency at a special inspection include those tasks and standards set
forth in Chapter 17 of the code, the reference standards and elsewhere in the
code, this section or any rule of any agency in connection with the work that
is the subject of such special inspection.
      (2)   Obligation to Avoid Conflict of Interest. A special inspector and/
or a special inspection agency must not engage in any activities that may
conflict with their objective judgment and integrity, including but not limited
to having a financial and/or other interest in the construction, installation,
manufacture or maintenance of structures or components that they inspect. It is
not, in and of itself, a conflict of interest for a registered design
professional of record to perform a special inspection(s) on the project he or
she designed.
      (3)   Approved Construction Documents. The special inspector or special
inspection agency must comply with all applicable provisions in section
1704.1.1.2 of the Building Code that relate to approved construction documents.
      (4)   Documentation. A special inspection agency must maintain records of
special inspections on a job-by-job basis for at least six (6) years or for
such period as the commissioner determines, and must make such records
available to the department upon request. Such records must include field logs,
test results, laboratory reports, notes, noted deficiencies and dates of cures
of such deficiencies, photographs and such other information as may be
appropriate to establish the sufficiency of the special inspection as per
Chapter 17 of the Building Code or elsewhere in the New York City Construction
Codes or their referenced standards.
         (i)   The primary inspector or inspection supervisor as provided for
in
Appendix A of this section must review special inspection progress reports and
final reports for conformance with the approved plans, specifications and
workmanship provisions of Chapter 17 of the New York City Building Code or
elsewhere in the construction codes or their referenced standards. Such primary
inspector or inspection supervisor must sign and seal any required statements,
applications or reports.
         (ii)   The primary director or technical director of the special
inspection agency must file notice of satisfactory completion of any special
inspection with the department within ten (10) days of such completion on the
forms and in the manner required by the department.
      (5)   Obligation to Cooperate with Inquiries. All special inspectors or
special inspection agencies must cooperate with any investigation, including
any audit investigation, by the department, or other city or law enforcement
agency, into the activities at any job site or fabricating / manufacturing
facility for which they have been designated a special inspector or special
inspection agency and must provide prompt, accurate and complete responses to
reasonable inquiries by the department and other appropriate agencies about the
conduct of such business.
      (6)   Limitation of Duties. Activities as a special inspection agency are
specifically limited to those special inspections for which the special
inspection agency has been registered and for which it has satisfied the
requirements set forth in this section and Chapter 17 of the New York City
Building Code. No special inspector or special inspection agency may conduct
any special inspection that such inspector or inspection agency is not
qualified or registered to perform in accordance with the requirements of this
section and Chapter 17 of the New York City Building Code. No special inspector
or special inspection agency may perform an inspection or test with an expired
or lapsed New York State license or department registration.
      (7)   Obligation to Comply with an Order of the Commissioner. All special
inspectors and/or special inspection agencies must comply with an order of the
commissioner.
      (8)   Equipment and Tools. The special inspection agency must possess and
maintain tools and equipment required to perform the specific special
inspection. Such tools and equipment must be maintained and calibrated
periodically in accordance with applicable nationally accepted standards
governing that equipment or tool.
      (9)   Reporting. The special inspection agency must report any
discrepancies noted during the inspection to the contractor and when applicable
to the superintendent of construction, as well as to the site safety
coordinator or site safety manager, for correction. If the discrepancies are
not corrected, the discrepancies must be brought to the attention of the owner
and the registered design professional of record prior to the completion of
that phase of the work. The special inspector/special inspection agency must
report conditions noted as hazardous to life, safety or health that are not
immediately corrected to the department.
      (10)   Service of process. All special inspection agencies must have an
agent for the acceptance of service or maintain a New York City address. A Post
Office box is not acceptable for such purposes. All agencies must comply with
the requirements of this paragraph upon registration.
   (c)   Registration of Special Inspection Agencies.
      (1)   General. All agencies performing special inspections must be
registered with the department as a special inspection agency. Applicants, both
at the time of their approval and at the time of all subsequent renewals, are
subject to the provisions of Article 401 of Chapter 4 of Title 28 of the
Administrative Code.
      (2)   Form and Manner of Registration. An application for registration
must be submitted in a form and manner determined by the commissioner,
including electronically, and must provide such information as the commissioner
may require. Such registration will be deemed an acknowledgement by the special
inspection agency of its obligations hereunder.
      (3)   Registration of Special Inspection Categories. Agencies must
register for each special inspection category that the agency intends to
perform.
      (4)   Registration of Special Inspection Classes. Agencies must register
as class 1, class 2, or class 3 special inspection agencies for each special
inspection category for which the agency registers.
         (i)   Class 1. An agency registered as a Class 1 special inspection
agency for a special inspection category is permitted to perform the work
associated with such special inspection category on any project.
         (ii)   Class 2. An agency registered as a Class 2 special inspection
agency for a special inspection category is permitted to perform the work
associated with such special inspection category on any project, except those
involving:
            (A)   The construction of a new major building;
            (B)   The full demolition of a major building;
            (C)   The alteration of a major building including:
               1.   The removal of an entire story or more;
               2.   The partial demolition of twenty thousand (20,000) square
feet or more of gross floor area; or
               3.   The partial demolition of twenty (20) percent or more of
the gross floor area.
            (D)   The enlargement of a major building by more than ten thousand
(10,000) square feet of gross floor area.
         (iii)   Class 3. An agency registered as a Class 3 special inspection
agency for a special inspection category is permitted to perform the work
associated with this category on the following projects only:
            (A)   The construction, demolition, or alteration of a one-, two-,
or three-family dwelling; or
            (B)   The alteration of any building, including partial demolition,
of less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of gross floor area in total.
Exception: The special inspection categories of underpinning, mechanical means
and methods of demolition, and the protection of the sides of excavations
greater than ten (10) feet in depth must be performed only by special
inspection agencies registered as either class 1 or class 2 special inspection
agencies for such categories.
         Exception: The special inspection categories of underpinning,
mechanical means and methods of demolition, and the protection of the sides of
excavations greater than ten (10) feet in depth must be performed only by
special inspection agencies registered as either class 1 or class 2 special
inspection agencies for such categories.
      (5)   Agency Accreditation. For class 1 special inspection agencies only,
accreditation is required in order to maintain their class 1 registration
status. These agencies must demonstrate accreditation for their intended scope
of work by an approved accrediting body accrediting to the standards set forth
in this section and ISO 17020-12. Accrediting bodies other than federal
agencies must operate in accordance with ISO 17011-04 and must be members of an
internationally recognized cooperation of laboratory and inspection
accreditation bodies subject to a mutual recognition agreement.
      (6)   Qualifications. All special inspection agency primary directors and
technical directors must ensure that the special inspectors employed by the
agency meet the qualification requirements set forth in
Appendix A of this section and perform special inspections only within the area
of expertise for which such special inspectors are qualified. A Professional
Engineer who is listed in
Appendix A of this section as requiring qualification in civil, structural,
mechanical, electrical, fire protection, geotechnical or such other designation
must have had the education, training and experience that has led to an
accumulation of knowledge and skill required for the New York State-licensed
Professional Engineer to hold himself/herself out as a professional practicing
in that field.
      (7)   Insurance. All special inspection agencies must have a professional
liability/errors and omissions insurance policy in the minimum amount of five
hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00), claim-based, for the term of the
registration, as well as insurance required by the provisions of the New York
State Workers' Compensation and disability benefits laws.
         Exception: An agency that is limited to performing:
            (i)   fuel-oil storage and fuel-oil piping inspections,
            (ii)   sprinkler system inspections,
            (iii)   standpipe system inspections,
            (iv)   emergency and standby power system inspections,
            (v)   private on-site storm water disposal and detention system
installation, or
            (vi)   individual on-site private sewage disposal system
installation special inspections, and whose primary director or technical
director is not a registered design professional,
         is exempt from obtaining professional liability insurance coverage.
This exception applies so long as the primary director or technical director
maintains the insurance requirements required for his/her respective license in
accordance with Chapter 4 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code.
      (8)   Agency Structure. A special inspection agency must have one full-
time primary director and up to four (4) full-time technical directors who are
registered design professionals in charge and all special inspections must be
performed under their direct supervision. Neither the primary director nor the
technical directors may be retained by any other agency that provides special
inspection or testing services, nor may they be an owner of another special
inspection or testing agency or be involved in the supervision of such an
agency. The primary director and technical directors must possess relevant
experience in the inspection and testing industry and hold management positions
in the agency. The agency structure must comply with all relevant New York
State and Federal laws. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in
this paragraph, an agency that is limited to performing:
         (i)   fuel-oil storage and fuel-oil piping inspections,
         (ii)   sprinkler system inspections,
         (iii)   standpipe system inspections,
         (iv)   emergency and standby power system inspections,
         (v)   private on-site storm water disposal and detention system
installation, or
         (vi)   individual on-site private sewage disposal system installation
special inspections
      may have a primary director and technical directors who satisfy the
requirements of primary inspector or inspection supervisor for such tests and
inspections as set forth in
Appendix A of this rule.
      (9)   Audits. The operations of special inspectors and special inspection
agencies are subject to audit by the department at any time. Audits may involve
the examination of applications for registration as well as the performance and
documentation of special inspections. Audits may also be conducted upon receipt
of complaints or evidence of falsification, negligence or incompetence.
      (10)   Registration and Renewal Term. The term of an initial registration
is three (3) years, beginning on the primary director's birthday following the
date of registration, and may be renewed for additional three (3) year periods
after such initial registration in accordance with the provisions of Article
401 of Chapter 4 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code. If, after a period of
one year from the date of the expiration of its registration, the special
inspection agency has failed to apply for late renewal of its registration, the
special inspection agency must register anew, subject to the provisions of this
section.
      (11)   Denial or Renewals. Requests for renewal will be denied where
there has been a finding by the commissioner:
         (i)   that any special inspection or test conducted by the special
inspector or special inspection agency has not been performed in accordance
with the requirements set forth in the code, applicable reference standards or
the rules of the department,
         (ii)   that there was fraud or misrepresentation on any document or
report submitted to the department by the special inspector or special
inspection agency,
         (iii)   that any special inspection has been performed by an inspector
who does not possess the proper qualifications, or
         (iv)   that the owner, primary director or technical director has not
demonstrated good moral character.
      (12)   Registration and Renewal Fees. Fees are set forth in 1 RCNY §
101-03.
   (d)   Disciplinary Actions.
      (1)   Suspension or Revocation of Registration. The commissioner may, in
accordance with the provisions of Article 401 of Chapter 4 of Title 28 of the
Administrative Code and the rules of the department, suspend or revoke a
special inspection agency registration, with or without the imposition of
penalties, for violation of any provision of the New York City Construction
Codes or the rules of the department, or any other applicable laws or rules.
      (2)   The commissioner may refuse to accept any application or other
document submitted, pursuant to or in satisfaction of any requirement of this
section or of Chapter 17 of the New York City Building Code or any rule or
regulation of any agency that bears the signature of any primary director or
technical director who has been found, after an opportunity to be heard, to
have knowingly or negligently made a false statement or to have knowingly or
negligently falsified or allowed to be falsified any certificate, form, signed
statement, application, report or certification of the correction of a
violation required under the provisions of this section, the code or any rule
or regulation of any agency.
      (3)   Stop Work and Suspension of Permits. Upon any suspension or
revocation of registration, pursuant to paragraph (1) of subdivision (d) of
this section, unless replaced by another registered special inspection agency
within five (5) business days of such suspension or revocation, all jobs on
which the special inspection agency whose registration was suspended or revoked
is designated, shall be stopped and the permits shall be suspended until such
time as a duly registered special inspection agency is designated to reinspect
such tests or such inspections performed by the disciplined special inspection
agency, or until such permits expire.
   (e)   Obligations of Others. Nothing in this section is intended to alter or
diminish any obligation otherwise imposed by law, including but not limited to
the obligation of an owner, construction manager, general contractor,
contractor, materialman, architect, engineer, site safety manager, land
surveyor, superintendent of construction or other party involved in a
construction project to engage in sound engineering, design, and construction
practices, and to act in a reasonable and responsible manner to maintain a safe
construction site.
Appendix A
                     Qualifications1,2 
                                       Supplemental     Supplemental
Special                                Inspector        Inspector
Inspection 2022 Code Primary Inspector (Alternative 1)- (Alternative 2)-
Category   Section   or Inspection     under direct     under direct
                     Supervisor        supervision of   supervision of
                                       Inspection       Inspection
                                       Supervisor       Supervisor
                                      2022 Code    Qualifications1,2 
Special Inspection Category           Section      Primary Inspector or Inspection Supervisor                                    Supplemental Inspector (Alternative 1)- under direct supervision of          Supplemental Inspector (Alternative 2)- under direct supervision of
                                                                                                                                 Inspection Supervisor                                                        Inspection Supervisor
1. General Building Construction
Wall Panels, Curtain Walls, and                    ∙ RA or PE-Civil or Structural Engineering; and                             ∙ Bachelor's degree in Architecture or Civil Engineering or Structural
Veneers                               BC 1705.20   ∙ 1 Year relevant experience                                                Engineering; and                                                             ∙ Technician with 3 years relevant experience
                                                                                                                                 ∙ 2 years relevant experience
Combustible Exterior Wall Covering    BC 1705.16   ∙ PE or RA; and                                                             N/A                                                                          ∙ Technician with 2 years relevant experience
                                                   ∙ 1 year relevant experience
                                                   ∙ PE or RA; and                                                             ∙ Bachelor's degree in Architecture or Engineering; and                    ∙ Technician with ICC Certification as a Residential or Commercial Mechanical
Chimneys and Vents                    BC 1705.32   ∙ 1 year relevant experience                                                ∙ 2 years relevant experience                                              Inspector; and
                                                                                                                                                                                                              ∙ 5 years relevant experience
Flood Zone Compliance                 BC 1705.34,  ∙ PE or RA; and                                                             N/A                                                                          N/A
                                      BC G107     ∙ 1 year relevant experience
Luminous Exit Path Markings           BC 1705.35,  ∙ PE or RA; and                                                             N/A                                                                          ∙ Technician with relevant experience
                                      BC 1025.8    ∙ relevant experience
Tenant Protection Plan Compliance     BC 1705.26   ∙ PE or RA; and                                                             N/A                                                                          ∙ Technician with relevant experience
                                                   ∙ relevant experience
Nonpotable Water Systems              BC 1705.38   ∙ PE or RA; and                                                             N/A                                                                          ∙ ICC Certification as a Commercial or Residential Building Inspector; and 2
                                                   ∙ 1 year relevant experience                                                                                                                             years relevant experience
Exhaust and Vent Systems in Plenums                ∙ PE or RA; and                                                             ∙ Bachelor's degree in Architecture or Engineering; and                    ∙ Technician with ICC Certification as a Residential or Commercial Mechanical
and Ducts                             BC 1705.39   ∙ 1 year relevant experience                                                ∙ 2 years relevant experience                                              Inspector; and
                                                                                                                                                                                                              ∙ 5 years relevant experience
Class 3 Special Inspections (Small                ∙ PE or RA; and                                                             See Technician requirements for relevant inspection.                         ∙ See Technician requirements for relevant inspection.
Projects)                                          ∙ relevant experience
2. Fire Protection Systems & Fire-Resistant Construction
                                                                                                                                 ∙ Bachelor's degree in Architecture or Engineering; and (a or b)
Sprayed Fire-resistant Materials and  BC 1705.14   ∙ PE or RA; and                                                                                                                                          ∙ Technician with ICC Certification as a Spray-applied Fireproofing Special
Mastic and Intumescent Fire-resistant BC 1705.15   ∙ 1 year relevant experience                                                a. 1 year relevant experience; or                                            Inspector; and
Coatings                                                                                                                                                                                                      ∙ 3 years relevant experience
                                                                                                                                 b. ICC Certification as a Spray-applied Fireproofing Special Inspector
Smoke Control Systems                 BC 1705.18   ∙ PE or RA; and                                                             ∙ AABC Test and Balance Technician Certification; and                      ∙ Technician with NEBB Air Balancer Certification; and
                                                   ∙ 1 year relevant experience (mechanical and/or fire protection)            ∙ 3 years relevant experience                                              ∙ 3 years relevant experience
                                                   ∙ PE - Mechanical Engineering; and
                                                   ∙ 1 year relevant experience
Sprinkler Systems and                 BC 1705.29,  OR                                                                            ∙ Bachelor's degree in Mechanical Engineering; and                         ∙ Technician with NICET Level II Certification in Fire Protection-Inspection
Standpipe Systems                     BC 1705.30   ∙ NYC Licensed Class A or Class B Master Fire Suppression Piping Contractor ∙ 3 years relevant experience                                              and Testing of Water-based Systems
                                                   License; and
                                                   ∙ Independent of installer
Fire-resistant Penetrations and       BC 1705.17   ∙ PE or RA; and                                                             ∙ Bachelor's degree in Architecture or Engineering; and                    ∙ Technician with 3 years relevant experience
Joints                                             ∙ 1 year relevant experience                                                ∙ 2 years relevant experience
                                                   ∙ PE - Mechanical, Electrical, or Fire Protection; and
Emergency and Standby Power Systems                ∙ 1 year relevant experience
(Generators)                          BC 1705.36   OR                                                                            ∙ Technician with 5 years relevant experience                              N/A
                                                   ∙ Licensed electrician independent of installer; and
                                                   ∙ 3 years relevant experience
Class 3 Special Inspections (Small                ∙ PE or RA; and                                                             ∙ See Technician requirements for relevant inspection                      ∙ See Technician requirements for relevant inspection
Projects)                                          ∙ relevant experience
3. Plumbing & Mechanical Systems
                                                   ∙ PE or RA; and                                                             ∙ Bachelor's Degree in Architecture, or Engineering; and                   ∙ Technician with ICC Certification as a Residential or Commercial Mechanical
Mechanical Systems                    BC 1705.21   ∙ 1 year relevant experience; or                                            ∙ 2 years relevant experience; and                                         Inspector; and
                                                   ∙ ICC Certification                                                         ∙ ICC Certification as a Residential or Commercial Mechanical Inspector    ∙ 3 years relevant experience
                                                   as a Residential or Commercial Mechanical Inspector
                                                   ∙ PE or RA; and
                                                   ∙ 1 year relevant experience
Fuel-Oil Storage and Fuel-Oil Piping                                                                                             ∙ Bachelors degree in Architecture, or Mechanical, Marine or Civil         ∙ Technician with ICC Certification as a Residential or Commercial Mechanical
Systems                               BC 1705.22   OR                                                                            Engineering; and                                                             Inspector; and
                                                   ∙ Licensed New York City Class A and B Oil Burner Equipment Installer; and  ∙ 3 years relevant experience                                              ∙ 5 years relevant experience
                                                   ∙ 1 year experience in the inspection of heating systems, Fuel burning-Fuel
                                                   storage systems.
Private On-Site Storm Drainage Water               ∙ PE or RA; and
Disposal Systems, and Detention       BC 1705.27,  ∙ 1 year relevant experience                                                ∙ Bachelor's Degree in Architecture, Civil or Mechanical Engineering; and
Facilities, and Individual On-Site    BC 1705.28   OR                                                                            ∙ 3 years relevant experience                                              N/A
Private Sewage Disposal Systems                    ∙ NYC Licensed Master Plumber; and
Installation                                       ∙ 3 years relevant experience
                                                   ∙ PE or RA - Civil or Mechanical Engineering; and                           ∙ Bachelor's Degree in Architecture, or Civil or Mechanical Engineering; an∙ Technician with ICC Certification as a Residential or Commercial Mechanical
Heating Systems                       BC 1705.31   ∙ 1 year relevant experience                                                ∙ 3 years relevant experience; and                                         Inspector; and
                                                                                                                                 ∙ ICC Certification as a Residential or Commercial Mechanical Inspector    ∙ 5 years relevant experience
Class 3 Special Inspections (Small                ∙ PE or RA; and                                                             ∙ See Technician requirements for relevant inspection                      ∙ See Technician requirements for relevant inspection
Projects)                                          ∙ relevant experience
4. Structural Materials & Construction Operations
Seismic Resistance of Seismic Force-
Resisting Systems and Structural
Steel Elements
                                      BC 1705.2.4,
Seismic Resistance of Designated      BC
Seismic Systems                       1705.12.1,
                                      BC
Seismic Resistance of Anchorage for   1705.12.2,   ∙ PE or RA; and                                                             ∙ Bachelor's degree in engineering or architecture; and                    ∙ Technician with ICC Certification as a Structural Steel and Bolting Special
Access Floor                          BC           ∙ 1 year relevant experience                                                ∙ 2 years relevant experience                                              Inspector; and
                                      1705.12.3,                                                                                                                                                              ∙ 3 years relevant experience
Seismic Resistance of Plumbing,       BC
Mechanical, Fuel Gas and Electrical   1705.12.4,
Components                            BC 1705.5.5

Seismic Resistance of Storage Racks

Seismic Resistance of Wood Structures
Seismic Resistance of Seismic         BC 1705.12.5 ∙ PE; and                                                                   ∙ Bachelor's degree in Geotechnical, Civil, or Structural engineering; and N/A
Isolation Systems                                  ∙ 2 years relevant experience                                               ∙ 5 years relevant experience
Welding:                                           ∙ PE or RA; and
Steel, High pressure Steam Piping,    BC 1705.2.1, ∙ AWS Certified Welding Inspector (AWS-CWI);                                ∙ AWS Certified Welding Inspector (AWS-CWI)                                ∙ AWS Certified Associate Welding Inspector (AWS-CAWI)
and High temperature Hot Water        BC 1705.23,  OR                                                                            OR
Piping, High pressure Gas Piping, and BC 1705.24,  ∙ PE or RA; and                                                             ∙ ICC Certification as a Structural Welding Inspector (ICC-SWI)            Note: AWS-CAWI only permitted to inspect when an AWS-CWI or ICC-SWI is on
Aluminum                              BC 1705.33   ∙ ICC Certification as a Structural Welding Inspector (ICC-SWI); and        ∙ 3 years relevant experience                                              site supervising
                                                   ∙ 1 year relevant experience
                                                   ∙ PE or RA; and                                                             ∙ Bachelor's degree in engineering or architecture; and                    ∙ Technician with ICC Certification as a Structural Steel and Bolting
Structural Steel - Details            BC 1705.2.2  ∙ 1 year relevant experience                                                ∙ 2 years relevant experience                                              Inspector; and
                                                                                                                                                                                                              ∙ 3 years relevant experience
Structural Steel - High-Strength
Bolting                                            ∙ PE-Civil/Structural; and                                                                                                                               ∙ Technician with ICC Certification as a Structural Steel and Bolting
                                      BC 1705.2.3  ∙ ICC Certification as a Structural Steel and Bolting Inspector; and        N/A                                                                          Inspector; and
Note: Inspection can also be                       ∙ 1 year relevant experience                                                                                                                             ∙ 3 years relevant experience
performed by agency approved to
inspect welding
                                      BC 1705.2.2, ∙ PE or RA; and                                                             ∙ Bachelor's degree in engineering or architecture; and                    ∙ Technician with ICC Certification as a Structural Steel and Bolting Special
Structural Cold-formed Steel          BC 1705.2.6  ∙ 1 year relevant experience                                                ∙ 2 years relevant experience                                              Inspector; and
                                                                                                                                                                                                              ∙ 3 years relevant experience
Open-web steel joists and joist                    ∙ PE or RA; and                                                                                                                                          ∙ Technician with ICC Certification as a Structural Steel and Bolting Special
girders                               BC 1705.2.7  ∙ 1 year relevant experience                                                N/A                                                                          Inspector; and
                                                                                                                                                                                                              ∙ 3 years relevant experience
Concrete - Cast-in-place & Precast                                                                                                                                                                            ∙ ACI Certification as an Associate Concrete Construction Special Inspector
                                                   ∙ PE or RA; and                                                             ∙ ACI Certification as Concrete Construction Special Inspector (ACI-CCSI)  (ACI-ACCSI)
Note: Licensed concrete testing lab   BC 1705.3    ∙ 1 year relevant experience                                                OR
to perform sampling and testing of                                                                                               ∙ ICC Certification as Concrete Special Inspector (ICC-CSI)                Note: ACI-ACCSI only permitted to perform inspection under on-site
cylinders                                                                                                                                                                                                     supervision by PE, RA, ACI-CCSI, or ICC-CSI
                                                   ∙ PE - Civil/Structural; and                                                ∙ Bachelor's degree in engineering; and                                    ∙ ICC Certification as Prestressed Concrete Special Inspector; and
Prestressed Concrete                  BC 1705.3    ∙ 1 year relevant experience                                                ∙ ICC Certification as Prestressed Concrete Special Inspector; and         ∙ 3 years relevant experience
                                                                                                                                 ∙ 1 year relevant experience
                                                   ∙ PE or RA; and                                                             ∙ Bachelor's degree in engineering or architecture; and                    ∙ ICC Certification as a Structural Masonry Special Inspector; and
Masonry                               BC 1705.4    ∙ 1 year relevant experience                                                ∙ ICC Certification as a Structural Masonry Special Inspector; and         ∙ 2 years relevant experience
                                                                                                                                 ∙ 1 year relevant experience
Wood construction- Prefabricated Wood              ∙ PE or RA; and                                                                                                                                          ∙ ICC Certification as a Commercial or Residential Building Inspector; and
I-Joists, Metal-plate-connected Wood  BC 1705.5.3  ∙ 1 year relevant experience                                                N/A                                                                          ∙ 2 years relevant experience
Trusses, and High-load Diaphragms
Type IV Construction                  BC 1705.5.6  ∙ PE or RA; and                                                             N/A                                                                          ∙ ICC Certification as a Commercial or Residential Building Inspector; and
                                                   ∙ 1 year relevant experience                                                                                                                             ∙ 2 years relevant experience
Subsurface Conditions-Subgrade        BC 1705.6    ∙ PE - Geotechnical, Civil, or Structural; and                              N/A                                                                          N/A
Inspection                                         ∙ 1 year relevant experience
                                                                                                                                                                                                              ∙ Technician with NICET Level I Geotechnical Certification; and
                                                                                                                                                                                                              ∙ 2 years relevant experience
Subsurface Conditions-Fill Placement, BC 1705.6    ∙ PE - Geotechnical, Civil, or Structural; and                              ∙ Bachelor's degree in Geotechnical, Civil, or Structural engineering; and
In-place Density                                   ∙ 1 year relevant experience                                                ∙ 1 year relevant experience                                               OR
                                                                                                                                                                                                              ∙ Technician with ICC Certification Soils Special Inspector
                                                                                                                                                                                                              ∙ 1 year relevant experience
Subsurface Investigations, Borings    BC 1705.27.1 ∙ PE - Geotechnical, Civil, or Structural; and                              ∙ Bachelor's degree in Geotechnical, Civil, or Structural engineering; and ∙ Technician with NICET Level II Geotechnical Certification; and
and Test Pits                                      ∙ 1 year relevant experience                                                ∙ 1 year relevant experience                                               ∙ Must take and pass Soils classification sections of NICET certification
                                      BC 1705.7,                                                                                 ∙ Bachelor's degree in Geotechnical, Civil, or Structural engineering; and ∙ Technician with NICET Level III Geotechnical Certification
                                      BC 1810,     ∙ PE - Geotechnical, Civil, or Structural; and                              ∙ 3 years relevant experience
Deep Foundations and Helical Piles    BC 1811,     ∙ 1 year relevant experience                                                                                                                             Note: Supplemental Inspector only permitted to inspect when multiple driving
                                      BC 1812                                                                                    Note: Supplemental Inspector only permitted to inspect when multiple driving rigs are used on the same site and Primary Inspector is on site supervising
                                      BC 1705.9                                                                                  rigs are used on the same site and Primary Inspector is on site supervising
Vertical Masonry Foundations          BC 1705.19   ∙ PE - Geotechnical, Civil, or Structural; and                              ∙ Bachelor's degree in Geotechnical, Civil or Structural; and              N/A
                                                   ∙ 1 year relevant experience                                                ∙ 3 years relevant experience
Prestressed Rock and Soil Anchor      BC 1705.8    ∙ PE - Geotechnical, Civil, or Structural; and                              ∙ Bachelor's degree in Geotechnical, Civil or Structural; and              N/A
Tests                                              ∙ 1 year relevant experience                                                ∙ 3 years relevant experience
                                      BC
Underpinning and Alternate Methods of 1705.25.4,   ∙ PE - Geotechnical, Civil, or Structural; and                              ∙ Bachelor's degree in Geotechnical, Civil or Structural; and
Support of Buildings and Adjacent     BC           ∙ 1 year relevant experience                                                ∙ 3 years relevant experience                                              N/A
Property                              1705.25.8.3,
                                      BC 1817 
                                      BC 1705.25,
                                      BC
Structural - Stability - Alterations  1705.25.1,
to Existing Structures, Construction  BC
Operations Influencing Adjacent       1705.25.2,
Structures, Mechanical Means and      BC           ∙ PE - Civil / Structural; and                                              ∙ Bachelor's Degree in Civil or Structural Engineering; and                N/A
Methods of Demolition, Other Means of 1705.25.5.1, ∙ 1 year relevant experience                                                ∙ 3 years relevant experience
Demolition, and Raising and Moving of BC
a Building                            1705.25.5.2
                                      BC
                                      1705.25.6,
                                      BC 3304.4
Excavation – Sheeting, Shoring, and BC           ∙ PE - Geotechnical, Civil, or Structural; and                              ∙ Bachelor's degree in Geotechnical, Civil or Structural; and
Bracing                               1705.25.3,   ∙ 1 year relevant experience                                                ∙ 3 years relevant experience                                              ∙ Technician with 5 years relevant experience
                                      BC 3304.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Anchors in Concrete:
                                                                                                                                 Anchors in Concrete:                                                         ∙ ACI Certification as an Associate Concrete Construction Special Inspector
                                                                                                                                 ∙ ACI Certification as Concrete Construction Special Inspector (ACI-CCSI)  (ACI-ACCSI)
                                                                                                                                 OR
Post-installed Anchors                BC 1705.37   ∙ PE or RA; and                                                             ∙ ICC Certification as Concrete Special Inspector (ICC-CSI)                Note: ACI-ACCSI only permitted to perform inspection under on-site
                                                   ∙ 1 year relevant experience                                                                                                                             supervision by PE, RA, ACI-CCSI, or ICC-CSI
                                                                                                                                 Anchors in Masonry:                                                          Anchors in Masonry:
                                                                                                                                 ∙ Bachelor's degree in engineering or architecture; and                    ∙ ICC Certification as a Structural Masonry Special Inspector; and
                                                                                                                                 ∙ ICC Certification as a Structural Masonry Special Inspector; and         ∙ 2 years relevant experience
                                                                                                                                 ∙ 1 year relevant experience
Class 3 Special Inspections (Small                 ∙ PE or RA; and                                                             ∙ See Technician requirements for relevant inspection                      ∙ See Technician requirements for relevant inspection
Projects)                                          ∙ relevant experience
 
Notes:
1.   Abbreviations in the qualifications descriptions:
   AABC – Associated Air Balance Council
   ACI – American Concrete Institute
   AWS – American Welding Society
   ICC – International Code Council
   NEBB – National Environmental Balancing Bureau
   NICET – National Institute for Certification in Engineering Technologies
   PE – A New York State Licensed and Registered Professional Engineer
   RA – A New York State Licensed and Registered Architect
2.   Bachelor's Degrees must be from an accredited institution or equivalent.
(Amended City Record 2/1/2016, eff. 3/2/2016; amended City Record 2/5/2018,
eff. 3/7/2018; amended City Record 9/23/2019, eff. 10/23/2019; amended City
Record 6/13/2023, eff. 7/13/2023)
§ 101-07 Approved Agencies.
   (a)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, all terms used herein
shall have the same meanings as set forth in the New York City Building Code
("Building Code"). In addition, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
      (1)   Approved boiler inspection agency. An agency employing qualified
boiler inspectors.
      (2)   Approved inspection agency. An agency that is approved by the
department as qualified to perform one or more of the inspections required by
the New York City Construction Codes ("Construction Codes").
      (3)   Approved pipe welder qualifying agency. An agency that is approved
by the department to qualify welders of gas piping installations in accordance
with section 406.1.1.1 of the New York City Fuel Gas Code ("Fuel Gas Code") and
high pressure steam piping systems in accordance with section 1210 of the New
York City Mechanical Code ("Mechanical Code").
      (4)   Approved product certification agency. An inspection agency that is
approved by the department as qualified to inspect at regular intervals the
material that is to be or is listed and labeled, to verify that the labeled
material is representative of the material tested.
      (5)   Approved progress inspection agency. An agency that is approved by
the department as qualified to perform one or more of the progress inspections
required by section BC 109 of the Building Code.
      (6)   Approved testing agency. An agency that is approved by the
department as qualified to test and evaluate the performance of one or more of
the materials regulated in its use by the Construction Codes. Such term shall
include, when approved pursuant to department rules, a third party testing or
certification agency, evaluation agency, testing laboratory, testing service or
other entity concerned with product evaluation. Such term shall also include a
licensed concrete testing laboratory.
      (7)   Certificate of compliance. A certificate stating that materials
meet specified standards or that work was done in compliance with approved
construction documents and other applicable provisions of law.
      (8)   Construction documents. Plans and specifications and other written,
graphic and pictorial documents, prepared or assembled for describing the
design, location and physical characteristics of the elements of the project
necessary for obtaining a building permit.
      (9)   Qualified boiler inspector. An inspector who has been issued a
certificate of competence by the State Department of Labor and who is employed
by an authorized insurance company, a high pressure boiler operating engineer
licensed pursuant to the provisions of the New York City Administrative Code
("Administrative Code"), a class A or class B oil burning equipment installer
licensed pursuant to the provisions of such Code, a master plumber licensed
pursuant to the provisions of such Code, or a journeyman plumber acting under
the direct and continuing supervision of a master plumber licensed pursuant to
the provisions of such Code. For inspection of boilers at properties owned or
managed by the Department of Education, such term shall include an individual
who has passed the National Board Commission examination and who has 5 years
relevant experience, as defined below, approved by the department.
      (10)   Qualified commissioning agent. An individual with at least 3 years
of relevant experience.
      (11)   Qualified elevator director. An individual licensed in accordance
with Article 421 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code.
      (12)   Qualified elevator inspector. An individual licensed in accordance
with Article 422 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code.
      (13)   Qualified exterior wall inspector. A registered design
professional with at least seven years of relevant experience with facades over
six stories.
      (14)   Qualified parking structure inspector. An engineer as defined in §
28-101.5 of the Administrative Code with three years of relevant experience
with building structures.
      (15)   Qualified retaining wall inspector. An engineer as defined in §
28-101.5 of the Administrative Code with three years of relevant experience
with retaining walls over 10 feet.
      (16)   Registered design professional. A New York State licensed and
registered architect (RA) or a New York State licensed and registered
professional engineer (PE).
      (17)   Relevant experience. Direct participation and practice related to
the underlying construction activities that are the subject of the special or
other inspection where such participation has led to accumulation of knowledge
and skill required for the proper execution of the special or other inspection.
      (18)   Supervision. Oversight and responsible control by a registered
design professional having the necessary qualifications and relevant experience
to effectively perform responsibilities associated with the inspection being
supervised. Field supervision shall include responsibility for determining
competence of special inspectors for the work they are authorized to inspect
and monitoring the inspection activities at the jobsite to assure that the
qualified inspector is performing his or her duties when work requiring
inspection is in progress. The supervisor shall review inspection progress
reports and final reports for conformance with the approved plans,
specifications and workmanship provisions of the Building Code. Such
supervision and control shall be evidenced by the supervisor's signature and
seal upon any required statements, applications and/or reports.
      (19)   Technician. An employee of the inspection or testing agency
assigned to perform the actual operations of inspection or testing. See ASTM E
329-14a, paragraph 3.1.9.
   (b)   General requirements for approved agencies.
      (1)   Availability and compliance. An approved agency shall have
responsibilities set forth in this rule and in the Building Code. Such agency
shall employ experienced personnel qualified to conduct, supervise and evaluate
the tests or inspections that it undertakes.
      (2)   Duties. Except as provided for in paragraph (8) of subdivision (c)
of this section, the approved agency shall:
         (i)   Examine all relevant documents, including approved construction
documents and/or manufacturers' instructions that define and describe
requirements in connection with the test or inspection to be performed.
         (ii)   Confirm that the documents are sufficient to enable the proper
performance of the test or inspection.
         (iii)   Confirm that any relevant approved construction documents are
acceptable to the registered design professional of record or another design
professional retained by the owner for the purpose of accepting shop drawings
and that the manufacturers' instructions are current. Acceptance shall be
demonstrated in writing on the drawing by the registered design professional.
         (iv)   Confirm through the test or inspection that the installation
and materials are in compliance with all relevant documents, reference
standards and the Building Code.
      (3)   Documentation. An approved agency shall maintain records of
inspections and tests for at least 6 years or for such shorter period as the
commissioner shall determine and shall make such records available to the
department upon request. Such records shall include field logs, test results,
laboratory reports, notes, photographs and such other information as may be
necessary or appropriate to establish the sufficiency of the inspection. The
principal of the approved agency shall furnish to the department upon request
such records of any inspection or test, in the manner required by the
department.
      (4)   Obligation to cooperate with inquiries. All approved agencies shall
cooperate with any investigation by the department, or other city or law
enforcement agency, into the activities at any job site or fabricating/
manufacturing/testing facility for which such agencies have undertaken any
inspections or tests and shall provide prompt, accurate and complete responses
to reasonable inquiries by the department and other such city or law
enforcement agencies about the conduct of such activities.
      (5)   Limitation of duties. An approved agency shall not engage in any
activity for which it has not been approved, registered, licensed or
accredited. An inspector or technician employed by an approved agency shall not
perform inspections or tests beyond the area of expertise for which he or she
is qualified in accordance with the standards set by the department, the
accrediting agency, if applicable, and the agency supervisor.
      (6)   Obligation to comply with an order of the commissioner. All
approved agencies shall comply with an order of the commissioner.
      (7)   Maintenance of insurance. Every approved agency shall maintain the
following insurance coverage:
         (i)   A general liability policy in the amount of one million dollars.
Where a registered design professional of record for an application for
construction document approval also serves personally, without relying on
persons under his or her supervision, as the progress inspector for such
application in accordance with paragraph (3) of subdivision (c) of this
section, a general liability policy shall not be required.
         (ii)   Insurance required by the provisions of the New York State
Workers' Compensation and Disability Benefits Laws; and
         (iii)   For progress inspection agencies, qualified exterior wall
inspectors and licensed concrete testing laboratories only, in addition to the
requirements of (i) and (ii) above, a Professional Liability/Errors and
Omissions insurance policy in the amount of at least three hundred thousand
dollars.
      (8)   Agency structure. An approved agency's structure shall comply with
all applicable New York State and Federal laws.
      (9)   Audits. The operations of approved agencies shall be subject to
audit at any time. Audits may examine applications for registration or
accreditation as well as the performance and documentation of inspections and
tests. Audits may also be conducted upon receipt of complaints or evidence of
falsification, negligence or incompetence.
   (c)   Qualifications and responsibilities of approved agencies. 
      (1)   All approved agencies, including single person approved agencies,
shall comply with the requirements of this section and Article 114 of Title 28
of the Administrative Code and shall meet the qualifications set forth herein.
      (2)   Testing and inspection agencies for product certification.
         (i)   A testing agency shall be deemed an approved testing agency for
testing materials to specified standards in accordance with the Construction
Codes and their referenced standards where such agency has achieved
accreditation for such testing from International Accreditation Service, Inc.
or an equivalent accrediting agency accrediting to the standards set forth in
International Standards Organization ("ISO") 17025, 2005 edition (General
Requirements for the Competence of Testing and Calibration Laboratories) or a
federal agency. Accrediting agencies, other than federal agencies, must be
members of an internationally recognized cooperation of laboratory and
inspection.
         (ii)   An inspection and/or product certification agency shall be
deemed an approved inspection and/or approved product certification agency for
listing and labeling materials to specified standards in accordance with the
Construction Codes and their referenced standards where such agency has
achieved accreditation for such listing and labeling from International
Accreditation Service, Inc. or an equivalent accrediting agency accrediting to
the standards set forth in ISO 17020, 2012 edition (General Criteria for the
Operation of Various Types of Bodies Performing Inspection), ISO 17065. 2012
edition (General Requirements for Bodies Operating Product Certification
Systems) or a federal agency. Accrediting agencies, other than federal
agencies, must be members of an internationally recognized cooperation of
laboratory and inspection accreditation bodies subject to a mutual recognition
agreement.
         (iii)   An approved testing and/or approved inspection agency shall
have in responsible charge a director who shall be qualified by education and
relevant experience to undertake the tests or inspections performed.
Qualification may be based on the standards set forth in ASTM E 329-14a. The
director shall personally supervise the testing and/or inspection of materials
for compliance with prescribed nationally recognized standards. Concrete
testing laboratories shall follow the provisions of paragraph (6) of
subdivision (c) of this section.
         (iv)   Technicians shall be qualified by education and relevant
experience to perform all tests or inspections they may be required to conduct
under the supervision of the director. Qualification may be based on the
standards set forth in ASTM E 329-14a.
         (v)   An approved testing agency shall furnish to the department such
proof of qualifications of all personnel and information regarding the
equipment used to perform tests as the department may from time to time
request, and any other such information that the commissioner deems appropriate
in assessing the competency of the agency's operations.
         (vi)   All approved testing and approved inspection agency inspection
and test reports shall be retained in a form acceptable to the department and
shall bear the name of the approved agency, its accreditation, license or
department acceptance identification information where applicable, the name of
the director who supervised the inspection or test, the names of all personnel
who performed the inspection or test, and the names of all witnesses to such
inspection or test.
      (3)   Progress inspection agencies.
         (i)   Responsibility of owner. It shall be the responsibility of the
owner to retain an approved agency to perform all required progress inspections
for a new building or alteration project.
         (ii)   Obligation to avoid conflict of interest. A progress inspector
and/or a progress inspection agency shall not engage in any activities that may
conflict with their objective judgment and integrity, including, but not
limited to, having a financial and/or other interest in the construction,
installation, manufacture or maintenance of structures or components that they
inspect.
         (iii)   Agency qualifications. Registered design professionals with
relevant experience shall be deemed approved progress inspection agencies,
without further requirement of registration or accreditation, for the purpose
of conducting the progress inspections required by section BC 109.3.
         (iv)   Inspector qualifications. A progress inspection agency shall
conduct required progress inspections, provided such inspections are conducted
by a registered design professional with relevant experience or an otherwise
qualified individual pursuant to the following table:
                                      Qualifications
                                                           Supplemental
Progress Inspection 2014 Code Section Primary Inspector or Inspector under
Category                              Inspection           direct supervision
                                      Supervisor           of Inspection
                                                           Supervisor
Progress Inspection Category              2014 Code Qualifications
                                          Section   Primary Inspector or Inspection Supervisor                                    Supplemental Inspector under direct supervision of Inspection Supervisor
Preliminary inspection                    AC 28-    ∙ Registered design professional with relevant experience                   ∙ A person with relevant experience
                                          116.2.1
Compliance inspections                    AC 28-    ∙ Registered design professional with relevant experience                   ∙ A person with relevant experience
                                          116.2.2
Footing and foundation                    BC        ∙ Registered design professional with relevant experience                   ∙ A person with relevant experience
                                          110.3.1
                                          BC
                                          110.3.2;  ∙ Engineer with relevant experience or licensed professional land surveyor
Lowest floor elevation                    BC        with relevant experience                                                      ∙ A person with relevant experience
                                          G105.3,
                                          Item 1
Structural wood frame                     BC        ∙ Registered design professional with relevant experience                   ∙ A person with relevant experience
                                          110.3.3
Fire-resistance-rated construction        BC        ∙ Registered design professional with relevant experience                   ∙ A person with relevant experience
                                          110.3.4
                                                    ∙ Registered design professional of record for the respective work;

Energy code compliance – "residential"1 BC        or                                                                            ∙ 3 years' experience in the inspection or construction observation of
buildings                                 110.3.5   ∙ Registered design professional with five years' experience in the design, buildings for Energy Code-regulated systems
                                                    construction, construction observation and/or inspection of Energy Code-
                                                    regulated systems for buildings
                                                    ∙ Registered design professional of record for the respective work;

                                                    or                                                                            ∙ 3 years' experience in the inspection or construction observation of the
Energy code compliance – "commercial"2  BC        ∙ Registered design professional with five years' experience in the design, system type(s) for Energy Code-regulated systems in commercial buildings for
buildings                                 110.3.5   construction, construction observation and/or inspection of Energy Code-      which he/she performs progress inspections
                                                    regulated systems for commercial buildings, at least three years of which
                                                    shall be for the system type(s) for which he/she performs progress
                                                    inspections
Other                                     BC        ∙ Registered design professional with relevant experience                   ∙ A person with relevant experience
                                          110.3.6
Final                                     AC 28-    ∙ Registered design professional with relevant experience                   ∙ A person with relevant experience
                                          116.2.4.2
Place of assembly emergency lighting      AC 28-    ∙ Registered design professional with relevant experience                   ∙ A person with relevant experience
                                          116.2.2
1   As such term "residential" is defined in the New York City Energy Conservation Code.
2   As such term "commercial" is defined in the New York City Energy Conservation Code.
 
         (v)   Verifications by progress inspector. In addition to all other
items required to be inspected in accordance with applicable laws and rules,
the progress inspector shall verify the following:
            (A)   Completion of related special inspections. A progress
inspection agency's performance of a progress inspection shall include
verification that any special inspections that were required to have been
conducted prior to the progress inspection have been documented as completed.
            (B)   Updated approved documents. Prior to performing a progress
inspection, the progress inspection agency shall verify that the relevant
approved construction documents, for the purpose of the progress inspection,
represent the built conditions. If changes are required in the approved
construction documents for the purpose of the progress inspection, the progress
inspector shall wait to perform the inspections until the updated construction
documents have been approved, including the energy analysis, where applicable.
            (C)   Energy code verifications. Progress inspectors for Energy
Code compliance shall perform inspections in accordance with the following:
               1.   Reports. The progress inspector is required to compile all
documentation, as required in paragraph (3) of subdivision (b) of this section,
into a report. The report must also include, but shall not be limited to:
                  i.   Identification of the Energy Code Progress Inspections
performed;
                  ii.   A list of the approved construction documents
referenced for each inspection performed;
                  iii.   Identification of any inspections performed where the
built conditions observed were not in compliance with the energy code as
documented in the approved construction documentation;
                  iv.   Identification of any inspections performed where non-
compliant built conditions, documented in accordance with Item iii above, were
corrected and made in compliance with the energy code as documented in the
approved construction documentation;
                  v.   Photographic documentation. Each report must include a
dated photo sufficient to identify the building, a dated photo of the progress
inspector and/or his or her employees performing physical inspections, and a
dated photo for each inspection performed. All photographs must be date-
stamped, clearly legible, labeled indicating the related inspection, and
include enough visible evidence to support the determinations contained in the
report, including but not limited to scale reference demonstrating insulation
depths, insulation installer certificate.
                  vi.   Signed and sealed by the Progress Inspection Agency
with a statement of approval such as "To the best of my knowledge, belief, and
professional judgement, all work performed substantially conforms to the latest
relevant approved construction documents and has been performed in accordance
with applicable provisions of the New York City Energy Conservation Code and
other designed rules and regulations."
               2.   Sampling. Unless noted otherwise in the Inspection/Test
columns of Tables I and II of 1 RCNY §
5000-01(h), required inspections or tests must be performed on not less than
15% of each relevant construction item in the scope of work as listed in the
applicable table, and on not less than one of each type where applicable.
Selection of such sample construction shall be at the sole discretion of the
progress inspector. Nothing in this item shall prevent the progress inspector
from determining that, in his or her professional judgment, more than 15% of a
given type of construction item must be inspected.
               3.   Phased inspection for temporary certificates of occupancy.
Prior to issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy for less than the
total scope of work, all work serving the portion of the building for which the
temporary certificate of occupancy is to be issued must be inspected. Where a
practical difficulty for some inspections is demonstrated to the commissioner,
the commissioner may grant a waiver of those inspections for a specified time
or until final inspection for the final certificate of occupancy.
               4.   Phased inspection of controls. Notwithstanding item 3 of
this clause, where inspection of the HVAC and lighting controls for central
head-end systems and communication networks depends upon completion of
installation of all related end devices and components located in the building,
such inspection of such controls for head-end systems and communication
networks must be completed prior to issuance of a final certificate of
occupancy.
               5.   Installed value more efficient than approved energy
analysis. Where the progress inspector verifies that, for any given space or
system, the installed performance value is more efficient than the performance
value on the approved construction documents, the progress inspector may
approve such space without the need for revised construction documents to be
submitted to and approved by the Department.
      (4)   Elevator agencies. 
         (i)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth herein,
elevator agencies, including their directors and inspectors who currently hold
or hereafter secure a license from the department issued pursuant to Article
421 or 422 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code shall be deemed approved
elevator agencies without further requirement of registration or accreditation,
for the purpose of conducting the periodic elevator inspections and tests
required by § 28-304.6 of the Administrative Code.
         (ii)   Tests and inspections performed by an approved elevator agency
on behalf of the owner shall be performed in compliance with Article 304 of
Title 28 of the Administrative Code and 1 RCNY §
103-02.
         (iii)   Periodic elevator inspections and tests performed by an
approved elevator agency on behalf of the owner as required by § 28-304.6.1 of
the Administrative Code shall be performed in compliance with 1 RCNY §
103-02.
         (iv)   Agency employee restriction. An employee of an elevator agency
may work only for such agency and for one agency director at a time.
         (v)   Reporting of incidents. The elevator agency director, on behalf
of the elevator agency, must immediately report to the department any fatality
or injury of any individual that occurs in connection with the elevator
agency's operations. Such reporting shall be in a form and manner prescribed by
the department.
      (5)   Boiler inspection agencies. 
         (i)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth herein, a
qualified boiler inspector shall be deemed an approved boiler inspection
agency, without further requirement of registration or accreditation, for the
purpose of conducting the periodic inspections required by § 28-303.2 of the
Administrative Code.
         (ii)   Periodic boiler inspections required by § 28-303.2 of the
Administrative Code shall be performed in compliance with 1 RCNY §§
103-01 and
103-05.
      (6)   Concrete testing laboratories.
         (i)   A concrete testing laboratory shall be deemed an approved agency
for purposes of testing and inspecting concrete-related construction activities
in accordance with the Building Code and its referenced standards where such
laboratory has:
            (A)   Obtained a license as a concrete testing laboratory pursuant
to Article 406 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code; and
            (B)   Achieved accreditation from AASHTO Accreditation Program, the
National Voluntary Laboratory Accreditation Program, or an equivalent
accrediting agency accrediting to the standards set forth in ASTM Designations:
C 1077, C 1093 and E 329-14a or a federal agency. Accrediting agencies, other
than federal agencies, must be members of an internationally recognized
cooperation of laboratory and inspection accreditation bodies subject to a
mutual recognition agreement.
         (ii)   A licensed concrete testing laboratory shall have in
responsible charge a director who shall be qualified by education and relevant
experience to undertake the tests or inspections performed. Such director
shall:
            (A)   Personally supervise inspections and tests to ensure
compliance with prescribed nationally recognized standards. Such supervision
shall include ensuring that inspectors and technicians are properly trained and
educated as necessary in order to perform their duties and shall include
planning for continued training related to developing technology;
            (B)   Be a full-time employee of the laboratory and shall not serve
as the director of more than one licensed laboratory at a time;
            (C)   Be a registered design professional with at least five years
of experience in the testing and inspection of concrete materials; and
            (D)   Submit proof of qualification to the department with any
application for the initial licensing of a laboratory and when there is a
change in director for an existing licensed laboratory.
         (iii)   Technicians shall be qualified by education and relevant
experience to perform all tests or inspections they may be required to conduct
under the supervision of the director. Field technicians shall be certified as
ACI Field Testing Technician – Grade I, or other equivalent certification
acceptable to the commissioner.
         (iv)   Laboratory technicians shall be certified as ACI Concrete
Testing Laboratory Technician-Level 1, or other equivalent certification
acceptable to the commissioner. Qualification may be based on the standards set
forth in ASTM C 1077, C 1093 and E 329-14a.
         (v)   The concrete testing laboratory shall furnish to the department
such proof of qualifications of all personnel and information regarding the
equipment used to perform tests as the department may from time to time
request, and any other such information that the commissioner deems appropriate
in assessing the competency of the laboratory's operations.
         (vi)   All concrete testing laboratory inspection and test reports
shall be presented in a form acceptable to the department and shall bear the
name of the laboratory or service and its accreditation and department-issued
license number where applicable, the name of the director who supervised the
inspection or test, the names of all personnel who performed the inspection or
test, and the names of all witnesses. Reports shall be signed and sealed by the
director who supervised the inspection or test.
         (vii)   A concrete testing laboratory shall maintain a New York City
address or agent for the acceptance of service. A Post Office Box shall not be
acceptable for such purposes.
         (viii)   A concrete testing laboratory's facilities and equipment
shall be used exclusively for its own concrete testing and quality control and
shall not be shared with other entities.
         (ix)   A concrete testing laboratory shall not engage in any
activities that may conflict with their objective judgment and integrity,
including but not limited to having a financial and/or other interest in the
construction, installation, manufacture or maintenance of structures or
components that they inspect.
         (x)   A concrete testing laboratory testing for the acceptance of
concrete as part of a special inspection, shall be employed by the owner in
accordance with section 1704.1 of the Building Code.
      (7)   Exterior wall inspections.
         (i)   Examination of a building's exterior walls and appurtenances
pursuant to § 28-302.2 of the Administrative Code must be performed by or under
the direct supervision of a qualified exterior wall inspector.
         (ii)   The qualified exterior wall inspector applicant must provide a
detailed resume indicating relevant work experience obtained in any US city or
jurisdiction. When relevant experience is obtained while employed by another
registered design professional who was signing and sealing such relevant work,
a letter must be provided indicating length of the qualified exterior wall
inspector applicant's employment and his or her responsibilities.
         (iii)   A qualified exterior wall inspector applicant must demonstrate
to the commissioner's satisfaction, including performance on any written or
oral tests the commissioner may require, that he or she is sufficiently
familiar with the Construction Codes, laws and rules pertaining to facades and
concepts specific to the science of buildings as it relates to facades.
      (8)   Pipe welder qualifying agencies. An agency shall be deemed an
approved agency for qualifying welders of gas piping installations in
accordance with section 406.1.1.1 of the Fuel Gas Code and high pressure steam
and high temperature hot water piping systems in accordance with section 1210
of the Mechanical Code, where such agency complies with the following:
         (i)   The testing administrator for the pipe welder qualifying agency
shall be an employee of such agency and an AWS Certified Welding Inspector.
         (ii)   A pipe welder qualifying agency shall be responsible for the
following:
            (A)   Complying with the requirements of section 406.1.1.1 of the
Fuel Gas Code and section 1210.2.2 of the Mechanical Code;
            (B)   Positively identifying each welder or welding operator being
qualified;
            (C)   Observing the welder or welding operator during the
qualification test.
         (iii)   No pipe welder qualifying agency shall engage in any
activities that may conflict with its objective judgment and integrity,
including but not limited to having a financial or other interest in the
qualification of the welder. A quality control manager or his or her designee
shall be considered sufficiently independent to satisfy this requirement when a
manufacturer or contractor has an ASME Certificate of Authorization.
         (iv)   A letter requesting pipe welder qualifying agency approval and
attesting to compliance with this section, signed by the owner of the agency,
accompanied by any related fees set forth in the rules of the department, shall
be mailed to the Department of Buildings, 280 Broadway, 7th Floor, New York,
NY, 10007, Attn: The Office of Technical Certification and Research ("OTCR").
         (v)   A pipe welder qualifying agency's approval shall be renewed
every three years.
         (vi)   A pipe welder qualifying agency shall maintain a New York City
address for the acceptance of service. A Post Office Box shall not be
acceptable for such purposes.
      (9)   Commissioning approved agencies. An agency shall be deemed an
approved agency for performing commissioning in accordance with the Energy
Conservation Code, where such agency complies with the following:
         (i)   Responsibility of owner. It shall be the responsibility of the
owner to retain an approved agency to perform commissioning for a new building
or alteration.
         (ii)   Obligation to avoid conflict of interest. A commissioning
approved agency must not engage in any activities that may conflict with their
objection judgment and integrity, including, but not limited to, having a
financial and/or other interest in the construction, installation, manufacture
or maintenance of structures or components that they inspect.
         (iii)   Agency qualifications. Commissioning and related testing
pursuant to section C408 of the Energy Conservation Code shall be performed by
or under the direct supervision of a qualified commissioning agent.
         (iv)   A qualified commissioning agency must maintain records of
inspections and tests for at least 6 years and must make such records available
to the department upon request.
         (v)   A qualified commissioning agency must maintain insurance
coverage as set forth in paragraph (7) of subdivision (b) above.
         (vi)   All commissioning and test reports must be presented in a form
acceptable to the department and must bear the name of the commissioning agency
and the name of the qualified commissioning agent who supervised each
inspection or test.
      (10)   Retaining wall inspections. 
         (i)   Inspection of a retaining wall and appurtenances pursuant to §
28-305.4 of the Administrative Code must be performed by or under the direct
supervision of a qualified retaining wall inspector.
         (ii)   The qualified retaining wall inspector applicant must provide a
detailed resume indicating relevant work experience obtained in any US city or
jurisdiction. When relevant experience is obtained while employed by another
registered design professional who was signing and sealing such relevant work,
a letter must be provided indicating length of the qualified retaining wall
inspector applicant's employment and his or her responsibilities.
         (iii)   A qualified retaining wall inspector applicant must
demonstrate to the commissioner's satisfaction, including performance on any
written or oral tests the commissioner may require, that he or she is
sufficiently familiar with the Construction Codes, laws and rules pertaining to
retaining walls and engineering concepts related to retaining walls.
      (11)   Parking structure inspections. 
         (i)   Inspection of a parking structure and appurtenances pursuant to
§ 28-323 of the Administrative Code must be performed by or under the direct
supervision of a qualified parking structure inspector.
         (ii)   The qualified parking structure inspector applicant must
provide a detailed résumé indicating relevant work experience obtained in any
US city or jurisdiction. When relevant experience is obtained while employed by
another registered design professional who was signing and sealing such
relevant work, a letter must be provided indicating length of the qualified
parking structure inspector applicant's employment and his or her
responsibilities.
         (iii)   A qualified parking structure inspector applicant must
demonstrate to the commissioner's satisfaction, including performance on any
written or oral tests the commissioner may require, that he or she is
sufficiently familiar with the Construction Codes, laws and rules pertaining to
parking structures and engineering concepts related to parking structures.
   (d)   Suspension or revocation and reinstatement of approved agency status.
      (1)   In accordance with department rules, the commissioner may suspend
or revoke an approved agency's approval, with or without the imposition of
penalties, for violation of any provision of Title 28 of the Administrative
Code or the Building Code or the rules of the department, or any other
applicable law or rule. The commissioner may refuse to accept any application
or other document submitted pursuant to or in satisfaction of any requirement
of law or rule that bears the signature of any approved agency or director that
has been found, after notice and an opportunity to be heard, to have knowingly
or negligently made a false statement or to have knowingly or negligently
falsified or allowed to be falsified any certificate, form, signed statement,
application, report or certification of the correction of a violation required
under the provisions of Title 28 of the Administrative Code or the Building
Code or any rule of any agency.
      (2)   Invalidation of tests and inspections upon suspension or revocation
of approved agency status. Upon any suspension or revocation of approved agency
approval pursuant to this subdivision, the owner of a building at which such
approved agency was required or scheduled to perform special, progress or
periodic inspections shall immediately designate another approved agency to re-
do such tests or inspections performed by the disciplined agency. Any periodic
inspections performed by a disciplined agency shall be rejected in the current
cycle of such inspections and any owner of a building requiring such periodic
inspection shall, upon notice of such disciplinary action, retain another
approved agency to perform the periodic inspection.
      (3)   Reinstatement of approval. Upon expiration of a suspension or no
sooner than one (1) year from the date of revocation, an agency shall be
eligible for reinstatement of approval. Such agency shall submit to OTCR the
following for review:
         (i)   Documentation that addresses corrections to the conduct or
practices that formed the basis for the suspension or revocation.
         (ii)   Documentation that establishes procedures to prevent the
conduct or practices that formed the basis for the suspension or revocation.
         (iii)   A reinstatement application.
   (e)   Obligations of others. Nothing in this section is intended to alter or
diminish any obligation otherwise imposed by law on others, including but not
limited to, the owner, construction manager, general contractor, contractor,
materialman, architect, engineer, site safety manager, land surveyor,
superintendent of construction or other party involved in a construction
project, to engage in sound engineering, design, and construction practices,
and to act in a reasonable and responsible manner to maintain a safe
construction site.
(Amended City Record 2/1/2016, eff. 3/2/2016; amended City Record 4/20/2018,
eff. 5/20/2018; amended City Record 1/21/2020, eff. 2/20/2020; amended City
Record 7/24/2020, eff. 8/23/2020; amended City Record 4/23/2021, eff. 5/23/
2021; amended City Record 12/16/2021, eff. 1/15/2022; amended City Record 5/23/
2022, eff. 6/22/2022; amended City Record 10/24/2023, eff. 11/23/2023) [
§ 101-08 Required Insurance and Indemnification.
   (a)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, all terms used herein
shall have the same meanings as set forth in the Building Code. In addition,
the following terms shall have the following meanings:
      (1)   Adjacent building. A building of record sharing a lot line with the
property for which a permit is issued.
      (2)   Major Alteration. Alteration of an existing building involving
demolition of more than 50% of its floor area; work that will result in the
removal of one or more floors of an existing structure; or horizontal or
vertical enlargement affecting the exterior envelope of an existing building.
      (3)   Permit. Any of the permit types set forth in items 1 - 5 of
Administrative Code § 28-105.2, as well as permits for the installation of
sidewalk sheds or scaffolds.
      (4)   Permittee. The person who or entity that obtains or renews a
permit. Such term shall include an applicant for a permit.
   (b)   Applicability. This rule applies to permits as defined in subdivision
(a) of this section.
   (c)   Permit issuance and renewal. For permits requiring proof of insurance
under this section, no permit shall be issued or renewed until the permittee
has provided the department with proof of insurance in accordance with
subdivision (g) hereof.
   (d)   Insurance requirements.
      (1)   Liability insurance.
         (i)   As a condition to the issuance or renewal of a permit for which
project-specific liability insurance is required under Table 1 in subparagraph
(ii) of this paragraph, the permittee shall procure and maintain commercial
general liability insurance for the type of work to be performed as described
in the permit, with total per-occurrence and aggregate limits at least as high
as those set forth in Table 1. This total minimum limit may be achieved through
any combination of primary, excess, umbrella or wrap-up policies, so long as
those policies:
            (A)   are issued by a company or companies that may lawfully issue
the required policy and has an A.M. Best rating of at least A-"VII" or a
Standard and Poor's rating of at least A;
            (B)   provide coverage at least as broad as set forth in the most
recent edition of Insurance Services Office (ISO) Form CG 0001;
            (C)   provide that the city, together with its officials and
employees, is an Additional Insured with coverage at least as broad as set
forth in the most recent edition of ISO Forms CG 2012 or CG 2026;
            (D)   provide a total aggregate limit of coverage (equal to or
above the per-occurrence limit) that applies exclusively to the project for
which the permit is issued (pursuant to a project-specific policy or a per-
project aggregate limit endorsement such as ISO Form CG 2503); and
            (E)   contain none of the following exclusions:
               1.   completed operations exclusion;
               2.   XCU exclusion;
               3.   an insured contract exclusion broader than any contained in
the most recent edition of ISO Form CG 0001;
               4.   third party actions over exclusion;
               5.   where project involves residential construction, a
residential construction exclusion;
               6.   where project involves use of an Exterior Insulation &
Finish System (EFIS), an EFIS exclusion;
               7.   exclusion for work performed within the city of New York;
               8.   exclusion for the type of work to be performed as described
in the permit(s) issued by the department.
         (ii)   Table 1 (minimum per-occurrence and project-specific aggregate
limits):
                                                Criterion 4
                                                (Proposed
            Criterion 2           Criterion 3   Height or   Required Project
Criterion 1 (Tower Crane Y/N) 2  (Permit Type) Height of   Specific Coverage 
                                                Tallest
                                                Adjacent
                                                Building)
                                               Criterion 4
                                               (Proposed
             Criterion 2           Criterion 3 Height or    Required Project
Criterion 1  (Tower Crane Y/N) 2  (Permit     Height of    Specific Coverage 
                                   Type)       Tallest
                                               Adjacent
                                               Building)
1/2 Family
Home
AND
Depth of                           Foundation
Excavation <                       and
12'                                earthwork 1
AND                                ,                        N/A, but comply
Proposed                           New         See          with the
Construction NO                    Building 1  Criterion 1  requirements of (d)
is not on a                        , Full Demo              (1)(iv)
lot line                           1 , or
with an                            Major
existing                           Alteration
structure                          1
AND
Proposed
Height < 35'
                                               Tallest
                                               Adjacent
                                               Building < 7
                                               stories and
                                               < 75 feet
                                               Tallest
                                               Adjacent
                                               Building
                                               between
                                               7-14 stories $5 million
                                               and < 150
                                   Foundation  feet
             NO                    and         OR
                                   earthwork 1 Tallest
                                               Adjacent     $10 million
                                               Building <
                                               14 stories   $15 million
                                               and between
                                               75-150 feet
                                               Tallest
                                               Adjacent
                                               Building >
                                               14 stories
                                               or > 150
                                               feet
                                               Tallest
                                               Adjacent
                                               Building < 7
                                               stories and
                                               < 75 feet
                                               Tallest
                                               Adjacent
                                               Building
                                               between 7-14 $5 million
                                               stories and
                                               < 150 feet
                                   Full Demo 1 OR
                                               Tallest
                                               Adjacent     $15 million
                                               Building <
                                               14 stories   $25 million
                                               and between
                                               75-150 feet
                                               Tallest
                                               Adjacent
                                               Building >
                                               14 stories
                                               or > 150
                                               feet
                                               Proposed
                                               Number of
                                   New         Stories < 7
                                   Building 1  stories and
                                   or          < 75 feet
                                   Major       AND          $5 million
Not 1/                             Alteration  Tallest
2 Family                           1           Adjacent
Home                                           Building < 7
OR                                             stories and
Depth of                                       < 75 feet
Excavation >                                   Proposed
12'                                            Number of
OR                                             Stories
Proposed                                       between 7-14
Construction                                   stories and
is on a lot                                    < 150 feet
line with an                                   AND
existing                                       Tallest
structure                                      Adjacent
OR                                             Building <
Proposed                                       14 stories
Height > 35'                                   or < 150
                                               feet
                                               OR
                                               Proposed
                                               Number of
                                               Stories < 14
                                               stories and
                                               between 75-
                                               150 feet
                                               AND
                                               Tallest
                                               Adjacent
                                               Building <
                                               14 stories
                                               or < 150
                                               feet         $15 million
                                               OR
                                               Tallest
                                               Adjacent
                                               Building
                                               between 7-14
                                               stories and
                                               < 150 feet
                                               AND
                                               Proposed
                                               Number of
                                               Stories < 14
                                               stories or <
                                               150 feet
                                               OR
                                               Tallest
                                               Adjacent
                                               Building <
                                               14 stories
                                               and between
                                               75-150 feet
                                               AND
                                               Proposed
                                               Number of
                                               Stories < 14
                                               stories or <
                                               150 feet
                                               Proposed
                                               Number of
                                               Stories > 14
                                               stories or >
                                               150 feet
                                               OR           $25 million
                                               Tallest
                                               Adjacent
                                               Building >
                                               14 stories
                                               or > 150
                                               feet
             YES                   ALL Permits N/A          $80 million
                                   1
Raising or                         Alteration
moving a     N/A                   Type 1 or   N/A          $2 million
building                           Type 2
                                                            N/A, but comply
ALL OTHER PERMITS                                           with the
                                                            requirements of (d)
                                                            (1)(iv)
1   Other than a storage shed, garage, or similar accessory use to a
residential structure
2   Does not include a self-erecting tower crane provided the setup of the
self-erecting tower crane does not require a boom, mast, or jib section, or
other attachment, to be installed at the site.
 
         (iii)   In its sole discretion, the department may allow a permittee
to satisfy the requirements of subparagraphs (i) and (ii) of this paragraph
through a self-insurance program.
         (iv)   With regard to all permits (or permit renewals) for which
project-specific liability insurance is not required under Table 1 in
subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph, prior to an application for the issuance
(or renewal) of such permit, the permittee shall procure and maintain
commercial general liability insurance if required of the permittee as a
licensee under 1 RCNY §
104-02 for all operations performed pursuant to the permit.
         (v)   With regard to the installation of sidewalk sheds and scaffolds,
including those scaffolds for which notification to the department is required
and a permit is not required, prior to an application for the issuance (or
renewal) of a permit or the provision of notification, the installer shall
procure and maintain commercial general liability insurance in the amount of
one million dollars ($1,000,000). Such insurance shall satisfy the requirements
set forth in clauses (A) through (E) of subparagraph (i) of this paragraph.
         (vi)   With regard to the installation of supported scaffolds for
which neither notification to the department nor a permit is required, the
installer shall procure and maintain commercial general liability insurance in
the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000). Such insurance shall satisfy
the requirements set forth in clauses (A) through (E) of subparagraph (i) of
this paragraph.
      (2)   Workers' compensation insurance. As a condition to the issuance or
renewal of a permit, the permittee shall procure and maintain workers'
compensation insurance as required by law.
      (3)   Disability benefits insurance. As a condition to the issuance or
renewal of a permit, the permittee shall procure and maintain disability
benefits insurance as required by law.
   (e)   Exemptions.
      (1)   Homeowners applying for permits for work on their own one, two or
three family dwellings who obtain a waiver of New York State workers'
compensation and/or disability insurance from the New York State Workers'
Compensation Board are exempt from the requirements of paragraphs (2) and/or
(3) of subdivision (d) of this section.
      (2)   Where there are no employees in the company or business of a
permittee, the permittee is exempt from the requirements of paragraphs (2) and
(3) of subdivision (d) of this section.
      (3)   Emergency work. When the department issues an emergency declaration
or an immediate emergency declaration, the demolition contractor shall provide
the department with proof of insurance conforming to the requirements of this
section prior to commencing the demolition work. Contractors employed by the
city for such emergency work shall have such insurance but need not provide
proof prior to commencing the demolition work.
   (f)   Notification. Regardless of whether it has procured liability
insurance in accordance with 1 RCNY §
104-02 (as licensee of the department) or with this section, the permittee
shall notify in writing all of liability insurance carriers of any loss,
damage, injury, or accident, and any claim or suit arising out of or relating
to any operations performed by or on behalf of the permittee for which the
department has issued it a permit (including an injury or accident affecting
permittee's own employees) no later than 20 days after such event. Such notice
to liability carriers must expressly specify that "this notice is being given
on behalf of the city of New York as Additional Insured as well as the Named
Insured." Such notice shall also contain the following information: the name of
the named insured, the number of the permit, the date of the occurrence, the
location (street address and borough) of the occurrence, and the identity of
the persons or things injured, damaged or lost. The permittee shall
simultaneously send a copy of such notice to the city of New York c/o Insurance
Claims Specialist, Affirmative Litigation Division, New York City Law
Department, 100 Church Street, New York, New York 10007.
   (g)   Proof of liability insurance. When commercial general liability
insurance is required under paragraph (1) of subdivision (d) of this section
the insured shall file with the department, at the time the insured applies for
a permit (or permit renewal) or provides required notification, a certificate
of insurance relating to such insurance in a form prescribed by the department
and a sworn statement from a licensed insurance broker in a form prescribed by
the department.
   (h)   Copies of insurance policies. The permittee shall provide a copy of
any required policy within thirty (30) days of a request for such policy by the
department or by the New York City Law Department.
   (i)   Maintenance of insurance. The permittee shall maintain the insurance
required under this rule in full force and effect for the duration of the
permit and any renewals thereof. In the event any required insurance expires,
is cancelled or otherwise terminates without being simultaneously replaced with
new or renewed insurance satisfying the requirements of this rule, the
permittee shall immediately notify the department of such fact. If any required
insurance is found at any time to be to absent or non-compliant, the department
may issue the permittee a stop work order relating to the permit at issue.
   (j)   Indemnification. Regardless of whether it has procured insurance in
accordance with 1 RCNY §
104-02 (as a licensee of the department) or with this section, the permittee
shall indemnify, defend and hold the city and its officials and employees
harmless against any and all claims, liens, demands, judgments, penalties,
fines, liabilities, settlements, damages, costs and expenses of whatever kind
or nature (including, without limitation, attorneys' fees and disbursements),
known or unknown, contingent or otherwise, allegedly arising out of or in any
way related to operations for which the department has issued a permit and/or
the permittee's failure to comply with any of the requirements set forth herein
or law. Insofar as the facts and law relating to any claim would preclude the
city and its officials and employees from being completely indemnified by the
permittee, the city and its officials and employees shall be partially
indemnified by the permittee to the fullest extent permitted by law.
   (k)   Failure to secure or maintain insurance. In the event a permittee
fails to secure or maintain insurance in full compliance with this section,
such permittee shall be obligated to indemnify the city pursuant to subdivision
(j) of this section and/or pay the city all amounts arising from such failure,
including but not limited any settlement or judgment paid by the city on an
uninsured claim or action, plus a sum equal to the reasonable costs of
defending such claim or action. The city's right to such amounts are additional
to all other rights the city may have arising from a violation of these
regulations or otherwise under the law.
   (l)   Failure to enforce. A failure by the city or by the department to
enforce any of the foregoing requirements shall not constitute a waiver of such
requirement or any other requirement.
(Amended City Record 4/24/2017, eff. 5/24/2017)
§ 101-10 Final Inspection and Sign-Off Prior to Letter of Completion.
   (a)   Final Inspection. Where permitted work does not require the issuance
of a certificate of occupancy and where the final inspection is performed by an
approved agency, the final inspection shall be performed after all work
authorized by the permit is completed, but in no event later than one (1) year
from the date of the expiration of the last valid permit.
   (b)   Inspection Report. A final inspection report complying with the
requirements of § 28-116.2.4.2 of the Administrative Code shall be filed within
thirty (30) days of the date of the final inspection that enables the inspector
to attest that the work is substantially compliant with the approved
construction documents, the Building Code, and other applicable laws and rules.
   (c)   Applicability. The requirements in this section shall apply to all
final inspections performed after July 1, 2008, regardless of when the
underlying permit was issued.
§ 101-12 The Office of Technical Certification and Research and the Use of
Material in Construction Activities.
   (a)   Scope. The Office of Technical Certification and Research ("OTCR") is
responsible for approving materials, pursuant to Article 113 of the New York
City Construction Codes ("Construction Codes") and § 27-3005 of the New York
City Administrative Code. Materials approved, pursuant to § 27-3005 are subject
to the requirements set forth in the New York City Electrical Code and 1 RCNY §
4000-01.
   (b)   References. See §§ 28-103.9, 28-103.10, 28-113.1 to 28-113.4 and 28-
114.1 to 28-114.4 and Chapter 3 of Title 27 of the New York City Administrative
Code ("Administrative Code"), and 1 RCNY §
4000-01.
   (c)   Definitions. For the purposes of this rule, the following terms shall
have the following meanings:
      (1)   Applicant. The person or entity seeking an assessment or approval
of materials.
      (2)   Approved inspection agency. An agency that is approved by the
department as qualified to perform one or more of the inspections required by
the Construction Codes.
      (3)   Approved product certification agency. An inspection agency that is
approved by the department as qualified to inspect at regular intervals the
material that is to be or is listed and labeled, to verify that the labeled
material is representative of the material tested.
      (4)   Approved testing agency. An agency that is approved by the
department as qualified to test and evaluate the performance of one or more of
the materials regulated in their use by the Construction Codes. Such term shall
include, when approved pursuant to department rules, a third party testing or
certification agency, evaluation agency, testing laboratory, testing service or
other entity concerned with product evaluation. Such term shall also include a
licensed concrete testing laboratory.
      (5)   Code prescribed materials. Materials for which the Construction
Codes provide prescribed standards. Such materials do not require OTCR
approval, but may be required to be identified on the Schedule of Materials and
Equipment as provided for in subdivision (d) of this section.
      (6)   Labeled. Material to which has been attached a label, symbol or
other identifying mark of the manufacturer that contains the name of the
manufacturer, the function and performance characteristics of the product or
material, and the name and identification of an approved agency and that
indicates that a representative sample of the material has been tested and
evaluated by an approved agency for compliance with nationally recognized
standards or tests to determine suitable usage in a specified manner.
      (7)   Listed. Material identified in a list published by an approved
agency that maintains periodic inspection of production of listed material or
periodic evaluation services and whose listing states either that the material
meets identified nationally recognized standards or has been tested and found
suitable for a specified purpose when installed in accordance with the
manufacturer's installation instructions.
      (8)   Materials. Materials, assemblies, appliances, equipment, devices,
systems, products and methods of construction regulated in their use by the
Construction Codes.
   (d)   Identification of materials.
      (1)   Schedule of Materials and Equipment. OTCR shall prepare and
maintain a Schedule of Materials and Equipment ("Schedule") that shall be used
to identify third-party tested and/or listed materials on construction
documents OTCR shall post the Schedule on the OTCR Webpage of the department's
Website (http://www.nyc.gov/buildings). For such materials, a registered design
professional filing construction documents shall be required to incorporate the
Schedule into his or her construction documents, shall provide material listing
information as identified on the Schedule and shall maintain third-party
certification documents for a period of six (6) years following sign-off of the
work.
      (2)   Code-prescribed or alternative material determination. An applicant
for materials approval may elect to have OTCR determine if materials are code-
prescribed or alternative materials by submitting an OTCR 1 application and six
hundred dollar ($600.00) fee to OTCR, as prescribed in Table 28-112.8 of the
Administrative Code. OTCR shall notify the applicant of its determination in
writing. If the material is found to be alternative, the application will be
evaluated in accordance with subdivision (f) of this section and the fee
required to determine whether the materials are code-prescribed or alternative
materials shall be applied to OTCR's fee for the evaluation of standards for
alternative materials prescribed in subdivision (f) of this section.
   (e)   Site specific approvals.
      (1)   Use. Use and/or installation of the following materials requires
site specific approval by the department:
         (i)   Materials too large to be tested in a laboratory;
         (ii)   Component parts, which must be assembled in the field; or
         (iii)   Foreign-made materials unavailable for testing prior to
installation, which may require on-site testing;
         (iv)   Other materials as determined by the commissioner.
      (2)   Application process.
         (i)   The applicant for a site-specific approval shall submit to OTCR
the OTCR 2 application (Site-Specific Approval Application) and six hundred
dollar ($600.00) fee as prescribed in Table 28-112.8 of the Administrative
Code.
         (ii)   The approved testing agency or the professional engineer has
sixty (60) calendar days from the date of the filing of the OTCR 2 in which to
submit to OTCR the OTCR 3 statement (Approved Testing Agency or Professional
Engineer Statement) and any associated test reports. If the statement and
reports are not submitted to OTCR within the sixty (60) calendar days, the
application may be administratively closed. The application fee shall be non-
refundable.
      (3)   Fire safety. If OTCR determines that a site specific material and/
or installation of such materials raises fire safety concerns and so notifies
the applicant:
         (i)   The applicant shall submit the OTCR 2 and a letter identifying
the project location and the fire safety concern(s) identified by OTCR to the
Technology Management Unit of the Fire Department;
         (ii)   The applicant shall submit an affidavit to OTCR attesting that
the OTCR 2 and letter were submitted to the Technology Management Unit; and
         (iii)   OTCR must receive correspondence from the Technology
Management Unit recommending support, rejection or restrictions of the material
prior to OTCR approving or rejecting the use and/or installation of the
material.
      (4)   Approval or rejection. Notification of approval or rejection shall
be issued by OTCR in writing.
   (f)   Alternative Materials.
      (1)   Standards for alternative materials. In the event that there is no
Construction Code-prescribed standard for a material, but there exist standards
that are accepted and/or endorsed by a nationally recognized organization that
sets standards and/or evaluates materials used in the construction of
buildings, an OTCR 1 application (Alternative Material Acceptance Criteria
Application) shall be submitted to OTCR along with a six hundred dollar
($600.00) fee as prescribed in Table 28-112.8 of the Administrative Code,
requesting a review of the proposed standard. The applicant shall provide OTCR
with any additional information and/or supporting documentation that OTCR
requires within fourteen (14) days from the date of a request for such
information. If such information and/or documentation is not received within
such time, the application shall be deemed abandoned and no refund of the
application fee shall be issued.
         (i)   Upon receipt of the application, OTCR shall review and research
the standard and, simultaneously, solicit comments from members of the building
and construction industry and other city agencies as appropriate;
         (ii)   OTCR shall review and evaluate comments received from the
industry and other city agencies, if any, and make such changes to the proposed
approval as it deems appropriate; and
         (iii)   OTCR shall publish its final approval on the department's
Website (http://www.nyc.gov/buildings).
         (iv)   Notification of rejection of a standard will be issued by OTCR
in writing. No refund of the application fee shall be issued.
      (2)   Testing, listing and labeling. Following the completion of steps
(i) through (iv) above, the alternative material shall be tested by an approved
testing agency according to the standard approved by OTCR. If OTCR finds it
necessary on the basis of such factors as but not limited to the history of the
material, its sensitivity, and treatment of similar materials that are listed
and labeled, the material shall be listed and labeled by an approved inspection
and/or product certification agency. Upon being so tested and/or listed and
labeled, the material may be used in construction with such limitations as OTCR
may prescribe.
   (g)   Abandoned applications. OTCR 1 and/or OTCR 2 applications that have
been rejected and upon which no further action has been taken by the applicant
within sixty (60) days after the notice of rejection shall be deemed abandoned.
   (h)   Reinstatement. Applicants seeking reinstatement of an abandoned
application(s) shall pay an additional six hundred dollar ($600.00) filing fee
as prescribed in Table 28-112.8 of the Administrative Code.
   (i)   Appeals. Any final decision by the department may be appealed to the
Board of Standards and Appeals pursuant to its rules.
   (j)   Testing. The department reserves the right to have materials tested by
a third party at the building owner's or manufacturer's expense where there are
observable defects, labeling inconsistencies, evidence of non-compliance with
the approved standard and/or other indications of concern.
(Amended City Record 6/11/2019, eff. 7/11/2019)
§ 101-13 Requirements for Filing Technical Reports of Inspections for
Applications for Permits in Process on July 1, 2008.
   (a)   Applicability. This rule shall apply to applications for construction
document approval submitted, and not thereafter abandoned, that have been
approved but not permitted prior to July 1, 2008 and to applications for
construction document approval submitted, and not thereafter abandoned, that
have been approved and partially permitted prior to July 1, 2008. For purposes
of this rule, such applications shall be denominated "covered jobs."
   (b)   Technical reports of inspections. Covered jobs may continue to perform
and file reports of technical inspections pursuant to the provisions of law in
effect prior to July 1, 2008, provided that all remaining permits for the job
are secured prior to December 31, 2008 and that work pursuant to such permits
is commenced within twelve (12) months after the date of issuance of the permit
therefore and is diligently carried on to completion. If all remaining permits
for the job are not secured prior to December 31, 2008, the covered job must
comply fully with all provisions of Title 28 of the administrative code.
§ 101-14 Categories of Work That May or May Not Require a Permit.
   (a)   Scope. This rule establishes categories of work that may be classified
as a minor alteration or ordinary repair and therefore may be exempt from the
permit requirements of the New York city construction codes.
   (b)   References. See Administrative Code §§ 28-105.1, 28-105.4, item 6 and
28-105.4.2.1.
   (c)   Compliance with code and other laws. Any exemptions outlined by this
rule will not grant authorization for any work to be done in a manner that
violates the provisions of this code, the New York City Energy Conservation
Code, the Zoning Resolution or any other laws, rules, or regulations. Such
exemptions shall not eliminate the obligation of any owner to file at other
City agencies, when appropriate, including but not limited to the Landmarks
Preservation Commission, the City Planning Commission, Department of
Transportation, Department of Environmental Protection, Department of
Environmental Conservation, or the Fire Department, nor shall it eliminate the
obligation of any owner to file at the Department of Buildings for any related
work, such as, for example, associated sidewalk protection, structural work,
electrical connections, or plumbing connections.
   (d)   Categories of work that may be exempt from permit requirements. In
addition to the categories of work exempted from the permit requirements of
Section 28-105.1 pursuant to 28-105.4, items 1 though 5, the following
categories of work may be considered minor alterations or ordinary repairs that
may be exempt from permit requirements. The tables below list the types of
minor alterations and ordinary repairs that are exempt from permit requirements
and those that require a permit. The categories shown in Tables 1 - 3 below are
not an exclusive list of all types of minor alterations or ordinary repairs
that may be exempt from permit requirements.
Table 1
Work Exempt from Permit in One- and Two-family Dwellings
Building component or system (accessory to one- and two-     Permit required?
family dwellings)
1. Sheds. Temporary portable freestanding sheds erected on
the same zoning lot as, and accessory to, a one- or two-     NO 
family dwelling, provided that all of the following
requirements are met:
(1) The shed shall not exceed 120 square feet in area and     
shall not be more than 7'6" in height; and
(2) The shed shall not obstruct any required window; and      
(3) The shed shall not be located within 3 feet (915 mm) of   
any lot line; and
(4) The shed shall be used for storage of normal household    
goods, tools, or similar items; and
(5) There shall not be more than one such shed on any tax     
lot.
Building component or system (accessory to one- and two-     Permit required? 
family dwellings)
2. Fences. Fences 6 feet (1829 mm) or less in height, as
measured from the higher of the two adjoining grades, in     NO
connection with one- and two-family dwellings.
3. Small swimming pools. Outdoor in-ground or above-ground
pools accessory to a one- or two-family dwelling limited to
400 square feet in area, provided that the distance from the NO 
edge of an in-ground pool to any building or lot line is
greater than the depth of the deepest portion of the pool,
and:
(1) there is an existing slop sink for indirect waste; or
(2) a plumbing permit is obtained for the installation of     
such sink.
4. Playground equipment. Playground equipment accessory to a NO 
one- or two-family dwelling.
5. Packaged air-conditioning unit in existing buildings.
Packaged air-conditioning unit not exceeding 5 tons rated
capacity, installed in an existing building, including       NO 
installations in existing windows or in existing sleeves
under windows, and that is not part of an alteration that
otherwise requires a permit.
 
Table 2
Work that may be Exempt from Permit in All Buildings
Building component or system (all buildings)                               Permit
                                                                           required?
I. Exterior structures                                                      
1. Retaining walls. Retaining walls less than 4 feet (1219 mm) in height,
measured from the top of the footing to the top of the wall, and the wall:
(1) does not support a surcharge; or                                       NO
(2) does not impound Class I, II or III-A liquids, as defined by section
307.2 of the New York City Building Code.
2. Nursery or agricultural shade cloth structures. Shade cloth structures
constructed solely for nursery or agricultural purposes, and not covering  NO
mechanical equipment, plumbing fixtures or automobiles.
 II. Service equipment                                                     
1. Air conditioning and ventilating systems. Air conditioning and
ventilating system installed as a voluntary system, serving only one floor
of a building, and that:
(1) does not use lot line openings for the intake or exhaust of air or the
mounting of equipment; and
                                                                           NO 
(2) is not installed in any public hallway, passageway, or stairway; and

(3) does not in any way reduce the ventilation of any room or space below
that required by code provisions; and

(4) does not penetrate any fire division, roof, floor, or wall.
2. Packaged air-conditioning unit. Packaged air-conditioning unit not
exceeding 3 tons rated capacity, installed in an existing building,
including installations in existing windows or in existing sleeves under   NO 
windows, and that is not part of an alteration that otherwise requires a
permit.
3. Fuel-burning and fuel-oil storage. Portable fuel-burning equipment that NO 
does not require a chimney or vent connection.
4. Fuel-burning and fuel-oil storage during construction. Portable
heaters, having a fuel-storage capacity of 6 gallons or less, used in      NO 
construction work.
5. Fuel-burning and fuel-oil storage. Oil-fired heaters, other than
internal combustion engines, having a fuel-storage capacity of 6 gallons   NO 
or less.
6. Refrigerating systems. Refrigerating systems twenty-five tons or less   NO 
in capacity and using a Group A1 refrigerant.
7. Refrigerating systems. Refrigerating systems installed in a vehicle,    NO 
railroad car, or vessel.
8. Refrigerating systems. Refrigerating systems that use water or air as   NO 
the refrigerant.
9. Temporary boilers. Temporary boilers, whether placed on private
property or on the street (related electrical and plumbing connections     YES 
also require separate permits).
III. Interior partitions                                                   
1. Non-fire-rated and non-load-bearing wall, temporary removal. Where the
cutting away and temporary removal of any portion of a non-load-bearing,
non-fire rated partition is limited to the lesser of 50% of a given wall   NO 
or 45 square feet in area, and where at the completion of work the
partition is restored to its original condition.
2. Non-fire-rated and non-load-bearing wall, permanent removal in Group R
occupancies. In Group R occupancies, where the cutting away and permanent
removal of any portion of a non-load-bearing, non-fire-rated partition is  NO 
limited to the lesser of 50% of a given wall surface or 45 square feet in
area.
Exception: a permit shall be required where the cutting away and permanent
removal of any size occurs in a dwelling unit satisfying either of the      
following conditions:
i. The dwelling unit is located in any of the following areas**:
a. Special Hudson Yards District
b. Preservation Area P-2 of the Special Garment Center District
c. Special Clinton District                                                 
d. Special West Chelsea District
e. Greenpoint-Williamsburg anti-harassment areas in Community District 1,
Borough of Brooklyn; and
ii. the dwelling unit is within a single room occupancy multiple            
dwelling♣♣
** The permanent removal of a portion of the partition resulting in a
change in the layout of rooms within a dwelling unit shall constitute a
"material alteration" in accordance with Zoning Resolution sections 93-90
and 96-01. Any "material alteration" to a dwelling unit located within the  
"anti-harassment areas" as provided for in Zoning Resolution Sections 23-
013, 93-90, 96-01, and 98-70 shall constitute an alteration in accordance
with the Building Code and, therefore, require a building permit.
♣♣ Such work shall be considered an alteration and therefore require a
building permit and, where applicable, a Certificate of No Harassment in    
accordance with § 28-107.4 of the Administrative Code.
3. Non-fire-rated and non-load-bearing wall, permanent removal in Groups
B, M, and S-1 occupancies. In Groups B, M, and S-1 occupancies, where the
cutting away and permanent removal of a non-load-bearing, non-fire-rated   NO 
partition is limited to 50 linear feet in buildings of Type I or II
construction (Class I construction in buildings subject to the 1968
Building Code).
 IV. Roofs                                                                 
1. Roof repair and reroofing above the deck/sheathing. Roof repair or
replacement, limited to the roof membrane, roof coverings, cant strip, and
any insulation above the roof deck/sheathing, provided that the New York   NO 
City Energy Conservation Code does not require additional thermal
insulation for the roof.
2. Roof repair and reroofing, including the deck/sheathing. Roof repair or YES 
replacement that includes replacement of roof deck/sheathing.
3. Green roofs not more than 4 inches in depth. Green roof systems, not
more than 4 inches in depth measured from the upper surface of the roof    NO 
covering to the top of the growth medium, located on buildings of
noncombustible construction or buildings greater than 100 feet in height.
 
Table 3
Facade Work that may be Exempt from Permit in All Buildings
Exterior Facade Restoration Item (all buildings)                               Permit
                                                                               required?
I. Masonry (not including Terra Cotta and Stone)                               
1. Brick re-pointing (or other unit masonry).                                  NO 
2. Removal and replacement of individual bricks – single outside wythe up to
10 sf., not to exceed 4 ft. horizontally, in any 100 sf. of wall area, and the NO 
cumulative area of all brick replacement on all facades does not exceed 150
sq. ft.
3. Mechanical anchorage (pinning) of brick masonry to underlying structure.    YES 
4. Parapet demolition and reconstruction.                                      YES 
5. Increasing height of an existing parapet.                                   YES 
6. Installation of new parapet coping (masonry).                               NO 
7. Installation of new parapet guardrail.                                      YES 
8. Replacement of existing guardrail or parapet to the same height (for
masonry parapets, replacement of existing parapet limited to 10 sq. ft. in any NO 
100 sq. ft. of continuous parapet vertical surface area).
9. Installation of expansion or control joints in existing masonry             YES 
construction (entailing saw-cutting of masonry).
10. Installation of flashing and weeps, repair or replacement of relieving
angles (or lintels), installation of new brickwork, exceeding limits noted in  YES
#2 above.
11. Flashing: cutting in reglet, removing one or two courses of brick from a   YES 
single wythe on inside face of parapets, exceeding limits noted in #2 above.
12. Masonry crack repair with injection of repair mortar.                      NO 
13. Masonry cladding of existing exterior building walls.                      YES 
14. Replacement of masonry sills.                                              NO 
II. Concrete Restoration                                                       
1. Structural repair, reinforcement of concrete (repair of re-bars, post-      YES 
tension cables, curtain panel wall, pre-cast concrete).
2. Spandrels: repair of cracked or spalled concrete on exterior concrete
spandrel beams, concrete fascias or balconies (whether or not repair of        YES 
deteriorated steel reinforcement is required).
3. Repair or re-anchoring of existing aluminum or steel balcony handrails.     NO 
4. Concrete crack repair with injection of repair cement.                      NO 
III. Stone/Terra Cotta Restoration                                             
1. For buildings subject to the requirements of § 28-302, patching of spalls  YES 
or cracks on exterior stone or terra cotta masonry.
2. Removal and replacement of exterior stone or terra cotta ornamentation with YES 
an alternative material.
3. Mechanical anchorage (pinning) of displaced stone or terra cotta masonry to YES 
underlying structure.
IV. Curtain/Panel Walls                                                        
1. Repair, replacements of structural components of panel wall system.         YES 
2. Removal or replacement of inspection plates.                                NO 
3. Repair or replacement of sheet metal window clip covers.                    NO 
4. Replacement of exterior glass panels in kind, limited to 1,000 square feet  NO 
of glass in any given 10,000 square feet of wall area.
5. Replacement of inner glass panels from within the building.                 NO 
V. Cleaning or Coating of Masonry/Concrete/Metal/EIFS                          
1. Cleaning, coloring or painting of masonry (brick, stone, terra cotta),      NO 
concrete.
2. Application of (trowel applied) cementitious material (stucco) no greater
than 1" (25.4 mm) in thickness or other material (brownstone) no greater than
1/8" (3.2 mm) in thickness to exterior surfaces of building walls, excluding   NO 
newly installed exterior insulation finish systems (EIFS). The application
must be limited to a height of 40 feet, measured vertically from the adjoining
grade or an adjoining setback that is at least 10 feet deep.
3. Application of sealant, caulking, regrouting.                               NO 
4. Minor repair of exterior insulation finish systems (EIFS), not to exceed 10 NO 
square feet in any given 100 square feet of continuous EIFS wall surface area.
Exterior Facade Restoration Item (all buildings)                               Permit
                                                                               required? 
1. For buildings subject to the requirements of § 28-302, scraping and        YES 
painting, flashing and coloring, sealing and coating of steel structural
members (including lintels over windows) entailing removal and replacement of
brick or other masonry, exceeding 10 sq. ft., 4 ft. horizontally, in any 100    
sf. of wall area.
2. Removal and replacement of steel structural members (including lintels over
windows), exceeding 10 sq. ft., 4 ft. horizontally, in any 100 sf. of exterior YES 
wall area.
3. Reinforcement of steel structural members (spandrels, beams columns).       YES 
4. Reinforcement of fire escape bars, struts, baskets, or supports.            NO 
5. Installation of handrails at perimeters of balconies, terraces, or          YES 
rooftops.
6. Installation of appurtenances (signs more than six square feet (0.56 m 2 )
in area, flagpoles, water tanks, awnings, satellite dishes) to the exterior    YES 
wall or at perimeters of balconies, terraces, or rooftops.
Exception: flagpoles, awnings, and satellite dishes accessory to one- and two-  
family dwellings shall not require a permit for installation.
VII. Sheet Metal                                                               
1. Sheet metal cladding of facades of existing cornice.                        YES 
2. Localized (non-structural) repairs/patching to sheet metal cornice.         NO 
3. Repair reinforcement of the structural supports of sheet metal cornices.    YES 
4. Installation of new (replacement) sheet metal or glass fiber reinforced     YES 
concrete (GFRC) cornice.
5. Installation of parapet coping cover (sheet metal).                         NO 
6. Sheet metal cladding of exposed surfaces of parapet wall.                   YES 
VIII. Doors/Windows                                                            
1. Replacement of existing windows (balcony doors) that satisfy the following  NO 
conditions:
a.   such window is not located on the lot line; and
b.   the replacement does not require a modification of existing masonry
openings; and                                                                   
c.   the replacement window does not affect access to light or ventilation;
and
d.   there is no change in the operable area of the window.
2. Replacement of required fire-rated windows.                                 YES 
3. Repair or replacement of window and door sills.                             NO 
Exterior Facade Restoration Item (all buildings)                               Permit
                                                                               required?
IX. Miscellaneous                                                              
1. Probes involving the removal of less than 10 sf. of unit masonry (with a
maximum horizontal dimension not to exceed 4 ft.) in any 100 sf. of wall area, NO 
and the cumulative area of all probe openings on all facades does not exceed
150 sq. ft.
2. Replacement in kind of exterior gutters and leaders.                        NO 
3. Removal of existing signs and marquees.                                     NO 
4. Replacement of existing signs and marquees.                                 YES 
5. Installation of new signs and marquees, other than painted signs.           YES 
6. Open screen balcony enclosures on balconies less than 40 feet above grade.  NO 
7. Weather-resistant balcony enclosures, such as windows and solid walls.      YES 
 
§ 101-15 Public Challenge of Department Zoning Approvals.
The following procedure shall be followed only when members of the public wish
to challenge a zoning approval issued by the department for a new building
("NB") or an enlargement affecting the exterior envelope of an existing
building ("enlargement"). For the purposes of this section, "zoning approval"
shall mean the approval of zoning documents filed as part of either a full
approval of construction documents pursuant to section 28-104.2.2 or a partial
approval of construction documents pursuant to § 28-104.2.5 of the
Administrative Code, whichever comes first.
   (a)   Initial zoning challenge. The public shall have forty-five (45) days
from the date of posting on the department's website of a zoning diagram filed
in connection with an NB or enlargement to challenge the zoning approval,
whether or not a permit or full approval for the NB or enlargement application
has been issued. Posting of the zoning diagram shall serve as notice of zoning
approval. All permits shall state that the zoning diagram can be accessed on
the department's website. In addition, such zoning approval and information
related to such approval shall be made available upon request at the
appropriate borough office. The challenge shall be postmarked by the 45th day
from the date of posting and shall be sent to the appropriate borough
commissioner on forms specified by the department.
   (b)   Department review and decisions. After the forty-five (45) days for
public challenge have elapsed, the department shall provide the challenge(s) to
the applicant and the borough commissioner shall begin a review of the
challenge(s) received and issue decision(s). The borough commissioner may deny
the challenge(s) and/or issue to the applicant a notice of intent to revoke the
zoning approval and any other approval and/or permit that relies on the zoning
approval, along with a list of objections to the application. The challenge(s)
and decision(s) shall be posted on the department's website and made available
upon request at the appropriate borough office.
      (1)   Denial of challenge. The public shall have fifteen (15) days from
the date of the posting of the borough commissioner's decision to deny the
challenge to appeal to the department's technical affairs unit on forms
specified by the department. The appeal shall be postmarked no later than the
15th day after the date of the posting.
      (2)   Notice of intent to revoke. The borough commissioner may issue a
notice of intent to revoke the zoning approval and any other approval and/or
permit that relies on the zoning approval, along with a list of objections.
Such notice shall be rescinded when all objections are satisfied. The public
shall have fifteen (15) days from the date of the posting of the rescission of
such notice on the department's website to appeal the rescission to the
department's technical affairs unit on forms specified by the department. The
appeal shall be postmarked no later than the 15th day after the date of the
posting.
      (3)   Final determinations. In addition to the internal appeals procedure
provided for in paragraph 2 of this subdivision, rescission of a notice of
intent to revoke a permit, issuance of a permit and revocation of a permit are
final determinations that may be appealed to the Board of Standards and Appeals
(BSA) in accordance with its rules. Where a permit has already been issued, the
denial of a challenge by the borough commissioner or by the head of the
technical affairs unit pursuant to this rule shall also be considered a final
determination that may be appealed to the BSA.
   (c)   Amendments to zoning approvals.
      (1)   Resolving objections. An applicant may file to amend a zoning
approval solely to resolve the objections stated in the notice of intent to
revoke. Rescission of a notice of intent to revoke as a result of the
resolution of objections shall constitute a decision that may be appealed
pursuant to the provisions of paragraph 2 of subdivision b of this section or
to the BSA, pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision b of this section.
      (2)   Amendments to the approved zoning documents. An applicant may also
file to amend approved zoning documents for reasons in addition to or other
than addressing the zoning objections raised in the notice of intent to revoke
approval or permit. Challenges to the department's approval of such amendments
shall be subject to the process set forth in subdivisions a and b of this
section.
   (d)   Currently filed jobs. The public challenge process described in this
section shall not apply to jobs where the application submission for an NB or
enlargement is deemed by the department as ready for initial plan examination
and the appropriate fees have been paid prior to the effective date of this
rule.
§ 101-16 Posting of Permit.
A building permit or copy thereof shall be securely posted at the work site in
a conspicuous location readily visible to the general public from a public
right-of-way within three days of issuance but not later than the date of
commencement of work and shall remain posted until all work is completed or the
permit expires, whichever is later.
§ 101-17 Major Projects Development Program.
The major projects development program will offer dedicated project
coordination and guidance services to participating projects as set forth in
subdivision (a) of this section. Such services will include consultations with
dedicated Department staff throughout the life of a project, including, but not
limited to, pre-application development consultations, pre-construction
consultations, pre-inspection consultations, and consultations regarding
construction phasing and scheduling as needed. The consultations may cover (1)
zoning and code compliance, (2) phasing of filings, permits, and occupancy, (3)
construction, site safety, and public safety checks, and (4) the issuance of a
Temporary Certificate of Occupancy and Final Certificate of Occupancy.
   (a)   Applicability. 
      (1)   The major projects development program is a voluntary program that
applies to:
         (i)   owners of proposed new buildings that will be 20 stories or
greater, regardless of whether such proposed building preserves existing
building elements;
         (ii)   owners of proposed new buildings that preserve existing
building elements and for which the resulting building includes additional
floor area of 100,000 square feet or more;
         (iii)   owners of proposed new buildings with a total floor area of
500,000 square feet or more; and
         (iv)   owners of existing or proposed buildings designated by the
commissioner as eligible for this program due to unique hazards associated with
the construction or demolition of the structure, including complex construction
logistics potentially impacting adjoining properties or public safety.
      (2)   Acceptance into the program is on a first-come-first-served rolling
basis, depending on program capacity.
   (b)   Requirements. Owners who choose to participate in this program shall:
      (1)   provide all project scope information, required filings, and
project schedule, sequencing and phasing information, and provide timely
updates of such information, as directed by the Department;
      (2)   attend all scheduled consultations and provide any additional
information and documentation requested by the Department; and
      (3)   address any objections and deficient conditions on the work site in
a timely manner.
   (c)   Fee. In order to participate in this program, the owner will be
charged a fee as provided in 1 RCNY §
101-03. Such fee will be charged in addition to all other applicable fees set
out in 1 RCNY §
101-03, Article 112 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code, or any other
provision of law.
   (d)   Removal from program. The Department may, on written notice to the
owner, remove a project from the program for failure to comply with the
requirements of the program. The notice will inform the owner of the reasons
for the proposed removal from the program and that the owner has the right to
present to the Department information as to why the project should not be
removed from the program within:
      (1)   10 business days of delivery of the notice by hand or
electronically to the owner's designated email address; or
      (2)   15 calendar days of the posting of notice by mail.
   (e)   Withdrawal from program. An owner who wishes to withdraw a project
from the program for financial or any other reasons must inform the Department
in writing.
   (f)   Effect of removal or withdrawal. After removal or withdrawal, as
described in subdivisions (d) and (e) of this section, an owner must continue
to comply with all requirements of law or rule applicable to the project
without receiving the consultation and guidance services authorized pursuant to
this section.
(Added City Record 1/27/2022, eff. 5/1/2022)
§ 101-18 Categories of Work That Do Not Require a Permit When Performed by the
New York City Department of Parks and Recreation or its Contractors on Land
under DPR’s Jurisdiction.
   (a)   Scope. This rule establishes categories of work performed by the New
York City Department of Parks and Recreation (“DPR”) or its contractors on land
under DPR’s jurisdiction that may be exempt from the permit requirements of the
New York City Construction Codes.
   (b)   References. See Administrative Code §§ 28-105.1 and 28-105.4,
paragraph 9.
   (c)   Compliance with code and other laws. Any exemptions outlined by this
rule will not grant authorization for any work to be performed in a manner that
violates the provisions of this rule, the New York City Construction Codes, the
New York City Energy Conservation Code, or any other laws, rules, or
regulations. Such exemptions do not eliminate the obligation of the DPR to file
with other City agencies, when appropriate, including but not limited to the
Landmarks Preservation Commission, the City Planning Commission, Department of
Transportation, Department of Environmental Protection, Department of
Environmental Conservation, or the Fire Department, nor do they eliminate the
obligation of the DPR to file at the Department of Buildings for any related
work, such as associated sidewalk protection, structural work, electrical
connections, or plumbing connections.
   (d)   General requirements. Work may be exempted from the permitting
requirements of the Construction Codes when the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The work must be performed by general contractors registered
pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 4 of Title 28 of the Administrative
Code, and/or licensed electricians in accordance with the New York City
Electrical Code. General contractors and electricians must be in good standing
with the Department.
      (2)   All Limited Alteration Application work and electrical work
associated with any exemptions outlined by this rule must be filed with the
Department.
      (3)   Geotechnical investigations must be performed when required by
Building Code section 1803.2.
      (4)   Support of excavation work must be filed with the Department where
required by Building Code section 3304.4.
      (5)   The work must be filed with the Department if such work is
performed as an integral part of a larger project filed with the Department.
      (6)   All repair and replace-in-kind work must be validated by an
engineering analysis accounting for all applicable loads.
      (7)   All special inspections required by Chapter 17 of the Building Code
must be performed.
   (e)   Documentation requirements. DPR must comply with the following
documentation requirements:
      (1)   Signed and sealed construction documents, including temporary
shoring documents where required, must be maintained on site during
construction. All construction document requirements in Building Code section
BC 107 and record retention requirements in Administrative Code § 28-104.12
apply. Such records must be made available to the department upon request.
      (2)   Where special inspections are performed for work exempted from
permitting by this rule, the special inspection documentation must be retained
by the DPR for at least six years in accordance with Administrative Code § 28-
115.3 and made available to the Department upon request.
   (f)   Categories of work that are exempt from permit requirements. In
addition to the categories of work exempted from the permit requirements of
Administrative Code § 28-105.1, in accordance with § 28-105.4, paragraphs 1
through 9, the following categories of work are exempt from permit requirements
when performed by DPR or its contractors on land under DPR’s jurisdiction.
      (1)   Construction fences. Construction fences when such fences:
         (i)   do not impede the public right of way; and
         (ii)   are not on the lot line; and
         (iii)   are not installed in connection with work requiring a permit.
      (2)   Site grading. Site grading, provided that the site grading:
         (i)   does not require support of excavation pursuant to Building Code
section 3304.4;
         (ii)   does not require a Department of Environmental Protection
permit;
         (iii)   does not create a non-accessible route(s) where an accessible
route(s) would be required; and
         (iv)   does not create new retaining walls or create modifications to
existing retaining walls that would require a permit. Retaining walls that do
not require a permit are set out in paragraph (7) of this subdivision.
      (3)   Outdoor stairs on grade. Outdoor stairs on grade that are
independent of other structures.
      (4)   Site furnishings and ancillary non-building structures. The
following site furnishings and ancillary non-building structures, including
their foundations:
         (i)   flagpoles;
         (ii)   handball walls that are:
            (A)   a maximum of 16’-0” high;
            (B)   a minimum of 10” thick;
            (C)   exempt from support of excavation requirements pursuant to
Building Code section 3304.4; and
            (D)   not supported by pile foundations.
         (iii)   playground equipment;
         (iv)   basketball hoops;
         (v)   guardrails;
         (vi)   handrails;
         (vii)   sports accessories;
         (viii)   bollards; or
         (ix)   chain link fences and steel picket fences including gates,
posts, and related appurtenances where such fences are:
            (A)   a maximum of 20’-0” high for chain link fences and 7’-0” high
for steel picket fences;
            (B)   not installed on the lot line;
            (C)   exempt from support of excavation requirements pursuant to
Building Code section 3304.4; and
            (D)   not supported by pile foundations.
      (5)   Concrete spall and crack repair. Concrete spall and crack repair
for exterior, on-grade, non-building structure concrete applications, provided
that the work:
         (i)   does not require temporary shoring;
         (ii)   is a replacement in kind; and
         (iii)   does not exceed a reinforcing bar size of #5.
      (6)   Retaining walls. 
         (i)   For all retaining wall work types listed in this paragraph, the
following general requirements apply. Retaining walls must:
            (A)   not be located on the lot line or within a distance that is
the maximum height of the wall from the lot line;
            (B)   not be attached to a building;
            (C)   be exempt from the inspection requirements of Administrative
Code § 28-305.4;
            (D)   not support any structure or any surcharge load other than
pedestrian loads, snow loads, and incidental loads associated with maintenance,
including temporary vehicle surcharges;
            (E)   not show any evidence of sliding or overturning failure; and
            (F)   be less than 10 feet in height along any point of the wall.
For the purposes of this item, the height of the retaining wall is the distance
from the top of the ground in front of the wall to the top of the wall stem, or
wall step for stepped walls, including any parapets or fencing capable of
retaining material. This applies to all retaining walls, including those not
fronting a public right-of-way.
         (ii)   The following scopes of work are exempt from permitting
requirements under this section:
            (A)   Construction of new retaining walls provided that such new
retaining walls retain 5 feet or less in height of soil.
            (B)   Replacement in kind of mass stone masonry walls provided that
such retaining walls comply with the applicable code requirements for mass
stone masonry walls, including but not limited to requirements pertaining to
base to height ratio.
            (C)   Repairs and rebuilds of retaining wall parapets down to a
maximum of 2 feet below the upper soil level.
            (D)   Repair of existing retaining walls provided that such
existing retaining walls retains 5 feet or less in height of soil.
            (E)   Removal and replacement of masonry facade/cladding units
where such replacement does not overlook a paved surface or marked path within
the height of the wall. However, if the facade removal and replacement occur a
maximum of 5 feet in height above the ground in front of the retaining wall,
the retaining wall may overlook a paved surface or marked path.
      (7)   Renovation of public restroom buildings. 
         (i)   Renovation of public restroom buildings, provided that the
building:
            (A)   is limited to a single story in height;
            (B)   is a freestanding building that does not exceed 1,000 gross
square feet;
            (C)   is not on the lot line or within a distance that is the
maximum height of the building from the lot line;
            (D)   contains no sub-grade levels;
            (E)   does not have a structural system that is either concrete or
structural steel;
            (F)   is isolated with a construction fence around the building,
measured perpendicularly 8 or more feet from the face of the building; and
            (G)   is taken offline for the duration of the work.
         (ii)   Work performed on such buildings must be limited to:
            (A)   reconfiguration of non-load bearing walls;
            (B)   facade restoration, with the exception of terra cotta;
            (C)   replacement in kind of existing structural members;
            (D)   replacement in kind of domestic hot water systems and
electric heating systems;
            (E)   replacement and reconfiguration of plumbing fixtures; or
            (F)   construction of ramps, stairs and their associated handrails
and guardrails as required for accessibility.
      (8)   Sheds and greenhouses. Temporary portable freestanding sheds and
greenhouses on land under DPR’s jurisdiction, provided that the sheds or
greenhouses:
         (i)   do not exceed 120 square feet in area and 9’-6” in height;
         (ii)   do not obstruct any required window;
         (iii)   are not located within 3 feet of any lot line;
         (iv)   do not impose any loads on adjacent structures or go below the
bottom of any adjacent footings;
         (v)   are prefabricated structures secured to foundations per the shed
or greenhouse manufacturer’s instructions; and
         (vi)   are limited to not more than one such shed per 1,000 square
feet of lot area.
      (9)   Replacement in kind of miscellaneous metal members. Replacement in
kind of miscellaneous metal members, provided that such replacement:
         (i)   occurs within buildings or structures not exceeding a single
story in height;
         (ii)   does not include the building structure or affect any portion
of the building’s structural stability;
         (iii)   does not result in the widening of any openings; and
         (iv)   is limited to the following types of work:
            (A)   lintels;
            (B)   steel doors;
            (C)   storefront; or
            (D)   guardrails and railings.
(Added City Record 7/24/2025, eff. 8/23/2025)
§ 101-19 Energy Storage Systems.
   (a)   Applicability and scope. This section governs the design, filing,
construction, installation, commissioning, operation, maintenance,
decommissioning of and establishes reporting requirements for the following
categories of energy storage systems (ESS):
      (1)   ESS that exceed the minimum aggregate capacities established in
NFPA 855 when installed indoors.
      (2)   ESS that exceed the minimum aggregate capacities established in the
New York City Fire Department’s (FDNY) rules when installed outdoors.
      (3)   Indoor and outdoor ESS installations associated with one- and two-
family dwellings.
   (b)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms
have the following meanings:
      (1)   Certificate of Approval (COA). As defined in the New York City Fire
Code (Fire Code).
      (2)   Energy Storage System (ESS). One or more devices that, when
assembled together, are capable of storing energy in order to supply electrical
energy at a future time to the local power loads, to the utility grid, or for
grid support.
      (3)   NFPA 855. National Fire Protection Association 855 - Amendment
Relating to the Standard for the Installation of Stationary Energy Storage
Systems – 2020 edition, as amended by the New York City Department of Buildings
(DOB).
   (c)   Codes. All work relating to the design, filing, construction,
installation, commissioning, operation, maintenance, decommissioning and
reporting of ESS must comply with the requirements of the New York City
Construction Codes (Construction Codes) set forth in title 28 of the
Administrative Code of the City of New York. All such work must also comply
with the requirements of the New York City Electrical Code (Electrical Code),
the Fire Code, the New York City Energy Conservation Code, the New York City
Zoning Resolution, the FDNY rules, the DOB rules, and any other applicable laws
and rules.
   (d)   General design and installation requirements for ESS. 
      (1)   Indoor ESS systems must comply with the following requirements:
         (i)   ESS must comply with NFPA 855.
         (ii)   Equipment listing, testing, evaluation, and certification:
            (A)   ESS must be listed in accordance with UL 9540, as referenced
in section 3616-07 item 2.3.7, unless specifically exempted by NFPA 855.
            (B)   UL 9540A, as referenced in section 3616-07 item 2.3.7, large-
scale fire testing must be performed on all ESS, unless specifically exempted
by NFPA 855.
            (C)   A COA must be obtained, as required by the Fire Code and FDNY
rules.
      (2)   Outdoor ESS systems must comply with the FDNY rules.
      (3)   ESS installations associated with one- and two-family dwellings
must comply with paragraph (1) of this subdivision for indoor ESS installations
and paragraph (2) of this subdivision for outdoor installations.
   (e)   Construction document approval. An application for construction
document approval for construction related to an ESS must be filed with DOB.
Construction documents filed in connection with the ESS and related
construction must comply with the requirements of the Construction Codes. In
addition, such applications must include the following information, as
applicable:
      (1)   Plans and specifications associated with the ESS submitted in
accordance with NFPA 855.
      (2)   Zoning analysis demonstrating that the ESS complies with the New
York City Zoning Resolution.
         Exception: An accessory indoor ESS installation within an existing
building envelope that complies with the definition of “accessory use” in the
New York City Zoning Resolution does not require a zoning analysis.
      (3)   For a roof installation, a roof plan demonstrating that the ESS
does not obstruct access for firefighting in accordance with the Fire Code and
maintenance of roof equipment.
      (4)   For a site installation, the site plan must show access to energy
storage equipment and site buildings for firefighting in accordance with the
Fire Code and for maintenance.
      (5)   Proof of compliance with the flood-resistant construction
requirements of the New York City Building Code (Building Code).
      (6)   When a site-specific approval is required pursuant to subdivision
(f) of this section, an Office of Technical Certification and Research (OTCR)
conditional acceptance letter.
      (7)   When a site-specific approval is not required pursuant to
subdivision (f) of this section, an application for construction document
approval must include:
         (i)   A COA issued by FDNY for the proposed ESS; and
         (ii)   Where required by the Fire Code or the FDNY rules, Installation
Approval issued by FDNY.
   (f)   Site-specific review. 
      (1)   Applicability. ESS installations subject to the requirements of
this section require site-specific review and approval by OTCR.
         Exception: OTCR review and approval are not required for the
following:
         (i)   ESS installations associated with one- and two-family dwellings
that comply with the applicable provisions of NFPA 855, provided that the
equipment has been approved by the FDNY through a COA or other listing that
accounts for thermal runaway conditions approved by DOB and FDNY.
         (ii)   At the discretion of OTCR, an ESS that has received a COA from
the FDNY may not require site specific equipment evaluation and approval.
      (2)   Site-specific application contents. A submission for site-specific
evaluation of the proposed ESS must include:
         (i)   The OTCR site-specific application form, and all required fees;
         (ii)   The construction documents required pursuant to subdivision (e)
of this section;
         (iii)   Documentation of peer review as applicable in accordance with
paragraph (3) of this subdivision;
         (iv)   A COA issued by the FDNY for the proposed ESS;
         (v)   Where required by the Fire Code or the FDNY rules, a letter of
conditional acceptance issued by the FDNY; and
         (vi)   An OTCR conditional acceptance letter and an OTCR final
certification letter uploaded to DOB’s electronic filing system.
      (3)   Peer review. Peer review is required for site-specific ESS
installations except as directed by DOB. The peer reviewer(s) must review the
plans and specifications for compliance with the provisions of NFPA 855.
         (i)   Peer reviewer. The peer reviewer(s) must be one or more
engineers licensed and registered in the state of New York with relevant
experience with and knowledge about fire protection engineering and ESS
applications and systems. The peer reviewer must also:
            (A)   Be retained by the owner of the ESS and be approved by DOB
prior to commencing the review,
            (B)   Be independent from the registered design professional of
record; and
            (C)   Avoid conflicts of interest by not engaging in any activities
that might compromise their objective judgment and integrity, including but not
limited to having a financial or other interest in the design, construction,
installation, manufacture or maintenance of the structures or components that
they are reviewing.
         (ii)   During the review, the peer reviewer(s) must verify that:
            (A)   The proposed design of the ESS and supporting infrastructure
complies with the Construction Codes, Electrical Code, the Fire Code and FDNY
rules;
            (B)   The proposed design of the ESS and supporting infrastructure
conforms to NFPA 855, UL 9540 listing conditions, and conditions specified
under the COA; and
            (C)   All applicable UL 9540A test data has been interpreted as
compliant with the intent of the provisions of the New York City Construction,
Electrical, and Fire codes, and safety benchmarks have been established based
on such interpretation to mitigate thermal runaway propagation and site-
specific hazard conditions.
         (iii)   The peer reviewer(s) must prepare a report summarizing the
findings of the peer review. OTCR will not issue a conditional acceptance
letter for the ESS site-specific review in accordance with paragraph (4) of
this subdivision until a peer review report has been submitted indicating the
ESS design shown on identified plans and specifications complies with the
requirements of this section. Such report must be separately signed and sealed
by each peer reviewer.
         (iv)   If a dispute arises between the registered design professional
of record and the peer reviewer regarding compliance with the provisions of
this section and the parties are unable to resolve the dispute, such dispute
must be reported to DOB in the form of a letter from the registered design
professional of record. DOB will either resolve the dispute or to allow a
change of the peer reviewer(s).
         (v)   The registered design professional of record for the ESS retains
sole responsibility for the design of the ESS. The activities and reports of
the peer reviewer(s) do not relieve the registered design professional of
record of this responsibility.
      (4)   Conditional acceptance. Upon demonstration of compliance with the
requirements of this section, OTCR will issue a conditional acceptance letter.
The applicant must submit the conditional acceptance letter in connection with
the application for construction document approval.
   (g)   Certificate of occupancy. Where the ESS is not accessory to the
principal use on the same zoning lot, a new certificate of occupancy must be
issued by DOB to reflect the zoning Use Group of the non-accessory ESS pursuant
to Article 118 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code.
   (h)   Permits. Prior to any work being performed, permits must be obtained
for both the construction work and the electrical work.
      (1)   Where the Construction Codes require the filing of technical
reports identifying those responsible for required special, progress and final
inspections, such reports must be filed with DOB.
      (2)   Before commencing any electrical work, an application for an
electrical work permit must be filed with DOB in accordance with the Electrical
Code, including an electrical plan review as required by the DOB rules. The
construction permit for the installation of the energy storage equipment will
not be issued until the electrical permit has been issued.
   (i)   Job sign-off. The registered design professional must take all steps
required by DOB for the issuance of a letter of completion, or, if applicable,
a certificate of occupancy, pursuant to § 28-116.4 of the Administrative Code,
including but not limited to, the completion of the following:
      (1)   Inspections. Any construction work performed in connection with the
construction application, including but not limited to the energy storage
equipment, must be inspected in accordance with Administrative Code. The
electrical work performed in connection with the energy storage equipment must
be completed and inspected in accordance with the Electrical Code.
      (2)   Commissioning. Where required by NFPA 855, and where required by
the Fire Code or the FDNY rules, commissioning must be performed accordingly. A
commissioning report must be submitted to DOB as required.
      (3)   Final acceptance. Where a site-specific approval is required
pursuant to subdivision (f) of this section, a registered design professional
must submit a final certification attesting that the installed ESS is in
compliance with the conditional acceptance letter. OTCR will issue a final
acceptance letter upon demonstration of compliance with the requirements of
this section.
   (j)   Operation. An ESS may not be operated until the job sign-off has been
completed in accordance with subdivision (i) of this section.
   (k)   Registration and reporting requirements. All system registrations and
notifications must be in a form and manner prescribed by DOB. Registration is
not required for lead acid and nickel cadmium batteries used for emergency,
standby, or uninterruptable power supply
      (1)   Where a new ESS is subject to the requirements of this section,
building owners and property managers must register each new system with DOB
prior to operation.
      (2)   Where an existing ESS would be subject to the requirements of this
section, building owners and property managers must register such existing ESS
with DOB within 3 years of the effective date of this section.
      (3)   Prior to decommissioning a registered ESS, DOB must be notified.
All required permits must be obtained prior to decommissioning.
(Added City Record 9/26/2025, eff. 10/26/2025)
Subchapter B: Enforcement
§ 102-01 Violation Classification and Certification of Correction.
   (a)   Pursuant to § 28-204.1 of the Administrative Code, any person who
shall violate or fail to comply with any provision or provisions of law
enforced by the Department or with any order issued pursuant thereto shall be
liable for a civil penalty that may be recovered in a proceeding before the
Environmental Control Board ("ECB"). Such proceeding shall be commenced by
service of a notice of violation ("NOV") returnable before the board. Such
notice of violation may be issued by employees of the Department or of other
city agencies designated by the Commissioner and may be served by such
employees or by a licensed process server.
   (b)   Classification of violations. For purposes of classifying violations
pursuant to § 28-201.2 of the Administrative Code, the following terms shall
have the following meanings:
      (1)   IMMEDIATELY HAZARDOUS VIOLATION. Immediately hazardous violations
are those specified as such by the New York City Construction Codes, or those
where the violating condition poses a threat that severely affects life,
health, safety, property, the public interest, or a significant number of
persons so as to warrant immediate corrective action, or, with respect to
outdoor advertising, those where the violation and penalty are necessary as an
economic disincentive to the continuation or the repetition of the violating
condition. Immediately hazardous violations shall be denominated as Class 1
violations.
      (2)   MAJOR VIOLATION. Major violations are those specified as such by
the New York City Construction Codes or those where the violating condition
affects life, health, safety, property, or the public interest but does not
require immediate corrective action, or, with respect to outdoor advertising,
those where the violation and penalty are appropriate as an economic
disincentive to the continuation or the repetition of the violating condition.
Major violations shall be denominated as Class 2 violations.
      (3)   LESSER VIOLATION. Lesser violations are those where the violating
condition has a lesser effect than an immediately hazardous (Class 1) or major
violation (Class 2) on life, health, safety, property, or the public interest.
Lesser violations shall be denominated as Class 3 violations.
   (c)   Correction and certification of correction.
      (1)   Each NOV issued by the Commissioner shall contain an order of the
Commissioner directing the respondent to correct the condition constituting the
violation and to file a certification with the Department that the condition
has been corrected.
      (2)   Violations classified as major or lesser must be corrected within
sixty days from the date of service of the NOV.
      (3)   A violation for filing a false certification cannot be certified as
corrected prior to a hearing before ECB. The respondent must appear at the
hearing prior to the submission of the certification to the Department.
      (4)   The required certification forms shall be obtained from the
Department in accordance with the instructions contained in the NOV.
      (5)   The respondent must appear at the ECB hearing for all violating
conditions unless those charges are cured or a pre-hearing stipulation is
offered, timely accepted by the respondent, and approved in writing by ECB.
Where more than one violation of law is listed on the same NOV, the respondent
must submit a single certification covering all of the violating conditions.
      (6)   The certification shall be signed by one with personal knowledge of
the correction of the violating condition and notarized by a notary public or
commissioner of deeds.
      (7)   The certification shall be accompanied by true and legible copies
of any and all documentary proof of compliance.
      (8)   The completed certification must be submitted to the Department in
a form and manner provided on the Department’s website at nyc.gov/buildings.
      (9)   For violations classified as Class 3 or for those Class 2
violations eligible for a cure, respondents may avoid a hearing by submitting a
certification of correction acceptable to and received by the Department no
later than sixty days from the date of service of the NOV. For violations
classified as Class 1, a certification acceptable to the Department must be
received by the Department forthwith.
      (10)   Failure to submit an acceptable certification for all violating
conditions indicated on the NOV on a Department of Buildings form within the
time period prescribed in paragraph (9) of this subdivision shall require the
respondent to appear at a hearing at ECB on the date indicated on the NOV. If
no certificate of correction is received within the time period prescribed in
paragraph (9) of this subdivision, the respondent is also subject to issuance
of a violation for failure to certify correction and the imposition of civil
penalties as defined in § 28-202.1 of the Administrative Code.
   (d)   Mitigated and zero penalties. Mitigated or zero penalties are
available in the following circumstances under the following conditions.
      (1)   Cure.1 An eligible violation may be cured by correction before the
first scheduled hearing date at ECB. All violations that are designated as
Class 3 violations are eligible for cure. Some, but not all, types of
violations that are designated as Class 2 violations are eligible for cure.
Those types of Class 2 violations that are eligible for cure will be indicated
within the Buildings Penalty Schedule found below. In order to cure, a
certificate of correction acceptable to the Department must be filed at the
Department within sixty days from the date of service of the NOV. A cure
constitutes an admission of the violation; dispenses with the need for a
hearing at ECB; constitutes a predicate violation for subsequent violations;
and, consistent with the provisions of § 28-204.2, and with the provisions of
the Buildings Penalty Schedule, results in a zero penalty. A violation that has
been charged as an Aggravated I or Aggravated II violation is never eligible
for a cure, even if there is a "Yes" in the "Cure" column in the Buildings
Penalty Schedule for that violation description.
1 Section 28-204.2 of the Administrative Code provides for a zero penalty for
Lesser violations that are corrected within the prescribed, or cure, period.
For purposes of this rule, certain Major violations will also be treated as
eligible for cure to the extent that § 28-202.1 of the Administrative Code
specifies no minimum penalty for such violations.
      (2)   Stipulation. An eligible violation may be subject to stipulation
where the Commissioner offers to the respondent a stipulation prior to or at a
hearing to extend the time for compliance upon such terms and conditions as the
Commissioner prescribes. Violations that are eligible for stipulation are
indicated as such on the Buildings Penalty Schedule. The respondent must admit
the violation subject to stipulation and agree to correct it and file an
acceptable certification of correction with the Department. The stipulation may
be signed and submitted to ECB either before the first scheduled hearing date
at ECB or else on the first scheduled hearing date but prior to any actual
hearing on that date, in which case it is considered a pre-hearing stipulation,
or may be entered into at the first ECB hearing in which case it is considered
a hearing stipulation. A reduced penalty will be imposed in connection with a
pre-hearing stipulation in an amount indicated for the charge in question in
the Buildings Penalty Schedule. Specifically, the penalty imposed for that
violation will be half of the penalty amount (rounded to the nearest dollar) of
the penalty amount that would otherwise have been imposed at a hearing for that
particular violation. In connection with a stipulation entered into at a
hearing, a hearing penalty will be imposed in an amount indicated for the
charge in question in the Buildings Penalty Schedule. A stipulation, whether a
pre-hearing stipulation or a hearing stipulation, gives the respondent seventy-
five days from the first scheduled hearing date within which to correct the
violation and file a certificate of correction, failing which any reduced
penalty that may have been imposed in connection with a pre-hearing stipulation
will be adjusted to the standard hearing penalty set forth in the Buildings
Penalty Schedule. A stipulation is effective only if it is approved by ECB. A
pre-hearing stipulation dispenses with the need for a hearing at ECB. No
stipulation shall take effect unless, in the case of a pre-hearing stipulation,
it is offered by the Department prior to the first scheduled hearing date,
signed by respondent prior to the first scheduled hearing date and approved by
ECB in writing, or unless, in the case of a hearing stipulation, it is offered
by the Department at the hearing, accepted by the respondent at that hearing,
and is approved in writing by ECB. A violation that has been charged as an
Aggravated I or Aggravated II violation is never eligible for a stipulation,
even if there is a "Yes" in the "Stipulation" column in the Buildings Penalty
Schedule for that violation description.
      (3)   Mitigation. An eligible violation may be subject to mitigation
where the respondent proves at the hearing that the condition was corrected
prior to the first scheduled hearing date at ECB. Violations that are eligible
for mitigation are indicated as such on the Buildings Penalty Schedule. A
penalty is imposed on mitigations in accordance with the Buildings Penalty
Schedule. If a mitigated penalty is imposed, that penalty will be half of the
penalty amount of the penalty amount that would otherwise have been imposed at
a hearing for that particular violation. An acceptable certificate of
correction must thereafter be filed at the Department. A violation that has
been charged as an Aggravated I or Aggravated II violation is never eligible
for mitigation, even if there is a "Yes" in the "Mitigation" column in the
Buildings Penalty Schedule for that violation description.
   (e)   Certificate of correction review procedures. 
      (1)   The Department shall review all certificates and accompanying
documentation to determine their acceptability.
      (2)   The Department shall notify the respondent if the certification is
accepted or rejected and, if rejected, the reasons for the rejection and the
documents necessary to correct the problem.
   (f)   Aggravated penalties. Aggravated penalties may be imposed with the
following provisions. Notice of aggravated penalties may either be set forth in
the NOV or otherwise provided to the respondent prior to the date of the first
scheduled hearing at ECB.
      (1)   Aggravated penalties of the first order. Aggravated penalties of
the first order ("Agg. I") may be imposed when evidence establishes the same
condition or the same charge under the New York City Construction Codes or the
predecessor charge under the laws in effect prior to July 1, 2008 in a prior
enforcement action against the same owner or responsible party during the
previous three years.
      (2)   Aggravated penalties of the second order. Aggravated penalties of
the second order ("Agg. II") may be imposed in the following instances:
         (i)   When the respondent or defendant is found in violation of any
law or rule enforced by the Department where the violation of law is
accompanied by or results in an accident, or poses a substantial risk thereof;
is accompanied by, or results in a fatality or serious injury, or poses a
substantial risk thereof; or where the violating condition affects a
significant number of people; or
         (ii)   Where the respondent or defendant refuses to give the
Department requested information necessary to determine the condition of a
building or site; or
         (iii)   Where the respondent or defendant has a history of non-
compliance with laws or rules enforced by the Department at one or more
locations, including but not limited to a pattern of unreasonable delays in
correcting violations, a pattern of failing to obey Stop Work Orders, filing
false documents, or multiple defaults.
         (iv)   For purposes of this section, "in violation" shall mean to be
adjudged in violation of any law or rule enforced by the Department following a
hearing, to admit the charge, or to sign a stipulation agreement either at or
before a hearing before any administrative or judicial tribunal. Failure to
appear at a hearing leading to entry of a default order or judgment shall also
be deemed a finding "in violation."
   (g)   Additional Daily and Monthly Penalties. Additional daily penalties may
be imposed in connection with certain continuing and uncorrected Class 1
violations. Additional monthly penalties may be imposed in connection with
certain continuing and uncorrected Class 2 violations. If the Department seeks
such penalties in connection with a particular Class 1 or Class 2 charge, that
will be indicated on the NOV. Such daily or monthly penalties, if applicable,
are in addition to the set, flat-amount penalty that also is indicated in the
Buildings Penalty Schedule as applicable to the type of violation in question
taking into account the classification level and Aggravated level of the
particular violation. Imposition of such additional daily and monthly penalties
is authorized pursuant to § 28-202.1 of the New York City Administrative Code.
      (1)   Accrual of Daily Penalties. Daily penalties, if applicable, will
accrue at the rate of $1,000 per day for a total of forty-five days running
from the date of the Commissioner's order to correct set forth in the NOV,
unless the violating condition is proved by the respondent at the hearing to
have been corrected prior to the end of that forty-five day period, in which
case the daily penalties will accrue for every day up to the date of that
proved correction.
      (2)   Accrual of Monthly Penalties. Monthly penalties, if applicable,
accrue at the rate of $250 per month for a total of one month running from the
date of the Commissioner's order to correct set forth in the NOV, unless the
violating condition is proved by the respondent at the hearing to have been
corrected prior to the end of a month period.
   (h)   Applicability. On and after July 1, 2008 any work performed without a
required permit will be presumed subject to enforcement under the New York City
Construction Codes. Thus, the option afforded by § 28-101.4 to use the either
the 1968 Building Code or the New York City Construction Codes applies only to
work for which an application is filed with the Department. If and when the
work is the subject of an application to legalize, the option will be available
once again.
   (i)   Legal References. The legal references referred to in the table below,
which reflect the classification of violations and the Penalty Schedule,
include the following:
      (1)   Title 28 of the New York City (NYC) Administrative Code. References
to Title 28 of the NYC Administrative Code begin with "28-" (for example, "28-
201.1"). The citation "28-Misc." refers to provisions of Title 28 that are not
specifically designated elsewhere in the table.
      (2)   Chapter 1 of Title 27 of the NYC Administrative Code (also known as
the "1968 Building Code") and Chapter 3 of the same (also known as the
"Electrical Code"). References to these chapters of Title 27 of the NYC
Administrative Code begin with "27-" (for example, "27-371"). The citation "27-
Misc." refers to provisions of Title 27 that are not specifically designated
elsewhere in the table.
      (3)   The "New York City Construction Codes," which consist of:
         – The New York City Plumbing Code (PC)
         – The New York City Building Code (BC)
         – The New York City Mechanical Code (MC)
         – The New York City Fuel Gas Code (FGC)
         – The New York City Energy Conservation Code (ECC)
References to these New York City Construction Codes are designated by the
various abbreviations set out above (for example, "BC 3010.1"). The citations
"BC-Misc.", "PC-Misc.", "MC-Misc.", "FGC-Misc.", "ECC-R Misc." and "ECC-
C Misc." refer to provisions of the New York City Building, Plumbing,
Mechanical, Fuel Gas, or Energy Conservation codes that are not specifically
designated elsewhere in the table.
      (4)   Appendices to the New York City Construction Codes. The New York
City Construction Codes include all enacted appendices. Administrative Code §
28-102.6. References to Appendices are cited by using the abbreviation for the
particular Construction Code followed by the applicable Appendix letter (for
example, "H") followed by the applicable section number (for example, "BC
H103.1").
      (5)   The NYC Zoning Resolution (ZR) and the Rules of the City of New
York (RCNY). References to the Zoning Resolution and to the Rules of the City
of New York are designated by the abbreviations "ZR" and "RCNY" (for example,
"ZR25-41" "1 RCNY9-01"). The citations "1 RCNY-Misc." and "ZR-Misc." refer to
provisions of 1 RCNY or the Zoning Resolution that are not specifically
designated elsewhere in the table.
      (6)   Reference Standards that pertain to Title 27 of the NYC
Administrative Code (RS). References to the Reference Standards are designated
by the abbreviation set out above (for example, "RS-16"). The citation "RS-
Misc." refers to Reference Standards that are not specifically designated
elsewhere in the table.
      (7)   Citations to the New York City Construction Codes. Whenever a
section or subdivision of the New York City Construction Codes is cited or
referred to, subordinate consecutively numbered subdivisions or paragraphs of
the cited provision are deemed to be included in such reference unless the
context or subject matter requires otherwise.
      (8)   Electrical Code Technical Standards. References to sections of the
National Fire Protection Association NFPA 70 National Electrical Code as
adopted and/or amended by New York City begin with "EC" (for example, "EC
250.14"). The citation "EC-Misc" refers to provisions of the Electrical Code
Technical Standards that are not specifically designated elsewhere in the
table.
      (9)   2008 code. References to the 2008 code pertain to the New York City
Construction Codes effective on July 1, 2008 and any applicable subsequent
amendments prior to December 31, 2014.
      (10)   2014 code. References to the 2014 code pertain to the amendments
and additions to the New York City Construction Codes effective on December 31,
2014 and any applicable subsequent amendments.
      (11)   2022 code. References to the 2022 code pertain to the amendments
and additions to the New York City Construction Codes effective on November 7,
2022 and any applicable subsequent amendments.
   (j)   Reduction of Default Penalties upon Proof of Compliance. With the
exception of daily penalties charged under § 28-202.1 of the Administrative
Code for continued Class 1 violations of §§ 28-210.1 or 28-210.3 of the
Administrative Code, any imposed Default Penalty, Aggravated l Default Penalty
or Aggravated II Default Penalty will be reduced by one-half (1/2) or to the
standard penalty amount, whichever is greater, after:
      (1)   Respondent files an acceptable certificate of correction with the
Department; and
      (2)   ECB receives notification from the Department of its acceptance of
such certificate of correction.
   (k)   Classification of particular violations. The table below sets forth
the penalties imposed in connection with Summonses, as defined in 48 RCNY §
6-01, and/or Notices of Violation returnable to ECB that are issued on or after
July 1, 2008. Particular violations shall be classified as indicated in the
following table:
Section                Violation                    Standard Mitigated Default Aggravated Aggravated Aggravated Aggravated II Default – Max
of Law  Classification Description Cure Stipulation Penalty  Penalty   Penalty I Penalty  I Default  II Penalty Penalty
                                                                                          Penalty
                                                                                                                                                Standard Mitigated Default Aggravated Aggravated Aggravated Aggravated II Default – Max
Section of Law                             Classification Violation Description                                                Cure Stipulation Penalty  Penalty   Penalty I Penalty  I Default  II Penalty Penalty
                                                                                                                                                                                      Penalty
1 RCNY-Misc, RS-Misc                       Class 1        Miscellaneous violations.                                            No   No          $2,500   No        $12,500 $6,250     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
1 RCNY-Misc, RS-Misc                       Class 2        Miscellaneous violations.                                            Yes  Yes         $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
1 RCNY-Misc, RS-Misc                       Class 3        Miscellaneous violations.                                            Yes  Yes         $500     Yes       $500    $500       $500       $500       $500
1 RCNY                                                    Failure to meet the requirements of licensing/ identification/
§                                         Class 2        qualification as required by 1 RCNY §                               Yes  No          $2,500   Yes       $10,000 $6,250     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
5-02                                                      5-02.
1 RCNY
§                                         Class 2        Failure to file report per 28-321.3                                 Yes  Yes         $10,000  Yes       $10,000 $10,000    $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
103-17(d)(1)
1 RCNY                                                    Failure to demonstrate compliance with energy compliant buildings
§                                         Class 2        requirements per 28-321.2                                           Yes  Yes         $10,000  Yes       $10,000 $10,000    $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
103-17(e)(1)
1 RCNY                                                    Failure to demonstrate compliance with energy conservation measures
§                                         Class 2        per 28-321.2                                                        Yes  Yes         $10,000  Yes       $10,000 $10,000    $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
103-17(e)(2)
1 RCNY
§                                         Class 3        Failure to install a sub-meter                                       Yes  Yes         $500     Yes       $500    $500       $500       $500       $500
103-18(e)(2)
1 RCNY
§                                         Class 1        Licensed Rigger designated an unqualified foreman.                   No   No          $2,500   No        $12,500 $6,250     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
104-20 
1 RCNY
§                                         Class 2        Licensed Rigger designated an unqualified foreman.                   No   No          $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
104-20 
1 RCNY                                                    Outdoor Advertising Company failed to comply with Commissioner's
§                                         Class 1        sign-related Order.                                                  No   No          $10,000  Yes       $25,000 $25,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
49-03
1 RCNY                                                    Failure of approved agency to comply with requirements of 1 RCNY §
§                                         Class 2        101-07.                                                              Yes  No          $2,500   Yes       $10,000 $6,250     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
101-07 
1 RCNY                                                    Removal of public protection from unsafe facade without approval
§                                         Class 2        from the department.                                                 No   No          $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
103-04(c)(5)(iv)
BC 3301.13.7 through BC 3301.13.13         Class 1        Construction Superintendent failed to perform duties per code.       No   No          $10,000  No        $25,000 $25,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
BC 3301.13.7 through BC 3301.13.13         Class 2        Construction Superintendent failed to perform duties per code.       No   No          $5,000   No        $10,000 $10,000    $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
BC 3301.13.10                              Class 1        Construction Superintendent failed to immediately notify the         No   No          $2,500   No        $12,500 $6,250     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
                                                          department of conditions as required.
1 RCNY
§                                         Class 1        Equipment User failed to designate a Lift Director.                  No   No          $10,000  No        $25,000 $25,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
3319-02(c)
1 RCNY
§                                         Class 1        No Lift Director on site.                                            No   No          $10,000  No        $25,000 $25,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
3319-02(c)(1)
1 RCNY                                                    Equipment User failed to designate a qualified and competent Lift
§                                         Class 1        Director.                                                            No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
3319-02(c)(2)
1 RCNY                                                    Equipment User failed to designate the proper party as Lift
§                                         Class 1        Director.                                                            No   No          $2,500   Yes       $12,500 $6,250     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
3319-02(c)(3)
1 RCNY
§                                         Class 1        No Assembly / Disassembly Director on site.                          No   No          $10,000  No        $25,000 $25,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
3319-01(i)(6)
1 RCNY
§                                         Class 1        Unqualified / Incompetent Assembly / Disassembly Director on site.   No   No          $5,000   Yes       $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
3319-01(i)(6)(i)
1 RCNY                                                    Failed to assemble or disassemble or ensure crane or derrick
§                                         Class 1        assembled / dissembled as per plans.                                 No   No          $2,500   No        $12,500 $6,250     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
3319-01(i)(6)
1 RCNY                                                    Failed to assemble or disassemble or ensure crane or derrick
§                                         Class 2        assembled / dissembled as per plans.                                 No   No          $1,250   No        $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
3319-01(i)(6)
1 RCNY
§                                         Class 1        HMO failed to provide proof of conducting a frequent inspection.     No   No          $2,500   No        $12,500 $6,250     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
3319-01(k)(1)(ii)
1 RCNY
§                                         Class 1        Failed to provide / maintain the required documents.                 No   Yes         $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
3319-01(u)
1 RCNY
§                                         Class 1        Equipment User failed to maintain crane or derrick log.              No   Yes         $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
3319-01(H)
1 RCNY                                                    Equipment user failed to make the proper notification to the
§                                         Class 1        department.                                                          No   No          $10,000  No        $25,000 $25,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
3319-01(c)(5)
1 RCNY                                                    Equipment user failed to make the proper notification to the
§                                         Class 2        department.                                                          No   Yes         $5,000   Yes       $10,000 $10,000    $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
3319-01(c)(5)
1 RCNY
§                                         Class 1        No anemometer / non-working anemometer on site or in machine.        No   No          $10,000  No        $25,000 $25,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
3319-01(t)(7)
1 RCNY
§                                         Class 2        No anemometer / non-working anemometer on site or in machine.        No   Yes         $5,000   Yes       $10,000 $10,000    $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
3319-01(t)(7)
1 RCNY
§                                         Class 1        Lift director failed to perform duties as required.                  No   No          $10,000  No        $25,000 $25,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
3319-02(e)
1 RCNY
§                                         Class 2        Lift director failed to perform duties as required.                  No   No          $5,000   Yes       $10,000 $10,000    $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
3319-02(e)
1 RCNY
§                                         Class 1        Lift director failed to notify the department of a violation.        No   No          $10,000  No        $25,000 $25,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
3319-02(f)
1 RCNY                                                    Lift director failed to conduct / record meeting (pre-shift or
§                                         Class 1        subsequent).                                                         No   No          $5,000   Yes       $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
3319-02(j)
                                                          Failure to file an Architect/Engineer report certifying that exit/
27-228.5                                   Class 2        directional signs are connected to emergency power source/storage    Yes  No          $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
                                                          battery equipment.
27-369, BC 1020.2 (2008 code), BC 1023.2   Class 1        Failure to provide unobstructed exit passageway.                     No   No          $1,250   No        $6,250  $3,125     $12,500    $6,250     $25,000
(2014 code), & BC 1024.2 (2022 code)
27-371, BC 715.3.7 (2008 code), BC 715.4.8 Class 2        Exit door not self-closing.                                          Yes  No          $625     Yes       $3,125  $1,563     $6,250     $3,125     $10,000
(2014 code), & BC 716.5.9 (2022 code)
27-382, BC 1006.3 (2014 code), & BC 1008.3 Class 2        Failure to provide power for emergency exit lighting.                Yes  No          $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
(2022 code)
27-383(b), BC 403.16 (2008 code) & BC      Class 1        Failure to install luminous egress or photoluminescent exit path     No   No          $2,500   Yes       $12,500 $6,250     $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
403.5.5 (2014 code)                                       marking in a high-rise building.
27-391 & BC 3002.3                         Class 2        Emergency signs at elevator call stations missing, defective or non- Yes  Yes         $625     Yes       $3,125  $1,563     $6,250     $3,125     $10,000
                                                          compliant with section requirements.
27-393, BC 1019.1.7 (2008 code), BC 1022.8 Class 2        Stair and/or floor identification signs missing and/or defective.    Yes  Yes         $625     Yes       $3,125  $1,563     $6,250     $3,125     $10,000
(2014 code), & BC 1023.9 (2022 code)
27-509, BC 3111.1 (2008 code) & BC 3112.1  Class 3        Fence exceeds permitted height.                                      Yes  Yes         $500     Yes       $500    $500       $500       $500       $500
(2014 code)
                                                          Plumbing systems and/or piping shall not be installed in elevator /
27-901(z)(1) & PC 301.6                    Class 2        counterweight hoistway and/or shaft or equipment rooms as per 27-901 Yes  No          $625     Yes       $3,125  $1,563     $6,250     $3,125     $10,000
                                                          (z)(1); PC 301.6.
27-904 & FGC 406.6.2                       Class 1        Gas being supplied to building without inspection and certification  No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          by DOB.
27-904 & FGC 406.6.2                       Class 2        Gas being supplied to building without inspection and certification  No   No          $2,500   Yes       $10,000 $6,250     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
                                                          by DOB.
27-921(a), PC 107.3 (2008 code), PC 107.4  Class 1        Failure to have new or altered plumbing system tested.               No   No          $2,500   No        $12,500 $6,250     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
(2014 code) & PC 108.4 (2022 code)
27-921(a), PC 107.3 (2008 code), PC 107.4  Class 2        Failure to have new or altered plumbing system tested.               Yes  No          $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
(2014 code) & PC 108.4 (2022 code)
27-929.1                                  Class 2        Failure to file report - automatic sprinkler                         No   No          $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
27-972(h), BC 907.2.12.3 (2008 code) & BC  Class 2        Failure to install an acceptable two-way voice communication system  Yes  No          $2,500   Yes       $10,000 $10,000    $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
907.2.13.3 (2014 code)                                    with central station connection.
27-2009.2                                  Class 2        Failure to post or distribute "Safe Construction Bill of Rights"     No   No          $1,250   No        $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
27-3017                                    Class 1        Performed unlicensed electrical work.                                No   No          $4,800   No        $24,000 $12,000    $25,000    $24,000    $25,000
27-3018(b)                                 Class 1        Electrical work without a permit.                                    No   No          $1,600   Yes       $8,000  $4,000     $16,000    $8,000     $25,000
27-3018(b)                                 Class 2        Electrical work without a permit.                                    Yes  Yes         $800     Yes       $4,000  $2,000     $8,000     $4,000     $10,000
27-3018(b)                                 Class 3        Electrical work without a permit.                                    Yes  Yes         $200     Yes       $500    $500       $500       $500       $500
27-3018(b)                                 Class 1        Electrical work does not conform to approved submittal documents/    No   No          $1,000   No        $5,000  $2,500     $10,000    $5,000     $25,000
                                                          amendments.
27-3018(b)                                 Class 2        Electrical work does not conform to approved submittal documents/    Yes  Yes         $500     Yes       $2,500  $1,250     $5,000     $2,500     $10,000
                                                          amendments.
27-3018(b)                                 Class 3        Electrical work does not conform to approved submittal documents/    Yes  Yes         $300     Yes       $500    $500       $500       $500       $500
                                                          amendments.
27-3018(i)                                 Class 2        Installed more than the authorized number of electric meters.        No   No          $2,400   Yes       $10,000 $6,000     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
27-Misc, 28-Misc, BC-Misc                  Class 1        Miscellaneous violations.                                            No   No          $2,500   No        $12,500 $6,250     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
27-Misc, 28-Misc, BC-Misc                  Class 2        Miscellaneous violations.                                            Yes  Yes         $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
27-Misc, 28-Misc, BC-Misc                  Class 3        Miscellaneous violations.                                            Yes  Yes         $500     Yes       $500    $500       $500       $500       $500
28-103.21.1                                Class 1        Failed to notify the department of an incident that resulted in a    No   No          $10,000  No        $25,000 $25,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          fatality or injury.
28-103.21.1                                Class 2        Failure to notify the department of an incident that resulted in a   No   No          $5,000   No        $10,000 $10,000    $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
                                                          fatality or injury in a timely fashion.
                                                          Failure to include the information required by 28-103.21 when
28-103.21.1                                Class 1        notifying the department of an incident that resulted in a fatality  No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          or injury.
                                                          Failure to include the information required by 28-103.21 when
28-103.21.1                                Class 2        notifying the department of an incident that resulted in a fatality  No   No          $2,500   No        $10,000 $6,250     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
                                                          or injury.
28-103.30.2                                Class 2        Failure to notify department prior to the commencement of alteration No   No          $1,250   No        $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
                                                          or addition.
28-104.7                                   Class 2        Failure to submit construction documents as required.                Yes  No          $625     Yes       $3,125  $1,563     $6,250     $3,125     $10,000
28-105.1                                   Class 2        Failure to obtain a temporary construction permit prior to           Yes  No          $500     Yes       $2,500  $1,250     $5,000     $2,500     $10,000
                                                          installation/use of sidewalk shed.
28-105.1                                   Class 1        Work After Hours Without a Variance Permit contrary to 28-105.12.5.  No   No          $2,500   Yes       $12,500 $6,250     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
28-105.1                                   Class 2        Work After Hours Without a Variance Permit contrary to 28-105.12.5.  No   No          $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
28-105.1                                   Class 1        Work without a permit.                                               No   No          $2,500   Yes       $12,500 $6,250     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
28-105.1                                   Class 2        Work without a permit.                                               Yes  Yes         $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $12,500    $6,250     $10,000
28-105.1                                   Class 3        Work without a permit.                                               Yes  Yes         $250     Yes       $500    $500       $500       $500       $500
28-105.1                                   Class 1        Construction or alteration work w/o a permit in manufacturing        No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          district for residential use.
28-105.1                                   Class 2        Construction or alteration work w/o a permit in manufacturing        No   No          $2,500   Yes       $10,000 $6,250     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
                                                          district for residential use.
28-105.1                                   Class 1        Demolition work without required demolition permit.                  No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
28-105.1                                   Class 1        Plumbing work without a permit in manufacturing district for         No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          residential use.
28-105.1                                   Class 2        Plumbing work without a permit in manufacturing district for         No   Yes         $2,500   Yes       $10,000 $6,250     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
                                                          residential use.
28-105.1                                   Class 2        Outdoor sign on display structure without a permit.                  No   Yes         $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
28-105.1                                   Class 1        Outdoor Ad Co sign on display structure without a permit.            No   No          $10,000  Yes       $25,000 $25,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
28-105.1                                   Class 2        Failure to obtain a temporary construction permit prior to           Yes  No          $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
                                                          installation/use of temporary construction equipment.
28-105.1                                   Class 2        Failure to obtain a permit prior to installation / use of sidewalk   Yes  No          $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
                                                          shed
28-105.11                                  Class 2        Failure to post or properly post permit for work at premises.        Yes  Yes         $300     Yes       $1,500  $750       $3,750     $1,500     $7,500
28-105.12.1                                Class 2        Outdoor sign permit application contrary to Code and ZR              No   No          $2,500   No        $10,000 $6,250     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
                                                          requirements.
28-105.12.2                                Class 1        Work does not conform to approved construction documents and/or      No   No          $2,500   No        $12,500 $6,250     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
                                                          approved amendments.
28-105.12.2                                Class 2        Work does not conform to approved construction documents and/or      Yes  Yes         $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
                                                          approved amendments.
28-105.12.2                                Class 3        Work does not conform to approved construction documents and/or      Yes  Yes         $500     Yes       $500    $500       $500       $500       $500
                                                          approved amendments.
28-105.12.2                                Class 1        Work does not conform to approved construction documents and/or      No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          approved amendments in a manufacturing district for residential use.
28-105.12.2                                Class 2        Work does not conform to approved construction documents and/or      No   No          $2,500   Yes       $10,000 $6,250     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
                                                          approved amendments in a manufacturing district for residential use.
28-105.12.2                                Class 1        Place of Assembly contrary to approved construction documents.       No   No          $2,500   No        $12,500 $6,250     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
28-105.12.2                                Class 1        Outdoor Ad Co sign work does not conform to approved construction    No   No          $10,000  Yes       $25,000 $25,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          documents or amendments.
28-110.1                                  Class 2        Failed to provide the required information for a site safety plan.   No   Yes         $2,500   Yes       $10,000 $3,750     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
28-110.1(20) (2014 code) & 28-110.1(17)    Class 1        Failure to provide evidence of workers attending construction &      No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
(2022 code)                                               safety course.
                                                          Failure of permit holder to provide inspection access to and/or
28-116.1                                   Class 2        expose ongoing construction or work on an active and permitted       No   No          $2,500   Yes       $10,000 $6,250     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
                                                          worksite.
28-116.2.4.2                               Class 2        Failure to conduct or file a final inspection of permitted work with Yes  Yes         $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
                                                          the Department.
28-116.4.1                                 Class 2        Operation of service equipment without Certificate of Compliance.    Yes  Yes         $625     Yes       $3,125  $1,563     $6,250     $3,125     $10,000
28-117.1                                   Class 1        Operation of a Place of Assembly without a current Certificate of    No   No          $2,500   No        $12,500 $6,250     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
                                                          Operation.
28-117.1                                   Class 2        Operation of a Place of Assembly without a current Certificate of    Yes  No          $800     Yes       $4,000  $2,000     $8,000     $4,000     $10,000
                                                          Operation.
28-118.1                                   Class 1        Building or open lot occupied without a valid certificate of         No   No          $2,500   No        $12,500 $6,250     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
                                                          occupancy.
28-118.3                                   Class 1        Altered/changed building occupied without a valid Certificate of     No   No          $2,500   No        $12,500 $6,250     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
                                                          Occupancy as per § 28-118.3.1 - § 28-118.3.2.
28-118.3                                   Class 2        Altered/changed building occupied without a valid Certificate of     Yes  Yes         $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
                                                          Occupancy as per § 28-118.3.1 - § 28-118.3.2.
                                                          Change in occupancy/use of C of O as per § § 28-118.3.1 - § 28-
28-118.3                                   Class 1        118.3.2 by operating a Place of Assembly as per when current C of O  No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          does not allow such occupancy.
                                                          Change in occupancy/use of C of O as per § § 28-118.3.1 - § 28-
28-118.3                                   Class 2        118.3.2 by operating a Place of Assembly as per when current C of O  Yes  No          $250     Yes       $1,250  $625       $3,125     $1,250     $6,250
                                                          does not allow such occupancy.
28-118.3.2                                 Class 1        Occupancy contrary to that allowed by the Certificate of Occupancy   No   No          $2,500   No        $12,500 $6,250     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
                                                          or Buildings Department records.
28-118.3.2                                 Class 2        Occupancy contrary to that allowed by the Certificate of Occupancy   Yes  Yes         $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
                                                          or Buildings Department records.
28-118.3.2                                 Class 3        Occupancy contrary to that allowed by the Certificate of Occupancy   Yes  Yes         $500     Yes       $500    $500       $500       $500       $500
                                                          or Buildings Department records.
28-118.3.2.1                               Class 3        Address, block and/or lot, or metes and bounds of zoning lot         Yes  Yes         $500     Yes       $500    $500       $500       $500       $500
                                                          contrary to Certificate of Occupancy.
28-120.1                                   Class 1        Failure to file a required Tenant Protection Plan.                   No   No          $10,000  No        $25,000 $25,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
28-120.1                                   Class 2        Failed to provide the required information for a tenant protection   No   Yes         $2,500   Yes       $10,000 $3,750     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
                                                          plan.
28-120.1.3                                 Class 2        Failure to post or distribute Notice of TPP meeting requirements.    No   No          $625     Yes       $3,125  $1,563     $6,250     $3,125     $10,000
28-120.1.3                                 Class 2        Failure to post and distribute Notice to occupants of TPP.           No   No          $1,250   No        $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
28-201.1                                   Class 1        Unlawful acts. Failure to comply with Commissioner's order.          No   No          $2,500   No        $12,500 $6,250     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
28-201.1                                   Class 1        Unlawful acts. Failure to comply with a law, rule, or Commissioner's No   No          $10,000  No        $25,000 $25,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          order involving construction and/or equipment safety operations.
28-201.1                                   Class 2        Unlawful acts. Failure to comply with a law, rule, or Commissioner's No   No          $5,000   No        $10,000 $10,000    $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
                                                          order involving construction and/or equipment safety operations.
28-202.1                                   Class 1        Additional daily penalty for Class 1 violation of 28-210.1 or 28-    No   No          $1,000 / No        $45,000 NA         NA         NA         NA
                                                          210-2.                                                                                day
28-202.1                                   Class 2        Additional monthly penalty for continued violation of 28-210.1.      No   No          $250 /   No        $10,000 NA         NA         NA         NA
                                                                                                                                                month
28-202.1                                   Class 1        Additional daily civil penalties for continued violations.           No   No          $1,000 / No        $25,000 NA         NA         NA         NA
                                                                                                                                                day
28-202.1                                   Class 2        Additional monthly civil penalties for continued violations.         No   No          $250 /   No        $10,000 NA         NA         NA         NA
                                                                                                                                                month
28-202.1                                   Class 2        Additional monthly penalty for continued violation of 28-210.2.      No   No          $250 /   No        $10,000 NA         NA         NA         NA
                                                                                                                                                month
                                                          Additional daily penalty for Class 1 violation of 28-210.3 –                        $1,000 /
28-202.1                                   Class 1        permanent dwelling offered/used/converted for other than permanent   No   No          per day  No        $45,000 N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A
                                                          residential purposes.
28-204.4                                   Class 2        Failure to comply with the Commissioner's order to file a            No   No          $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
                                                          certificate of correction with the Department of Buildings.
                                                          Failure to comply with the Commissioner’s order to file a
28-204.4                                   Class 2        certificate of correction with the Department of Buildings - Parking No   No          $2,500   Yes       $12,500 $6,250     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
                                                          Structures.
28-207.2.2                                 Class 1        Unlawfully continued work while on notice of a Stop Work Order.      No   No          $10,000  No        $25,000 $25,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
28-207.2.5                                 Class 1        Tampered with, removed, or defaced a written posted Stop Work Order. No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
28-207.4 (2014 Code) & 28-207.4.6 (2022    Class 1        Failure to obey a Vacate Order from the Commissioner.                No   No          $10,000  No        $25,000 $25,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
Code)
28-207.4.4 (2014 code) & 28-207.4.5 (2022  Class 1        Removed or defaced a written posted Vacate Order.                    No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
code)
                                                          Residence converted maintained or occupied as a dwelling for more
28-210.1                                   Class 1        than the legally approved number of families - Legal two family      No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          converted to a four family dwelling
                                                          Dwelling converted, maintained, or occupied with 3 or more
28-210.1  1                               Class 1        additional dwelling units than legally authorized by the C of O or   No   No          $15,000  No        $25,000 $25,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          official records.
                                                          Residence converted maintained or occupied as a dwelling for more
28-210.1                                   Class 2        than the legally approved number of families authorized by the C of  No   No          $2,500   No        $10,000 $6,250     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
                                                          O or official department records
                                                          Industrial/manufacturing building converted, maintained, or occupied
28-210.2                                   Class 1        for residential use for 3 or more additional dwelling units than     No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          legally authorized by the C of O or official records.
28-210.2                                   Class 2        Industrial/manufacturing building converted, maintained, or occupied No   No          $2,500   No        $10,000 $6,250     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
                                                          for residential use contrary to the C of O or official records.
28-210.3                                   Class 1        Permanent dwelling offered/used/converted for other than permanent   No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $15,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          residential purposes.
28-210.3                                   Class 2        Permanent dwelling offered/used/converted for other than permanent   No   No          $2,500   Yes       $10,000 $6,250     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
                                                          residential purposes.
28-211.1                                   Class 1        Filed a certificate, form, application etc., containing a material   No   No          $10,000  No        $25,000 $25,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          false statement(s).
28-211.1                                   Class 1        Filed a certificate of correction or other related materials         No   No          $10,000  No        $25,000 $25,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          containing material false statement(s).
28-211.1                                   Class 1        Filed a certificate, form, application etc., containing a material   No   No          $20,000  No        $25,000 $25,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          false statement(s) - Parking Structure.
28-212.11                                  Class 1        Occupancy of a building or vacant land that has been sealed,         No   No          $10,000  No        $25,000 $25,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          padlocked, or otherwise closed.
28-217.1.1                                 Class 2        Failure to submit required report of inspection of potentially       Yes  Yes         $1,600   Yes       $8,000  $4,000     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
                                                          compromised buildings and structures.
28-217.1.1                                 Class 2        Failure to submit required report of inspection of potentially       Yes  Yes         $1,600   Yes       $8,000  $4,000     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
                                                          compromised buildings - Parking Structure.
28-217.1.4                                 Class 2        Failure to conduct annual inspection of potentially compromised      No   No          $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
                                                          building or structure.
28-217.1.6                                 Class 1        Failure to immediately notify Department that building or structure  No   No          $2,500   No        $12,500 $6,250     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
                                                          has become potentially compromised.
28-217.1.6                                 Class 1        Failure to immediately notify Department that building or structure  No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          has become potentially compromised - Parking Structure.
                                                          Failure to maintain building in code compliant manner. Lack of
28-301.1                                   Class 1        required number of means of egress for every floor per BC 1018.1     No   No          $2,500   No        $12,500 $6,250     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
                                                          (2008 code); 27-366; BC 1021.1 (2014 code); BC 1006.3 (2022 code).
                                                          Failure to maintain building in code compliant manner. Exhaust
28-301.1                                   Class 2        discharge must be no closer than 10 feet from building openings as   Yes  No          $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
                                                          per MC 501.2 (2014 code); MC 501.3 (2022 code) and RS 13-1 Sec. 2-
                                                          2.1.4.
28-301.1                                   Class 1        Failure to maintain building in code-compliant manner.               No   No          $2,500   No        $12,500 $5,000     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
28-301.1                                   Class 2        Failure to maintain building in code-compliant manner.               Yes  Yes         $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
28-301.1                                   Class 3        Failure to maintain building in code-compliant manner.               Yes  Yes         $500     Yes       $500    $500       $500       $500       $500
28-301.1                                   Class 1        Failure to maintain building in code-compliant manner: service       No   No          $2,500   No        $12,500 $5,000     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
                                                          equipment – boiler.
28-301.1                                   Class 2        Failure to maintain building in code-compliant manner: service       Yes  Yes         $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
                                                          equipment – boiler.
28-301.1                                   Class 3        Failure to maintain building in code-compliant manner: service       Yes  Yes         $500     Yes       $500    $500       $500       $500       $500
                                                          equipment – boiler.
                                                          Failure to maintain building in code-compliant manner: Use of
28-301.1                                   Class 1        prohibited door and/or hardware per BC 1008.1.8 (2014 code); 27-371; No   No          $2,500   No        $12,500 $5,000     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
                                                          BC 1008.1.9 (2014 code); BC 1010.1.8 (2022 code); BC 1010.1.9 (2022
                                                          code).
                                                          Failure to maintain building in code-compliant manner: Use of
28-301.1                                   Class 2        prohibited door and/or hardware per BC 1008.1.8 (2014 code); 27-371; Yes  No          $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
                                                          BC 1008.1.9 (2014 code); BC 1010.1.8 (2022 code BC 1010.1.9 (2022
                                                          code).
                                                          Failure to maintain building in code-compliant manner: illumination
28-301.1                                   Class 1        for exits, exit discharges and public corridors per BC 1006.1 (2014  No   No          $2,500   No        $12,500 $5,000     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
                                                          code); 27-381; BC 1008.1 (2022 code).
                                                          Failure to maintain building in code-compliant manner: illumination
28-301.1                                   Class 2        for exits, exit discharges and public corridors per BC 1006.1 (2014  Yes  No          $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
                                                          code); 27-381; BC 1008.1 (2022 code).
                                                          Failure to maintain building in code-compliant manner: floor
28-301.1                                   Class 1        numbering signs missing and/or defective per BC 1019.1.7 (2008       No   No          $2,500   No        $12,500 $5,000     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
                                                          code); 27-392; BC 1022.8 (2014 code); BC 1023.9 (2022 code).
                                                          Failure to maintain building in code-compliant manner: floor
28-301.1                                   Class 2        numbering signs missing and/or defective per BC 1019.1.7 (2008       Yes  Yes         $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
                                                          code); 27-392; BC 1022.8 (2014 code); BC 1023.9 (2022 code).
                                                          Failure to maintain building in code-compliant manner: high-rise to
28-301.1                                   Class 1        provide exit sign requirement(s) within exits per BC 1011.1.1 (2014  No   No          $2,500   Yes       $12,500 $6,250     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
                                                          code); 27-383; BC 1013.1.1 (2022 code); BC 403.4.8.1 (2014 code); BC
                                                          403.4.8.4.1 (2022 code).
                                                          Failure to maintain building in code-compliant manner: high-rise to
28-301.1                                   Class 2        provide exit sign requirement(s) within exits per BC (2014 code);    Yes  No          $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
                                                          27-383; BC 1013.1.1 (2022 code); BC 403.4.8.1 (2014 code); BC
                                                          403.4.8.4.1 (2022 code).
                                                          Failure to maintain building in code-compliant manner: lack of
28-301.1                                   Class 1        emergency power or storage battery connection to exit signs per BC   No   No          $5,000   Yes       $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          1011.5.3 (2014 code); 27-384(c); BC 1013.6.3 (2022 code).
                                                          Failure to maintain building in code-compliant manner: lack of
28-301.1                                   Class 1        emergency lighting for exits, exit discharges and public corridors   No   No          $2,500   No        $12,500 $6,250     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
                                                          per 1006.1 (2014 code); 27-542; BC 1008.2 (2022).
                                                          Failure to maintain building in code-compliant manner: lack of
28-301.1                                   Class 2        emergency lighting for exits, exit discharges and public corridors   Yes  No          $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
                                                          per BC 1006.1 (2014 code); 27-542; BC 1008.2 (2022).
                                                          Failure to maintain building in code-compliant manner: failure to
28-301.1                                   Class 2        provide non-combustible proscenium curtain or stage water curtain    Yes  Yes         $625     Yes       $3,125  $1,563     $6,250     $3,125     $10,000
                                                          per BC 410.3.5; 27-546; 27-546 F-1a.
28-301.1                                   Class 1        Failure to maintain building in code-compliant manner: no fire       No   No          $2,500   No        $12,500 $6,250     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
                                                          stopping per BC 712.3 (2014 code); 27-345; BC 711.2.4 (2022 code).
28-301.1                                   Class 2        Failure to maintain building in code-compliant manner: no fire       Yes  No          $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
                                                          stopping per BC 712.3 (2014 code); 27-345; BC 711.2.4 (2022 code).
                                                          Failure to maintain building in code-compliant manner: Improper
28-301.1                                   Class 1        exit/exit access doorway arrangement per BC 1014.2 (2008 code); 27-  No   No          $2,500   No        $12,500 $5,000     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
                                                          361; BC 1015.2 (2014 code); BC 1016.1 (2022 code).
28-301.1                                   Class 1        Failure to maintain building in code-compliant manner: lack of a     No   No          $2,500   No        $12,500 $6,250     $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          system of automatic sprinklers where required per BC 903.2; 27-954.
28-301.1                                   Class 2        Failure to maintain building in code-compliant manner: lack of a     No   No          $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
                                                          system of automatic sprinklers where required per BC 903.2; 27-954.
28-301.1                                   Class 1        Failure to maintain building in a code compliant manner: lack of     No   No          $2,500   No        $12,500 $6,250     $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          fire alarm system where required by BC 907.2.
28-301.1                                   Class 2        Failure to maintain building in a code compliant manner: lack of     No   No          $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
                                                          fire alarm system where required by BC 907.2.
                                                          Failure to maintain building in code-compliant manner re:
28-301.1                                   Class 2        installation/maintenance of plumbing materials/ equipment per PC     Yes  Yes         $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
                                                          102.3; 27-902.
28-301.1                                   Class 2        Failure to maintain building in code-compliant manner: Gas vent      No   No          $625     No        $3,125  $1,563     $6,250     $3,125     $10,000
                                                          reduced or undersized as per FGC 504.2; 27-887.
28-301.1                                   Class 2        Failure to maintain building in code-compliant manner: failure to    No   No          $625     No        $3,125  $1,563     $6,250     $3,125     $10,000
                                                          comply with law for water supply system per PC 602.3; 27-908(c).
28-301.1                                   Class 2        Failure to maintain building in code-compliant manner: failure to    No   No          $625     Yes       $3,125  $1,563     $6,250     $3,125     $10,000
                                                          comply with law for drainage system per PC 702.1; 27-911.
                                                          Failure to maintain building in code-compliant manner: Plumbing
28-301.1                                   Class 2        fixture(s) not trapped and/or vented per PC 916.1 & PC 1002.1; 27-   No   No          $625     Yes       $3,125  $1,563     $6,250     $3,125     $10,000
                                                          901(o).
28-301.1                                   Class 1        Failure to maintain building in code-compliant manner: Misc sign     No   No          $10,000  Yes       $25,000 $25,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          violation by Outdoor Ad Co as per 27-498 through 27-508 & BC H103.1.
28-301.1                                   Class 2        Failure to maintain sign in accordance w Tit. 27; Tit. 28; ZR; RCNY. Yes  Yes         $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
28-301.1.1 & 28-301.2                      Class 2        Failure to provide required annual parapet observation report on     No   No          $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
                                                          request.
28-302.1                                   Class 1        Failure to maintain building wall(s) or appurtenances.               No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $7,500     $25,000    $18,750    $25,000
28-302.1                                   Class 2        Failure to maintain building wall(s) or appurtenances.               Yes  Yes         $2,500   Yes       $10,000 $6,250     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
28-302.1                                   Class 3        Failure to maintain building wall(s) or appurtenances.               Yes  Yes         $500     Yes       $500    $500       $500       $500       $500
28-302.3                                   Class 1        Failure of registered design professional to immediately notify the  No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          department of unsafe facade condition(s).
28-302.4                                   Class 2        Failure to submit a required report of critical examination          Yes  No          $2,500   Yes       $10,000 $6,250     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
                                                          documenting condition of exterior wall and appurtenances.
28-302.5                                   Class 1        Failure to take required measures to secure public safety – unsafe No   No          $10,000  No        $25,000 $25,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          facade.
28-302.5                                   Class 2        Failure to file an amended report acceptable to this Department      Yes  No          $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
                                                          indicating correction of unsafe conditions.
28-303.7                                   Class 2        Failure to file a complete boiler inspection report.                 Yes  No          $625     Yes       $3,125  $1,563     $6,250     $3,125     $10,000
28-304.1                                   Class 1        Failure to maintain elevator or conveying system.                    No   No          $1,250   No        $6,250  $3,125     $12,500    $6,250     $25,000
28-304.1                                   Class 2        Failure to maintain elevator or conveying system.                    Yes  Yes         $625     Yes       $3,125  $1,563     $6,250     $3,125     $10,000
28-304.1                                   Class 3        Failure to maintain elevator or conveying system.                    Yes  Yes         $500     Yes       $500    $500       $500       $500       $500
28-304.6                                   Class 1        Failure to inspect or test elevator or conveying system.             No   No          $1,250   No        $6,250  $3,125     $12,500    $6,250     $25,000
28-304.6                                   Class 2        Failure to inspect or test elevator or conveying system.             Yes  Yes         $625     Yes       $3,125  $1,563     $6,250     $3,125     $10,000
28-304.10                                  Class 2        Failure to provide notice of elevator to be out of service for       No   No          $2,500   No        $10,000 $6,250     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
                                                          alteration work.
28-305.4.4                                 Class 2        Failure to submit required report of condition assessment of         Yes  Yes         $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
                                                          retaining wall.
28-305.4.6                                 Class 1        Failure to immediately notify Department of unsafe condition         No   No          $2,500   No        $12,500 $6,250     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
                                                          observed during condition assessment of retaining wall.
28-305.4.7.3                               Class 2        Failure to file an amended condition assessment acceptable to        Yes  Yes         $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
                                                          Department indicating correction of unsafe conditions.
28-317.3                                   Class 2        Failure to register cooling tower prior to operation.                No   No          $2,500   Yes       $10,000 $6,250     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
28-317.3.1                                 Class 2        Failure to notify of discontinued use or removal of cooling tower.   Yes  Yes         $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
                                                          Failure to file an annual certification of cooling tower inspection
28-317.5                                   Class 2        / testing / cleaning / disinfecting / maintenance plan per Admin.    No   No          $2,500   Yes       $10,000 $6,250     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
                                                          Code § 17-194.1 .
28-323.1                                   Class 1        Failure to maintain building in code-compliant manner - Parking      No   No          $2,500   No        $12,500 $5,000     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
                                                          Structure.
28-323.1                                   Class 2        Failure to maintain building in code-compliant manner - Parking      Yes  Yes         $1,250   No        $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
                                                          Structure.
28-323.5                                   Class 2        Failure to submit a condition assessment report - Parking Structure. No   No          $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
28-323.7                                   Class 1        Failure to timely notify the Department of an unsafe condition -     No   No          $2,500   No        $12,500 $6,250     $25,000    $15,625    $25,000
                                                          Parking Structure.
28-323.8                                   Class 1        Failure to take required measures to ensure public safety - unsafe   No   No          $10,000  No        $25,000 $25,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          Parking Structure.
28-323.8                                   Class 2        Failure to take required measures to ensure public safety - unsafe   No   No          $5,000   No        $10,000 $10,000    $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
                                                          Parking Structure.
28-323.8                                   Class 2        Failure to submit required amended report of parking structure       No   No          $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
                                                          assessment certifying that unsafe conditions have been corrected.
                                                          Failure to submit required amended report of parking structure
28-323.9.1                                 Class 2        assessment no more than 2 years after initial SREM report - Parking  Yes  Yes         $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
                                                          Structures.
Misc. Chapter 4 of Title 28 – Unlicensed Class 1        Illegally engaging in any business or occupation without a required  No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
Activity                                                  license or other authorization.
28-401.9                                   Class 1        Failure to file evidence of liability &/or property damage           No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          insurance.
28-401.9                                   Class 1        Failure to file evidence of compliance with Workers Comp, law and/or No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          disability benefits law.
28-401.16                                  Class 1        License holder authorized, consented to, or permitted the use of his No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          or her license by or on behalf of another person.
28-401.19                                  Class 1        Improper conduct of a licensee or Certificate of Competence Holder   No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
28-401.19                                  Class 2        Improper conduct of a licensee or Certificate of Competence Holder   No   No          $2,500   No        $6,250  $10,000    $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
28-401.20 &
1 RCNY                                     Class 1        Licensee/registrant failed to fully and completely cooperate as per  No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 12,500     $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
§                                                        section.
3319-02(g)
28-404.1                                   Class 1        Supervision or use of rigging equipment without a Rigger's license.  No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
28-404.4.1                                 Class 2        Licensed Master/Special Rigger failed to place appropriate "Danger"  Yes  No          $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
                                                          sign while using rigging equipment.
28-405.1                                   Class 1        Supervision or use of power-operated hoisting machine without a      No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          Hoisting Machine Operator's license.
28-406.1                                   Class 1        Unlicensed concrete testing activity.                                No   No          $5,000   Yes       $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
28-408.1                                   Class 1        Performing unlicensed plumbing work without a master plumber         No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          license.
28-410.1                                   Class 1        Performed fire suppression piping work w/o a license                 No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
28-415.1                                   Class 1        Hoisting, lowering, hanging, or attaching of outdoor sign not        No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          performed or supervised by a properly licensed sign hanger.
28-502.2                                   Class 1        Outdoor Advertising Company engaged in outdoor advertising business  No   No          $10,000  Yes       $25,000 $25,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          without a valid registration.
                                                          Outdoor Advertising Company failed to submit complete/accurate
28-502.2.1                                 Class 1        information as prescribed in 1 RCNY                                  No   No          $10,000  Yes       $25,000 $25,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          Chapter 49.
28-502.2.2                                 Class 1        Outdoor Advertising Company failed to post, renew, or replenish bond No   No          $10,000  Yes       $25,000 $25,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          or other form of security.
28-502.5                                   Class 1        Outdoor Advertising Company failed to post required information at   No   No          $10,000  Yes       $25,000 $25,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          sign location.
28-502.6                                   Class 1        Misc sign violation by Outdoor Advertising Company of Title 27;      No   No          $10,000  Yes       $25,000 $25,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          Title 28; ZR; or BC
28-504.1.2                                 Class 2        Failure to complete / implement / amend bicycle access plan or       No   No          $625     Yes       $3,125  $1,563     $6,250     $3,125     $10,000
                                                          provide request for exception.
                                                          Failure to implement the terms and conditions of bicycle access
28-504.1.2                                 Class 2        plan/letter of exception as prescribed in 34 RCNY                    No   No          $625     Yes       $3,125  $1,563     $6,250     $3,125     $10,000
                                                          2-19.
28-504.1.4                                 Class 2        Failure to post a bicycle access plan/letter of exception / notice   No   No          $625     Yes       $3,125  $1,563     $6,250     $3,125     $10,000
                                                          of availability of plan / letter.
                                                          Failure to timely file bicycle access plan or amendment with DOT as
28-504.1.4                                 Class 2        prescribed in 34 RCNY                                                No   No          $625     Yes       $3,125  $1,563     $6,250     $3,125     $10,000
                                                          2-19.
BC 105.8.2 (2014 code) & BC 106.8.2 (2022  Class 2        Temporary Construction Equipment or Installation on Site – Expired Yes  Yes         $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
code)                                                     Permit.
BC 105.8.2 (2014 code) & BC 106.8.2 (2022  Class 2        Temporary Construction Equipment or Installation on Site – Expired Yes  Yes         $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
code)                                                     Permit (Shed).
BC 903.6                                   Class 2        Failure to paint dedicated sprinkler piping/valves in accordance     Yes  No          $2,500   Yes       $10,000 $6,250     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
                                                          with section.
                                                          Failure to provide / maintain painting certification of sprinkler
BC 903.6                                   Class 2        and combination sprinkler / standpipe systems in accordance with     Yes  No          $625     Yes       $3,125  $1,563     $6,250     $3,125     $10,000
                                                          section.
BC 905.11                                  Class 2        Failure to paint dedicated standpipe / valves in accordance with     Yes  No          $2,500   Yes       $10,000 $6,250     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
                                                          section.
                                                          Failure to provide / maintain painting certification of standpipe
BC 905.11                                  Class 2        and combination sprinkler / standpipe systems in accordance with     Yes  No          $625     Yes       $3,125  $1,563     $6,250     $3,125     $10,000
                                                          section.
                                                          Failure to maintain building in code-compliant manner: provide
BC 1018.2 (2014 code) & 1020.2 (2022 code) Class 2        required corridor width per BC 1018.2 (2014 code); BC 1020.2 (2022   Yes  No          $625     Yes       $3,125  $1,563     $6,250     $3,125     $10,000
                                                          code); 27-369.
                                                          Failure to perform special inspections and verifications for
BC 1704.4 (2014 code) & 1705.3 (2022 code) Class 2        concrete construction as required by section and Table 1704.4 (2014  No   No          $2,500   No        $10,000 $6,250     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
                                                          code) and Table 1705.3 (2022 code).
BC 1704.21.1 (2008 code) & BC 1704.23.1    Class 1        Failure to perform successful hydrostatic pressure test of sprinkler No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
(2014 code) & BC 1705.29.1 (2022 code)                    system.
BC 1704.22.1 (2008 code) & BC 1704.24.1    Class 1        Failure to perform successful hydrostatic pressure test of standpipe No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
(2014 code) & BC 1705.30.1 (2022 code)                    system.
BC 1905.6.3.2 (2008 code) & BC 1905.6.3.3  Class 2        Failure to comply with ASTM C 31 standards for concrete cylinder     No   No          $2,500   No        $10,000 $6,250     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
(2014 code)                                               test samples.
BC 3012.1 & 27-1006                        Class 1        Failure to promptly report an elevator accident involving personal   No   No          $2,500   No        $12,500 $6,250     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
                                                          injury requiring the services of a physician or damage to property.
Misc. BC – Chapter 33                    Class 1        Miscellaneous violations.                                            No   No          $5,000   No        $10,000 $10,000    $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
Misc. BC – Chapter 33                    Class 2        Miscellaneous violations.                                            No   No          $2,500   No        $10,000 $6,250     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
BC 3301.1.2                                Class 1        Failure to carry out demolition operations as per Fire Code.         No   No          $1,250   No        $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
BC 3301.1.2                                Class 2        Failure to carry out demolition operations as per Fire Code.         No   No          $625     No        $3,125  $1,563     $6,250     $3,125     $10,000
BC 3301.1.3 (2014 code)                    Class 1        Failure to comply with manufacturer specifications.                  No   No          $2,500   No        $12,500 $6,250     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
BC 3301.1.3 (2014 code)                    Class 2        Failure to comply with manufacturer specifications.                  No   No          $1,250   No        $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
BC 3301.2                                  Class 1        Failure to safeguard the public and property affected by             No   No          $10,000  No        $25,000 $25,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          construction operations.
BC 3301.2                                  Class 2        Failure to safeguard the public and property affected by             No   No          $5,000   No        $10,000 $10,000    $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
                                                          construction operations.
BC 3301.2 & 27-1009(a)                     Class 1        Failure to institute / maintain safety equipment measures or         No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          temporary construction – No guard rails.
BC 3301.2 & 27-1009(a)                     Class 1        Failure to institute / maintain safety equipment measures or         No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          temporary construction – No toe boards.
BC 3301.2 & 27-1009(a)                     Class 1        Failure to institute / maintain safety equipment measures or         No   No          $2,500   No        $12,500 $6,250     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
                                                          temporary construction – No handrails.
BC 3301.6                                  Class 1        Failure to comply with manufacturer specifications.                  No   No          $2,500   No        $12,500 $6,250     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
BC 3301.7 (2014 code)                      Class 1        Failure to maintain / display on site documents required by BC       No   No          $2,500   No        $12,500 $6,250     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
                                                          Chapter 33.
BC 3301.7 (2014 code)                      Class 2        Failure to maintain / display on site documents required by BC       No   No          $1,250   No        $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
                                                          Chapter 33.
BC 3301.8                                  Class 1        Failure to promptly notify the Department of an accident, incident,  No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          or damage to adjoining property at construction / demolition site.
BC 3301.9                                  Class 2        Project Information Panel / Sidewalk Shed Parapet Panel /            No   No          $1,250   No        $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
                                                          Construction Sign not provided or not in compliance with section.
BC 3301.11.1 and 2                         Class 1        Permit Holder failed to ensure workers receive site safety           No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          orientation or refresher.
                                                          Permit Holder failed to designate a qualified person to conduct site
BC 3301.11.3                               Class 1        safety orientation or refresher, or to ensure that such qualified    No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          person conducted the site safety orientation or refresher.
BC 3301.11.4                               Class 1        Failure to communicate required information during site safety       No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          orientation or refresher.
BC 3301.11.5                               Class 1        Failure to maintain a record of orientations performed at worksite.  No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
BC 3301.12                                 Class 1        Permit Holder failed to ensure workers attend pre-shift safety       No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          meeting prior to commencement of work.
                                                          Permit Holder failed to designate a competent person to conduct
BC 3301.12.1                               Class 1        preshift safety meeting, or to ensure that such competent person     No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          conducted the pre-shift meeting.
BC 3301.12.2                               Class 1        Failure to communicate required information to workers during pre-   No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          shift safety meeting.
BC 3301.12.3                               Class 1        Failure to maintain record of pre-shift safety meeting for each      No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          worker.
BC 3301.13.3                               Class 1        Failure to designate and / or have a Construction Superintendent     No   No          $10,000  No        $25,000 $25,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          present at site as required.
BC 3303.4 & 27-1018                        Class 1        Failure to maintain adequate housekeeping per section requirements.  No   No          $2,500   No        $12,500 $6,250     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
BC 3303.4 & 27-1018                        Class 2        Failure to maintain adequate housekeeping per section requirements.  Yes  No          $1,250   No        $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
BC 3303.4.5 & 27-1018                      Class 1        Unsafe storage of materials during construction or demolition.       No   No          $2,500   No        $12,500 $6,250     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
BC 3303.4.6 & 27-1018                      Class 1        Unsafe storage of combustible material and equipment.                No   No          $2,500   No        $12,500 $6,250     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
BC 3303.7.2                                Class 1        Failure to provide fire extinguishers per Fire Code.                 No   No          $1,250   No        $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
BC 3303.7.2                                Class 2        Failure to provide fire extinguishers per Fire Code.                 No   No          $625     No        $3,125  $1,563     $6,250     $3,125     $10,000
BC 3303.7.3                                Class 1        Smoking at construction / demolition site.                           No   No          $2,500   No        $12,500 $6,250     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
BC 3303.7.3                                Class 2        Smoking at construction / demolition site.                           No   No          $1,250   No        $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
BC 3303.7.3                                Class 2        Failure to post No Smoking signs at construction / demolition sites  No   No          $1,250   No        $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
                                                          per Fire Code.
BC 3303.8                                  Class 1        Failure to provide standpipe or air pressurized alarm system for     No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          standpipe system during construction or demolition operation.
BC 3303.8.1                                Class 1        Failure to conduct proper planned removal from service of standpipe  No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          system and / or standpipe air pressurized alarm.
BC 3303.10                                 Class 1        Failure to provide protection for tenants during demolition or       No   No          $10,000  No        $25,000 $25,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          construction activity in an occupied building.
BC 3303.10                                 Class 2        Failure to provide protection for tenants during demolition or       No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          construction activity in an occupied building.
BC 3303.10                                 Class 3        Failure to provide protection for tenants during demolition or       No   No          $500     No        $500    $500       $500       $500       $500
                                                          construction activity in an occupied building.
BC 3303.10.2                               Class 2        Failure to notify the department prior to commencement of work that  No   No          $1,250   No        $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
                                                          requires tenant protection plan
BC 3303.14                                 Class 1        Failure to maintain adequate housekeeping per section requirements.  No   No          $2,500   No        $12,500 $6,250     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
BC 3303.14                                 Class 2        Failure to maintain adequate housekeeping per section requirements.  No   No          $1,250   No        $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
BC 3303.15                                 Class 2        Failure to perform proper concrete washout water procedures.         No   No          $2,500   No        $10,000 $6,250     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
BC 3304.3 & 1 RCNY                         Class 1        Failure to notify the Department prior to the commencement of        No   No          $2,500   No        $12,500 $6,250     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
52-01(a)                                                  earthwork.
BC 3304.3 & 1 RCNY                         Class 2        Failure to notify the Department prior to the cancellation of        No   No          $1,250   No        $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
52-01(b)                                                  earthwork.
BC 3304.4 & 27-1032                        Class 1        Failure to provide protection at sides of excavation.                No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
BC 3304.12 (2014 code)                     Class 1        Failure to perform slurry operations in accordance with section.     No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
BC 3305.3.1.2.1 (2014 code)                Class 1        Failure to obtain registered design professional evaluation prior to No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          using existing structure to support formwork loads.
BC 3305.3.2 (2014 code)                    Class 1        No site-specific formwork design drawings present per 3301.7.        No   No          $2,500   No        $12,500 $6,250     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
BC 3305.3.3.2 (2014 code)                  Class 1        Failure to perform required formwork observation.                    No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
BC 3306.1 & 27-1039                        Class 1        Failure to carry out demolition operations as required by BC 3306.1; No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          27-1039.
BC 3306.2.1 (2014 code) & BC 3306.2.2      Class 1        Failure to provide safety zone for demolition operations.            No   No          $2,500   No        $12,500 $6,250     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
(2022 code)
BC 3306.3 & 27-195                         Class 1        Failure to provide required notification prior to the commencement   No   No          $2,500   No        $12,500 $6,250     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
                                                          of demolition.
BC 3306.5                                  Class 1        Mechanical demolition without plans on site.                         No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
BC 3307.1                                  Class 2        Pedestrian protection does not meet code specifications.             No   No          $2,400   No        $10,000 $6,000     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
BC 3307.1.1 (2008 code), BC 3307.4.6 (2014 Class 1        Prohibited Outdoor Advertising Company sign on sidewalk shed or      No   No          $10,000  No        $25,000 $25,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
code)(2014 code) & BC 3306.2.2 (2022 code)                construction fence.
BC 3307.1.1 (2008 code), BC 3307.4.6 (2014 Class 2        Posting of unlawful signs, information, pictorial representation,    No   No          $2,500   No        $10,000 $6,250     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
code), & BC 3301.9 (2022 code)                            business or advertising messages on protective structures.
BC 3307.2                                  Class 1        Failure to provide pedestrian protection for sidewalks and walkways  No   No          $1,250   No        $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
                                                          as required.
BC 3307.2                                  Class 2        Failure to provide pedestrian protection for sidewalks and walkways  No   No          $625     No        $3,125  $1,563     $6,250     $3,125     $10,000
                                                          as required by DOT.
BC 3307.3 (2008 Code) and BC 3307.1 (2014  Class 1        Failure to provide pedestrian protection for sidewalks and walkways. No   No          $10,000  No        $25,000 $25,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
Code)
BC 3307.3.1 (2008 code), 27-1021(a) & BC   Class 1        Failure to provide sidewalk shed where required.                     No   No          $10,000  No        $25,000 $25,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
3307.6.2 (2014 code)
BC 3307.4                                  Class 1        Failure to provide required warning signs, personnel, or barriers to No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          protect the public.
BC 3307.6.4 (2008 code) & BC 3307.6.4.11   Class 2        Sidewalk shed does not meet color specification.                     No   No          $1,250   NO        $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
(2014 code)
BC 3307.7                                  Class 2        Job site fence not constructed or maintained pursuant to subsection. No   No          $1,000   No        $5,000  $2,500     $10,000    $5,000     $10,000
BC 3308.5                                  Class 1        Failure to institute / maintain safety equipment measures or         No   No          $10,000  No        $25,000 $25,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          temporary construction – No vertical safety netting.
BC 3308.5                                  Class 2        Failure to institute / maintain safety equipment measures or         No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          temporary construction – No vertical safety netting.
BC 3309.1                                  Class 1        Failure to provide protection of adjoining property during           No   No          $10,000  No        $25,000 $25,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          construction or demolition as required.
BC 3309.1                                  Class 2        Failure to provide protection of adjoining property during           No   No          $5,000   No        $10,000 $10,000    $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
                                                          construction or demolition as required.
BC 3309.4 & 27-1031                        Class 1        Failure to protect adjoining structures during excavation            No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          operations.
BC 3309.10                                 Class 1        Failure to provide protection of adjoining property during           No   No          $5,000   No        $10,000 $10,000    $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
                                                          construction or demolition as required – No roof protection.
BC 3309.10                                 Class 2        Failure to provide protection of adjoining property during           No   No          $2,500   No        $12,500 $6,250     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
                                                          construction or demolition as required – No roof protection.
BC 3309.14                                 Class 1        Failure to provide protection of adjoining property during           No   No          $5,000   No        $10,000 $10,000    $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
                                                          construction or demolition as required – No window protection.
BC 3309.14                                 Class 2        Failure to provide protection of adjoining property during           No   No          $2,500   No        $12,500 $6,250     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
                                                          construction or demolition as required – No window protection.
BC 3301.3 & BC 3310.5 & BC 3310.5.2        Class 1        Failure to designate and / or have Site Safety Manager or Site       No   No          $10,000  No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          Safety Coordinator present at site as required.
BC 3310.8.2 (2008 code) & BC 3310.8.2.1    Class 1        Site Safety Manager / Coordinator failed to immediately notify the   No   No          $2,500   No        $12,500 $6,250     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
(2014 code)                                               Department of conditions as required.
BC 3310.9.1                                Class 1        No Concrete Safety Manager present at site as required.              No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
BC 3310.10                                 Class 1        Failure to conduct a site-specific safety orientation program for    No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          all workers.
BC 3314.1                                  Class 1        Failure to maintain pedestrian protection for sidewalks and          No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          walkways.
BC 3314.1.1 (2008 code) & 27-1050.1 & BC   Class 2        Failed to notify Department prior to installation or removal of      No   No          $2,500   No        $10,000 $6,250     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
3314.4.1.5 (2014 code)                                    Suspended Scaffold.
BC 3314.2 & 27-1042                        Class 1        Erected or installed supported scaffold 40 feet or higher without a  No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          permit.
BC 3314.4.3.1 (2008 code), 27-1045 & BC    Class 1        Failure to perform safe / proper inspection of Suspended Scaffold.   No   No          $10,000  No        $25,000 $25,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
3314.4.3 (2014 code)
BC 3314.4.3.1 (2008 code), 27-1045(b) & BC Class 1        No record of daily inspection of Suspended Scaffold performed by     No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
3314.4.3.4 (2014 code)                                    authorized person at site.
BC 3314.4.5 (2008 code & BC 3314.4.5.1     Class 1        Unqualified supervisor or worker performing work on scaffold.        No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
(2014 code)
BC 3314.4.6 (2008 code) & BC 3314.4.5.8    Class 2        Scaffold training certificate card not readily available for         No   No          $1,250   No        $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
(2014 Code)                                               inspection.
                                                          Failure to institute / maintain safety equipment measures or
BC 3314.5                                  Class 1        temporary construction – No                                        No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          planking or decking.
                                                          Failure to institute / maintain safety equipment measures or
BC 3314.5                                  Class 2        temporary construction – No                                        No   No          $2,500   No        $12,500 $6,250     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
                                                          planking or decking.
BC 3314.6.3                                Class 1        Failure to provide / use lifeline while working on scaffold.         No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
BC 3314.6.3                                Class 2        Failure to provide / use lifeline while working on scaffold.         No   No          $2,500   No        $10,000 $6,250     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
BC 3316.2 & BC 3319.1                      Class 1        Inadequate safety measures: Operation of crane / derrick / hoisting  No   No          $10,000  No        $25,000 $25,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          equipment in unsafe manner.
BC 3319.3                                  Class 1        Operation of a crane / derrick without a Certificate of Operation /  No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          Certificate of Approval.
BC 3319.3 & 27-1057(d)                     Class 2        Operation of a crane / derrick without a Certificate of Onsite       No   No          $5,000   No        $10,000 $10,000    $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
                                                          Inspection.
BC 3319.8                                  Class 1        Failure to provide erection, jumping, climbing, dismantling plan for No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          tower crane.
BC 3319.8.2                                Class 1        Failure to conduct a safety coordination meeting.                    No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
BC 3319.8.3                                Class 1        Failure to conduct a pre-jump safety meeting.                        No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
BC 3319.8.4                                Class 1        Failure to notify the Department prior to pre-jump or safety         No   No          $2,500   No        $12,500 $6,250     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
                                                          coordination meeting.
BC 3319.8.4.2 (2014 code) & BC 3319.8.4(1) Class 1        Failure to provide time schedule indicating erection, jumping,       No   No          $2,000   No        $10,000 $5,000     $25,000    $10,000    $25,000
(2022 code)                                               climbing, or dismantling of crane.
BC 3319.8.6                                Class 1        No meeting log available.                                            No   No          $2,000   No        $10,000 $5,000     $25,000    $10,000    $25,000
BC 3319.8.7                                Class 1        Failure to file a complete and acceptable tower Installation Report  No   No          $2,500   No        $12,500 $6,250     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
                                                          per BC 3319.8.7.
BC 3319.8.8                                Class 1        Erection, jumping, climbing, dismantling operations of a tower crane No   No          $10,000  No        $25,000 $25,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          not in accordance with BC 3319.8.8.
BC 3321.1                                  Class 1        Failure to ensure each worker has successfully completed the         No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          required training.
BC 3321.1                                  Class 2        Failure to ensure each worker has successfully completed the         No   No          $2,500   No        $10,000 $5,000     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
                                                          required training.
BC 3321.2(1)                               Class 1        Failure to ensure each worker is in compliance with BC 3321.1.       No   No          $10,000  No        $25,000 $25,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
BC 3321.2(3)                               Class 1        Failure to have or maintain the required daily log.                  No   No          $5,000   No        $25,000 $12,500    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
BC 3321.2(4)                               Class 1        Failure to produce the daily log for inspection.                     No   No          $2,500   No        $12,500 $6,250     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
EC-Misc                                    Class 1        Miscellaneous violation of the Electrical Code Technical Standards.  No   No          $1,600   No        $8,000  $4,000     $16,000    $8,000     $25,000
EC-Misc                                    Class 2        Miscellaneous violation of the Electrical Code Technical Standards.  Yes  Yes         $800     Yes       $4,000  $2,000     $8,000     $4,000     $10,000
EC-Misc                                    Class 3        Miscellaneous violation of the Electrical Code Technical Standards.  Yes  Yes         $400     Yes       $500    $500       $500       $500       $500
EC 110.2(A)                                Class 1        Unapproved / unsafe / unsuitable electrical equipment, apparatus,    No   No          $1,600   No        $8,000  $4,000     $16,000    $8,000     $25,000
                                                          materials, devices, appliances or wiring in use.
EC 110.2(A)                                Class 2        Unapproved / unsafe / unsuitable electrical equipment, apparatus,    Yes  Yes         $800     Yes       $4,000  $2,000     $8,000     $4,000     $10,000
                                                          materials, devices, appliances or wiring in use.
EC 110.2(B)                                Class 2        Constructed electrical installation without required commissioner's  No   No          $2,400   Yes       $10,000 $6,000     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
                                                          approval per section.
EC 110.2                                   Class 2        Failure to use approved conductors and / or equipment.               No   No          $1,000   Yes       $5,000  $2,500     $10,000    $5,000     $10,000
EC 110.2                                   Class 3        Failure to use approved conductors and / or equipment.               Yes  Yes         $500     Yes       $500    $500       $500       $500       $500
EC 110.12                                  Class 3        Failure to close unused openings (knockouts) in outlet/panel box.    Yes  Yes         $300     Yes       $500    $500       $500       $500       $500
EC 110.14(A)                               Class 2        Failure to properly connect conductors to terminals.                 No   No          $1,200   Yes       $6,000  $3,000     $10,000    $6,000     $10,000
EC 110.25                                  Class 1        Electrical closet not dedicated to electrical distribution equipment No   No          $1,200   No        $6,000  $3,000     $12,000    $6,000     $25,000
                                                          only.
EC 110.26                                  Class 2        Failure to provide / maintain sufficient access / work space about   Yes  Yes         $500     Yes       $2,500  $1,250     $5,000     $2,500     $10,000
                                                          electrical equipment.
EC 210.8                                   Class 2        Failure to install Ground-fault circuit interrupter (GFCI)           No   No          $2,400   Yes       $10,000 $6,000     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
                                                          protection as required.
EC 210.12(B)                               Class 2        Failure to provide Arc-fault circuit interrupter (AFCI) protection   No   No          $2,400   Yes       $10,000 $6,000     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
                                                          in dwelling units.
EC 210.52(A)                               Class 3        Failure to provide proper spacing between receptacle outlets.        Yes  Yes         $300     Yes       $500    $500       $500       $500       $500
EC 230.72(A)                               Class 1        Failure to properly group / label disconnects.                       No   No          $1,000   Yes       $5,000  $2,500     $10,000    $5,000     $25,000
EC 230.72(A)                               Class 2        Failure to properly group / label disconnects.                       Yes  Yes         $500     Yes       $2,500  $1,250     $5,000     $2,500     $10,000
EC 240.3                                   Class 1        Failure to provide adequate circuit overcurrent protection device    No   No          $4,800   No        $24,000 $12,000    $25,000    $24,000    $25,000
                                                          per table.
EC 240.3                                   Class 2        Failure to provide adequate circuit overcurrent protection device    No   No          $2,400   Yes       $10,000 $6,000     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
                                                          per table.
EC 240.3                                   Class 3        Failure to provide adequate circuit overcurrent protection device    Yes  Yes         $500     Yes       $500    $500       $500       $500       $500
                                                          per table.
EC 240.4                                   Class 1        Failure to protect conductor(s) against overcurrent per EC.          No   No          $4,800   No        $24,000 $12,000    $25,000    $24,000    $25,000
EC 240.4                                   Class 2        Failure to protect conductor(s) against overcurrent per EC.          No   No          $2,400   Yes       $10,000 $6,000     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
EC 240.21                                  Class 2        Tap conductors not in compliance with section.                       No   No          $1,000   Yes       $5,000  $2,500     $10,000    $5,000     $10,000
EC 250.4                                   Class 1        Failure to ground electrical systems.                                No   No          $4,800   No        $24,000 $12,000    $25,000    $24,000    $25,000
EC 250.4                                   Class 1        Failure to properly bond electrical systems.                         No   No          $3,000   No        $15,000 $7,500     $25,000    $15,000    $25,000
EC 250.4                                   Class 2        Failure to properly bond electrical systems.                         No   No          $1,500   Yes       $7,500  $3,750     $10,000    $7,500     $10,000
EC 250.4                                   Class 3        Failure to properly bond electrical systems.                         Yes  Yes         $500     Yes       $500    $500       $500       $500       $500
EC 250.4                                   Class 2        Failure to provide adequate grounding of electrical systems.         No   No          $2,400   Yes       $10,000 $6,000     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
EC 250.64                                  Class 1        Failure to install grounding electrode conductor in accordance with  No   No          $4,800   No        $24,000 $12,000    $25,000    $24,000    $25,000
                                                          section.
EC 300.10                                  Class 2        Failure to provide effective electrical continuity for metal         No   No          $1,200   Yes       $6,000  $3,000     $10,000    $6,000     $10,000
                                                          raceways / enclosures / cable armor.
EC 300.11                                  Class 2        Failure to secure / support raceways / cable assemblies / boxes /    Yes  Yes         $800     Yes       $4,000  $2,000     $8,000     $4,000     $10,000
                                                          cabinets / fittings.
EC 314.23                                  Class 3        Failure to secure electrical device enclosure per section            Yes  Yes         $300     Yes       $500    $500       $500       $500       $500
                                                          requirement.
EC 358.12                                  Class 2        Prohibited use of electrical metallic tubing (EMT).                  Yes  Yes         $500     Yes       $2,500  $1,250     $5,000     $2,500     $10,000
EC 358.30                                  Class 2        Failure to properly secure / support electrical metallic tubing      Yes  Yes         $500     Yes       $2,500  $1,250     $5,000     $2,500     $10,000
                                                          (EMT).
EC 408.4                                   Class 3        Failure to provide required circuit directory / identification.      Yes  Yes         $200     Yes       $500    $500       $500       $500       $500
EC 410.30                                  Class 2        Luminaires and Lampholders not installed in an approved manner.      Yes  Yes         $250     Yes       $1,250  $625       $3,125     $1,250     $6,250
EC 590.4(G)                                Class 2        Improper splicing of temporary wiring.                               Yes  Yes         $500     Yes       $2,500  $1,250     $5,000     $2,500     $10,000
EC 590.4(J)                                Class 1        Failure to provide proper support for temporary wiring.              No   No          $1,600   No        $8,000  $4,000     $16,000    $8,000     $25,000
EC 590.4(J)                                Class 1        Failure to protect temporary wiring from improper contact per        No   No          $1,600   No        $8,000  $4,000     $16,000    $8,000     $25,000
                                                          section.
ECC R402.2                                 Class 2        Insulation placement and / or R values do not meet minimum           Yes  Yes         $1,000   No        $5,000  $2,500     $10,000    $5,000     $10,000
                                                          requirements.
ECC C502.2 2011 code; C402.2 2014 and 2016 Class 2        Insulation placement and / or R values do not meet minimum           Yes  Yes         $2,000   No        $10,000 $4,500     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
code                                                      requirements.
ECC R402.3                                 Class 2        Fenestration U factor and / or SHGC does not meet requirements.      Yes  Yes         $1,000   No        $5,000  $2,500     $10,000    $5,000     $10,000
ECC 502.3 2011 code; C402.3 2014 code;     Class 2        Fenestration U factor and / or SHGC does not meet requirements.      Yes  Yes         $2,000   No        $10,000 $4,500     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
C402.4 2016 code
ECC R402.4                                 Class 2        Air leakage controls were not installed per code requirements.       Yes  Yes         $1,000   No        $5,000  $2,500     $10,000    $5,000     $10,000
ECC C502.4 2011 code; C402.4 2014 code;    Class 2        Air leakage controls were not installed per code requirements.       Yes  Yes         $2,000   No        $10,000 $4,500     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
C402.5 2016 code
ECC R403.1                                 Class 2        Equipment controls not installed per requirements.                   Yes  Yes         $1,000   No        $5,000  $2,500     $10,000    $5,000     $10,000
ECC C503.2.4 2011 code; C403.2.4 2014 and  Class 2        Equipment controls not installed per requirements.                   Yes  Yes         $2,000   No        $10,000 $4,500     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
2016 code
ECC R403.2 2011 and 2014 code; R403.3 2016 Class 2        Duct insulation and sealing does not meet minimum requirements.      Yes  Yes         $1,000   No        $5,000  $2,500     $10,000    $5,000     $10,000
code
ECC C503.2.7 2011 code; C403.2.7 2014      Class 2        Duct insulation and sealing does not meet minimum requirements.      Yes  Yes         $2,000   No        $10,000 $4,500     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
code; C403.2.9 2016 code
ECC R403.3 2011 and 2014 code; R403.4 2016 Class 2        Mechanical system piping insulation does not meet minimum            Yes  Yes         $500     No        $2,500  $1,250     $5,000     $2,500     $10,000
Code                                                      requirements.
ECC C503.2.8 2011 code; C403.2.8 2014      Class 2        Mechanical system piping insulation does not meet minimum            Yes  Yes         $1,000   No        $5,000  $2,500     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
code; C403.2.10 2016 code                                 requirements.
ECC R403.4 2011 and 2014 code; R403.5 2016 Class 2        Hot water piping insulation does not meet minimum requirements.      Yes  Yes         $500     No        $2,500  $1,250     $5,000     $2,500     $10,000
code
ECC C504.5 2011 code; C404.5 2014 code;    Class 2        Hot water piping insulation does not meet minimum requirements.      Yes  Yes         $1,000   No        $5,000  $2,500     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
C404.4 2016 code
ECC R403.5 2011 and 2014 code; R403.6 2016 Class 2        Required dampers are not installed / Service water heating equipment Yes  Yes         $500     No        $2,500  $1,250     $5,000     $2,500     $10,000
code                                                      efficiency does not meet requirements.
ECC C503.2.4.4 2011 code; C403.2.4.4 2014  Class 2        Required dampers are not installed / Service water heating equipment Yes  Yes         $1,000   No        $5,000  $2,500     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
code; ECC C403.2.4.3 2016 code                            efficiency does not meet requirements.
ECC R403.6 2011 and 2014 code; R403.7 2016 Class 2        HVAC equipment size and / or efficiency does not meet minimum        Yes  Yes         $500     No        $2,500  $1,250     $5,000     $2,500     $10,000
code                                                      requirements.
ECC C503.2 2011 code; C403.2 2014 and 2016 Class 2        HVAC equipment size and / or efficiency does not meet minimum        Yes  Yes         $1,000   No        $5,000  $2,500     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
code                                                      requirements.
ECC R404.1                                 Class 2        Fixtures installed do not meet minimum efficiency requirements.      Yes  Yes         $1,000   No        $5,000  $2,500     $10,000    $5,000     $10,000
ECC R404.2                                 Class 2        Failure to meter each dwelling unit separately.                      Yes  Yes         $1,000   No        $5,000  $2,500     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
ECC C505.7 2011 code; C405.7 2014 code;    Class 2        Failure to meter each dwelling unit separately.                      Yes  Yes         $1,000   No        $5,000  $2,500     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
C405.6 2016 code
ECC C505.2 2011 code; C405.2 2014 and 2016 Class 2        Lighting controls installed do not meet code.                        Yes  Yes         $2,000   No        $10,000 $4,500     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
code
ECC C505.4 2011 code; C405.4 2014 code;    Class 2        Exit signs in excess of five watts per side.                         Yes  Yes         $1,000   No        $5,000  $2,500     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
C405.3 2016 code
ECC C505.5 2011 code; C405.5 2014 code;    Class 2        Failure to meet interior lighting power requirements.                Yes  Yes         $2,000   No        $10,000 $4,500     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
C405.4 2016 code
ECC C505.6 2011 code; C405.6 2014 code;    Class 2        Failure to meet exterior lighting power requirements.                Yes  Yes         $2,000   No        $10,000 $4,500     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
C405.5 2016 code
ECC C405.9.2 2016 Code                     Class 2        Escalator or moving walk fails to comply with ASMEA17.1 / CSA or     Yes  Yes         $1,000   No        $5,000  $2,500     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
                                                          local code when not conveying passengers.
ECC C405.9.2.1 2016 Code                   Class 2        Escalator fails to have a variable frequency regenerative drive as   Yes  Yes         $1,000   No        $5,000  $2,500     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
                                                          per section requirements.
ECC – R-Misc                             Class 1        Miscellaneous violation of Energy Conservation Code residential      No   Yes         $1,600   No        $8,000  $4,000     $16,000    $8,000     $25,000
                                                          provisions.
ECC – R-Misc.                            Class 2        Miscellaneous violation of Energy Conservation Code residential      Yes  Yes         $800     Yes       $4,000  $2,000     $8,000     $4,000     $10,000
                                                          provisions.
ECC – R-Misc.                            Class 3        Miscellaneous violation of Energy Conservation Code residential      Yes  Yes         $300     Yes       $500    $500       $500       $500       $500
                                                          provisions.
ECC – C-Misc                             Class 1        Miscellaneous violation of Energy Conservation Code commercial       No   No          $3,200   No        $16,000 $8,000     $25,000    $16,000    $25,000
                                                          provisions.
ECC – C-Misc.                            Class 2        Miscellaneous violation of Energy Conservation Code commercial       Yes  Yes         $1,600   Yes       $8,000  $4,000     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
                                                          provisions.
ECC – C-Misc.                            Class 3        Miscellaneous violation of Energy Conservation Code commercial       Yes  Yes         $500     Yes       $500    $500       $500       $500       $500
                                                          provisions.
PC-Misc, FGC-Misc, MC-Misc                 Class 1        Miscellaneous violations.                                            No   No          $2,500   No        $12,500 $6,250     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
PC-Misc, FGC-Misc, MC-Misc                 Class 2        Miscellaneous violations.                                            Yes  Yes         $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
PC-Misc, FGC-Misc, MC-Misc                 Class 3        Miscellaneous violations.                                            Yes  Yes         $500     Yes       $500    $500       $500       $500       $500
RS 6-1                                     Class 1        Failure to file affidavits and / or comply with other requirements   No   No          $2,500   Yes       $12,500 $6,250     $25,000    $12,500    $25,000
                                                          set forth for photoluminescent exit path marking.
ZR 11-62                                   Class 1        Violation of discretionary Zoning conditions on privately owned      No   No          $10,000  No        $25,000 $25,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          public space (substantial denial of public access).
ZR 11-62                                   Class 2        Violation of discretionary Zoning conditions on privately owned      No   No          $5,000   No        $10,000 $10,000    $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
                                                          public space.
ZR 22-00                                   Class 2        Illegal use in residential district.                                 Yes  No          $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $12,500    $6,250     $10,000
ZR 22-00                                   Class 3        Illegal use in residential district.                                 Yes  Yes         $500     No        $500    $500       $500       $500       $500
ZR 22-32                                   Class 1        Outdoor Advertising Company has impermissible advertising sign in an No   No          $10,000  Yes       $25,000 $25,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          R District.
ZR 22-342                                  Class 1        Outdoor Advertising Company sign in R District exceeds height        No   No          $10,000  Yes       $25,000 $25,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          limits.
ZR 25-41                                   Class 2        Violation of parking regulations in a residential district.          Yes  No          $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
ZR 25-41                                   Class 3        Violation of parking regulations in a residential district.          Yes  No          $500     Yes       $500    $500       $500       $500       $500
ZR 32-00                                   Class 2        Illegal use in a commercial district.                                Yes  No          $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
ZR 32-63                                   Class 1        Outdoor Advertising Company advertising sign not permitted in        No   No          $10,000  Yes       $25,000 $25,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          specified C District.
ZR 32-64                                   Class 2        Sign(s) in specified C District exceed(s) surface area restrictions. Yes  Yes         $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
ZR 32-64                                   Class 1        Outdoor Advertising Company sign(s) in specified C Districts exceed  No   No          $10,000  Yes       $25,000 $25,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          surface area limits.
ZR 32-652                                  Class 2        Sign in specified C District extends beyond street line limitation.  Yes  Yes         $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
ZR 32-653                                  Class 2        Prohibited sign on awning, canopy, or marquee in C District.         Yes  Yes         $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
ZR 32-655                                  Class 1        Outdoor Advertising Company sign exceeds permitted height for        No   No          $10,000  Yes       $25,000 $25,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          specified C District.
ZR 42-00                                   Class 2        Illegal use in a manufacturing district.                             Yes  No          $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
ZR 42-62                                   Class 1        Outdoor Advertising Sign not permitted in M District.                No   No          $10,000  Yes       $25,000 $25,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
ZR 42-63                                   Class 1        Outdoor Advertising sign in M District exceeds surface area limits.  No   No          $10,000  Yes       $25,000 $25,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
ZR 42-643                                  Class 1        Outdoor Advertising Company sign in M District exceeds height limit. No   No          $10,000  Yes       $25,000 $25,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
ZR 105-20                                  Class 2        Damaged or removed a tree within a Special Natural Area District     No   No          $1,250   No        $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
                                                          without certification, authorization or special permit.
ZR-Misc.                                   Class 2        Miscellaneous violations of the Zoning Resolution.                   Yes  No          $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
ZR-Misc.                                   Class 3        Miscellaneous violations of the Zoning Resolution.                   Yes  No          $500     Yes       $500    $500       $500       $500       $500
ZR-Misc.                                   Class 1        Misc sign violation under the Zoning Resolution by an Outdoor        No   Yes         $10,000  Yes       $25,000 $25,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
                                                          Advertising Company.
ZR-Misc.                                   Class 2        Misc sign violation under the Zoning Resolution.                     Yea  Yes         $1,250   Yes       $6,250  $3,125     $10,000    $6,250     $10,000
Misc. – ZR Misc. – Title 28           Class 1        Misc outdoor sign violation of ZR and / or Building Code.            No   No          $10,000  No        $25,000 $25,000    $25,000    $25,000    $25,000
Misc. – ZR Misc. – Title 28           Class 2        Misc outdoor sign violation of ZR and / or Building Code.            Yes  No          $2,500   Yes       $10,000 $6,250     $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
Misc. ZR                                   Class 2        Misc. violation of condition on as of right privately owned public   No   No          $5,000   No        $10,000 $10,000    $10,000    $10,000    $10,000
                                                          space.
 
1 This penalty applies to each additional dwelling unit above the number
authorized in the certificate of occupancy.
(Amended City Record 1/19/2016, eff. 2/18/2016; amended City Record 4/15/2016,
eff. 4/15/2016; amended City Record 9/2/2016, eff. 10/2/2016; amended City
Record 4/10/2017, eff. 5/10/2017; amended City Record 2/5/2018, eff. 3/7/2018;
amended City Record 10/11/2018, eff. 11/10/2018; amended City Record 9/20/2019,
eff. 10/20/2019; amended City Record 8/19/2020, eff. 9/18/2020; amended City
Record 7/14/2021, eff. 8/13/2021; amended City Record 10/21/2022, eff. 11/20/
2022; amended City Record 6/30/2023, eff. 7/30/2023; Am. City Record 12/21/
2023, eff. 1/20/2024; amended City Record 1/16/2025, eff. 2/15/2025)
§ 102-02 Compensation of Registered Design Professionals in Accordance With §
28-216.6 of the Administrative Code.
In accordance with the provisions of Administrative Code § 28-216.6, registered
design professionals appointed by a recognized professional organization to act
on any survey or appointed to resolve disagreement between surveyors shall each
be paid the sum of one hundred dollars.
§ 102-03 Potentially Structurally Compromised Buildings.
   (a)   Potentially compromised. For the purposes of this section,
"potentially compromised" means a building or structure that:
      (1)   has had an open roof for sixty days or longer,
      (2)   has been shored and braced or repaired pursuant to an emergency
declaration issued by the commissioner pursuant to Article 215 of Title 28 of
the Administrative Code,
      (3)   has been subject to a precept as a compromised structure under
Article 216 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code,
      (4)   may have suffered structural damage by fire or by partial collapse
of floors, interior or exterior walls or other cause as determined by the
commissioner.
   (b)   Inspections.
      (1)   Initial inspections. Beginning September 1, 2013, the owner of a
building or structure that has become potentially compromised must have a
structural condition inspection of such building or structure. The inspection
must be performed by a registered design professional within sixty days from
the date that the building or structure becomes potentially compromised. The
design professional must file a report as described in subdivision d of this
section with the department within thirty days after the date of the
inspection.
      (2)   Periodic inspections. After the initial inspection and filing of
the report, structural condition inspections must be performed and reports as
described in subdivision d of this section must be filed annually, unless
otherwise specified by the department. The periodic inspections must continue
until a certification is filed with the department by the registered design
professional stating that the building or structure is no longer potentially
compromised and the department has audited the certification to ensure its
accuracy.
   (c)   Notifications to the department.
      (1)   Department notification by owner. An owner of a building or
structure must notify the department in writing that such building or structure
has become potentially compromised immediately after such owner knows or should
have known of the condition.
      (2)   Department notification by registered design professional. If a
structural condition inspection reveals that there is an immediate risk to the
public or property due to a violation of any applicable law or rule or any
unsafe condition, the registered design professional must immediately notify
the department and the owner by both calling 311 and in writing.
   (d)   Report. The registered design professional must sign, seal, and submit
to the department the report of the inspection required by § 28-217.1 of the
Administrative Code and subdivision b of this section. The registered design
professional must also submit a filing fee as specified in 1 RCNY §
101-03, and must send a copy of the report to the owner. The report must
include, but need not be limited to, the following information:
      (1)   the address of the property;
      (2)   the block and lot of the property;
      (3)   the owner's name and contact information, including an address for
the receipt of notifications and service of process;
      (4)   the registered design professional's name and contact information,
including an address for the receipt of notifications and service of process;
      (5)   the date of inspection or inspections;
      (6)   detailed description and location of the structural damage found;
      (7)   a comprehensive analysis of the structural condition of the
building or structure as a result of the structural damage, based on probes and
calculations;
      (8)   photographs of the condition;
      (9)   8 1/2" × 11" sketches of the property showing its relationship to
the adjacent properties;
      (10)   schematically sketched floor plans, sections and elevations of the
building and adjacent buildings, roof to foundation, with notes relating to the
existing description of the property;
      (11)   at least two different photographs of each of the following:
street facades, side facades, rear facades, the roof and the condition of the
interior of the property;
      (12)   a statement that the owner received the report;
      (13)   an estimate of how long the building will remain stable;
      (14)   a proposed schedule for monitoring and repairing the condition;
      (15)   8 1/2" x 11" sketches showing the work required to stabilize the
property, such as shoring and bracing and/or partial demolition; and
      (16)   any additional information requested by the commissioner.
   (e)   Final report. After the condition that caused the building or
structure to be potentially compromised has been repaired, the registered
design professional must submit to the department a signed and sealed report
certifying that the building or structure is no longer potentially compromised.
   (f)   Civil penalties. In addition to any other penalties authorized by law,
failure to file a report pursuant to the requirements of section 28-217.1 and
this section will result in a civil penalty of $3,000 for each violation of
such section, payable to the department.
(Amended City Record 7/5/2019, eff. 8/4/2019)
§ 102-04 Civil Penalties for Work Without a Permit and for Violation of Stop
Work Orders.
   (a)   Payment of civil penalty for work without a permit or violation of a
stop work order. Except as otherwise provided in this section, payment of the
civil penalty is required before:
      (1)   Issuance of a permit for work in a particular space when work was
performed without a permit in such space and the penalty for such unpermitted
work has not been paid.
      (2)   Renewal of a permit for work performed after the expiration of a
permit when the penalty for such unpermitted work has not been paid.
      (3)   Acceptance of a certificate of correction for a violation issued
for work without a permit, even if removal of such work occurred or is required
and the removal does not require a permit.
      (4)   Rescission of a stop work order.
   (b)   Assessment of civil penalty for work without a permit. The civil
penalty for work without a permit is assessed as follows:
      (1)   The civil penalty is based on occupancy status as shown on the
Certificate of Occupancy or other Department records.
      (2)   Pursuant to § 28-213.1.1 of the Administrative Code, the penalty
for work performed without a permit on a one-family or two-family dwelling
(which includes inside a residential condominium or cooperative unit) is the
greater of six times the amount of the current fee payable for the permit, but
not more than $10,000, or $600. Where only part of the work has been performed
without a permit, the Department will reduce the penalty proportionately
according to the amount of work still to be performed at the time the
Department issues a permit but not to an amount less than $600 or more than
$10,000.
      (3)   Pursuant to § 28-213.1.2 of the Administrative Code, the penalty
for work performed without a permit on a building other than a one-family or
two-family dwelling (which includes work on any common area of a condominium or
cooperative building) is the greater of twenty-one times the amount of the
current fee payable for the permit, but not more than $15,000, or $6,000. Where
only part of the work has been performed without a permit, the Department will
reduce the penalty proportionately according to the amount of work still to be
performed at the time the Department issues a permit but not to an amount less
than $6,000 or more than $15,000.
      (4)   Expired permits or working without an after-hours variance. The
penalty for work performed after the expiration of a permit for such work or
for work performed after hours without a variance permit is $600 when such
unpermitted work is performed on a one-family or two-family dwelling or $6,000
when such unpermitted work is performed on a building other than a one-family
or two-family dwelling.
      (5)   Removal of illegal work. If work that was performed without a
permit is removed, the penalty for the unpermitted work is $600 when performed
on a one-family or two-family dwelling or $6,000 when performed on a building
other than a one-family or two-family dwelling, even if the removal did not
require a permit.
      (6)   Fee-exempt properties. When unpermitted work is performed on
properties not subject to permit fees pursuant to § 28-112.1 of the
Administrative Code, the penalty for such unpermitted work is $600 when
performed on a one-family or two-family dwelling or $6,000 when performed on a
building other than a one-family or two-family dwelling.
      (7)   Legalization of completed work. If work has been performed without
a permit and an applicant seeks a permit for the unpermitted work before a
notice of violation is issued, the penalty for such unpermitted work is $600
when performed on a one-family or two-family dwelling or $6,000 when performed
on a building other than a one-family or two-family dwelling.
      (8)   Pursuant to § 28-213.6 of the Administrative Code, within one (1)
year after the Department imposes a penalty for work without a permit against
(i) a building or (ii) a part thereof (if the owner of such part is not the
owner of the building), the civil penalty for any subsequent violation related
to work without a permit on the building, or a part thereof, is two (2) times
the penalty that would otherwise apply for such violation, not to exceed the
maximum allowable penalty.
   (c)   Override of civil penalty for work without a permit. If an applicant
has an outstanding violation for unpermitted work and seeks a permit for work
in a space not related to the violation, the Department may issue a permit for
work in the space not related to the violation. Any permit that is granted
pursuant to this subdivision will not affect the outstanding violation or any
civil penalty assessed for the unpermitted work.
   (d)   Waiver of civil penalty for work without a permit. Notwithstanding any
penalty waiver, a permit must be obtained for the unpermitted work. The
Department may waive a civil penalty for work without a permit in the following
instances:
      (1)   Where an owner is a subsequent bona fide purchaser and the previous
owner performed the unpermitted work, whether or not the subsequent bona fide
purchaser received notice of the violation. The Department requires the
following supporting documentation:
         (i)   Copy of the deed;
         (ii)   Notarized affidavit stating that there is no relationship
between the previous owner and the subsequent bona fide purchaser. If the
subsequent bona fide purchaser is an entity, the affidavit must be on the
entity's letterhead and signed by the owner or an officer of the entity. The
affidavit must include:
            (A)   The name of the subsequent bona fide purchaser;
            (B)   The location of the property;
            (C)   A statement that the subsequent bona fide purchaser did not
receive the property as a gift;
            (D)   A statement that the subsequent bona fide purchaser had no
interest or relationship with the prior owner at the time of purchase; and
            (E)   A statement that the subsequent bona fide purchaser is not
acting in any way for the benefit of the prior owner.
      (2)   Where a violation for working without a permit has been dismissed.
      (3)   Where the Department of Housing Preservation and Development (HPD)
or another agency performed emergency work as directed by the Commissioner
pursuant to § 28-215.1 of the Administrative Code or where HPD or another
agency performed work on unsafe buildings in accordance with § 28-216.8 of the
Administrative Code.
      (4)   Where emergency work is performed without a permit, except for
emergency work described in paragraph (3) of this subdivision, and an
application for the work is filed with the Department within two business days
after commencement of the work.
      (5)   Where a fence, scaffold or other temporary construction equipment,
excluding sidewalk sheds, was installed with a valid permit and the permit has
expired.
      (6)   Where a permit (other than for temporary construction equipment)
expired and no work was performed after the permit's expiration.
      (7)   Where the city, state, or federal government or other government
entity or public authority owns the property where the unpermitted work
occurred.
      (8)   Where HPD third-party transfers occur after a court issues a
foreclosure judgment allowing the City to transfer title of the foreclosed
property to a new owner. The new owner must provide a letter from HPD stating
that a third-party transfer occurred and that the Department must waive any
penalties accrued before the closing date of the transfer.
      (9)   Multiple violations. Upon payment of the civil penalty and
acceptance of a Certificate of Correction for unpermitted work for which
multiple notices of violation have been issued, any outstanding civil penalties
for the same unpermitted work at the same location will be waived.
      (10)   Where an owner of a business that employs fewer than one hundred
employees (small business) has been issued a violation for unpermitted work and
all of the following conditions are met:
         (i)   The violation for which the waiver is requested was not issued
for a sidewalk shed installed without a permit or a sidewalk shed installed
with a valid permit and the permit has expired;
         (ii)   The applicant demonstrates, in a form and manner determined by
the Department, that the individual or entity requesting the waiver is the
owner of the small business;
         (iii)   The business provides goods or services onsite;
         (iv)   The work without a permit violation was issued on or after
November 20, 2022;
         (v)   The applicant demonstrates, in a form and manner determined the
by the Department, that the space in which the unpermitted work was performed
is occupied exclusively by the small business;
         (vi)   A small business waiver was not previously granted to the small
business owner for unpermitted work performed on behalf of or for the benefit
of such business; and
         (vii)   The sole or primary purpose of the business is not filing
representative or expeditor services, real estate, real estate development,
property management, construction or other related services as determined by
the Department.
   (e)   Waiver of civil penalty for failure to comply with a stop work order.
The Department may waive a civil penalty for failure to comply with a stop work
order in the following instances:
      (1)   Where the Commissioner determines that a stop work order has not
been violated.
      (2)   Where a violation for failure to comply with a stop work order has
been dismissed.
   (f)   Request for override, reduction, or waiver of a civil penalty.
      (1)   Any request for an override, reduction or waiver of a civil penalty
must be in writing in a form and manner determined by the Department. In
addition, the applicant must submit any supporting documentation required by
the Department or by paragraph (5) of this subdivision.
      (2)   The Department will review the application and issue a
determination.
      (3)   An applicant may appeal the determination to the Commissioner of
the borough (Borough Commissioner) in which the property is located or such
Commissioner's designee.
      (4)   An applicant may appeal the Borough Commissioner's or his or her
designee's determination by submitting it to the Borough Commissioner's office,
where it will be forwarded to the Department's Associate Commissioner for
Borough Operations or to the Associate Commissioner's designee. These final
appeals must be submitted within 30 days from the date of the Borough
Commissioner's or his or her designee's determination.
      (5)   Burden of proof and acceptable forms of supporting documentation.
         (i)   The burden of proof is on the applicant to show that a civil
penalty should be overridden, reduced, or waived.
         (ii)   Supporting documentation for a request for an override of a
penalty must consist of the following:
            (A)   A copy of approved plans;
            (B)   A completed job application; and
            (C)   A copy of the relevant violation and a dated color photograph
of the area of the work at issue showing the current work area is unrelated to
the violation;
         (iii)   Supporting documentation for a request for a reduction in a
penalty must consist of:
            (A)   Affidavits from contractors or building supply warehouses
concerning the unpermitted work at issue;
            (B)   A copy of the violation(s); and
            (C)   Any other documents required by the Commissioner.
         (iv)   Supporting documentation for a request for a waiver of the
penalty must consist of a copy of the relevant violation and the following
documents:
            (A)   For emergency work performed without a permit, a copy of the
work application filed within two business days after commencement of the
unpermitted emergency work;
            (B)   For a violation that has been dismissed, proof of dismissal;
            (C)   For subsequent bona fide purchasers claiming that unpermitted
work was performed by a previous owner, the documents required as stated in
subdivision (d) of this section; and
            (D)   Any other documents required by the Commissioner.
         (v)   Effect of inconsistent or incomplete documentation. If the
information provided in the request for an override, reduction or waiver of a
civil penalty or supporting documentation contradicts the description of work
completed as stated on the violation, or if the request or supporting
documentation is incomplete, the request for an override, reduction or waiver
of the penalty may be denied.
         (vi)   The Commissioner may reject incomplete or illegible documents.
The Commissioner reserves the right to audit all submissions.
   (g)   Refunds. If the civil penalty for performing unpermitted work is paid
and the underlying violation is subsequently dismissed for any reason, the
applicant will be eligible for a refund of the civil penalty payment upon
submitting proof of dismissal and payment of the violation.
(Amended City Record 1/16/2019, eff. 2/15/2019; amended City Record 2/3/2021,
eff. 3/5/2021; amended City Record 10/21/2022, eff. 11/20/2022; amended City
Record 7/27/2023, eff. 8/26/2023; amended City Record 9/26/2024, eff. 10/26/
2024)
§ 102-05 Penalty for Failure to Certify Correction of Certain Immediately
Hazardous Violations.
   (a)   Penalty amount. Pursuant to § 28-219.1 of the Administrative Code, and
in addition to any penalties otherwise authorized by Article 202 of Chapter 2
of Title 28 of the Administrative Code and the rules of the department,
whenever any person fails to submit certification of correction of an
immediately hazardous violation that was issued at a construction site and
poses a threat of imminent danger to public safety or property, a penalty of
$5,000 shall be paid to the department.
      Exception: This penalty does not apply to one- to four-family dwellings.
   (b)   Issuance of permits or certificates of occupancy; rescission of stop
work order; approval of Certificates of Correction. No permit or certificate of
occupancy shall be issued, no stop work order may be rescinded, nor shall any
Certificate of Correction for the immediately hazardous violation giving rise
to the civil penalty be approved at the property until such penalty is paid to
the department. Failure to pay such penalty shall not prevent the issuance of a
permit for work to be performed pursuant to Articles 215 or 216 of Chapter 2 of
Title 28 of the Administrative Code.
   (c)   Process. 
      (1)   Where the department determines that a Certificate of Correction of
the underlying immediately hazardous violation that is returnable to the
Environmental Control Board / Office of Administrative Trials and Hearings (ECB
/ OATH) has not been submitted as provided in § 28-219.1 of the Administrative
Code, the department will send a notice of the civil penalty pursuant to this
section to the owner of the property at which the immediately hazardous
violation occurred and, if the owner is not the respondent named in the notice
of violation for the underlying immediately hazardous violation, to such
respondent. The notice will indicate the manner in which a challenge to the
penalty may be made in accordance with this subdivision and that the penalty
will be imposed unless the department receives such a challenge within 30 days
after the date of such notice. The notice will include the bases on which such
a challenge may be made. The department will send the notice by regular mail.
      (2)   A challenge to the penalty may be made by the owner and/or the
respondent named in the ECB / OATH notice of violation for the immediately
hazardous violation. Such challenge must be made in a form and manner as set
forth on the web site of the department.
      (3)   The basis for such a challenge must be one of the following:
         (i)   the immediately hazardous ECB / OATH violation was dismissed,
         (ii)   the immediately hazardous ECB / OATH violation was downgraded
to a major or lesser violation,
         (iii)   an acceptable Certificate of Correction for the immediately
hazardous violation was submitted to the department within 30 days after the
date of the notice sent pursuant to paragraph (1) of this subdivision; or
         (iv)   the immediately hazardous violation was issued on or after May
15, 2022 at a construction site for a one- to four-family dwelling.
      (4)   The department will review any documents or evidence submitted by
the person challenging the penalty and will mail or email notice of its
determination to such person. If the challenge is denied, the penalty amount
will be imposed 10 days after the date of such notice. The determination shall
be the final determination of the department for purposes of review pursuant to
article 78 of the civil practice law and rules.
(Added City Record 9/3/2020, eff. 10/3/2020; amended City Record 11/18/2024,
eff. 12/18/2024)
§ 102-06 Homeowner Resolution Program.
Owners of one- and two-family homes who have not received any prior violations
at the property will have an opportunity to correct certain violating
conditions prior to receiving a notice of violation and associated penalties.
   (a)   Applicability. The homeowner resolution program applies to owners of
existing one- and two-family homes, whether or not they occupy those homes,
where prior Department notices of violations returnable to the Environmental
Control Board / Office of Administrative Trials and Hearings (ECB / OATH) have
not been issued at the property within the past five years, whether or not the
current owner owned the property during those five years.
   (b)   Eligible violations. This program covers violations classified as
Class 1, Class 2 or Class 3 in subdivision (k) of 1 RCNY §
102-01. Multiple violating conditions observed on the same date are considered
as one request for corrective action. Any repeated instance of the same
violating condition is ineligible for this program and will result in the
issuance of a notice of violation.
      Exceptions. This section does not apply to Class 1 violations for illegal
conversions as described in § 28-210.1 of the Administrative Code, Class 1
violations that result in the issuance of a Stop Work Order or a Vacate Order
and Class 1 violations that lead to death or serious injury.
   (c)   Request for corrective action. Where a violating condition is observed
at a property that is part of this program, the commissioner will issue a
request for corrective action, giving the owner 60 days to correct the
condition. In order to resolve a request for corrective action, the owner must
correct the condition and submit acceptable proof of correction to the
Department within such 60 days. The Department may perform an inspection upon
receiving such proof of correction in order to verify that such conditions have
been corrected.
   (d)   Failure to correct condition. At the expiration of the 60-day
correction grace period, a notice of violation returnable to ECB / OATH based
on the conditions observed and documented on the request for corrective action
will be issued to the owner for each condition for which correction has not
been verified as described in subdivision (c).
   (e)   Fee. The owner will be charged a fee for any reinspection made
necessary by a failure to respond to a request for corrective action, as
provided in 1 RCNY §
101-03.
   (f)   Removal from program. An owner who receives a notice of violation
returnable to ECB / OATH after failing to correct the violating condition
within the provided timeframe in the request for corrective action is no longer
eligible for this program. The violating condition must still be corrected and
any applicable penalty associated with any such notice of violation issued must
be paid.
(Added City Record 7/14/2021, eff. 8/13/2021; amended City Record 11/18/2024,
eff. 12/18/2024)
Subchapter C: Maintenance of Buildings
§ 103-01 Low Pressure Boiler Inspection and Filing Requirements, Penalties and
Waivers.
   (a)   Scope. This rule implements Article 303 of Title 28 of the New York
City Administrative Code ("Administrative Code") by specifying the low pressure
boiler annual inspection requirements, the processes through which the
department shall regulate the filings of low pressure boiler annual inspection
reports and shall issue penalties and waivers for failure to file and/or late
filing, and the penalties for failure to file and/or untimely filing of a
written notice of removal or disconnection of a low pressure boiler.
   (b)   References. See §§ 28-201.2.2, 28-202.1 and Article 303 of Title 28 of
the Administrative Code and 1 RCNY §
101-07.
   (c)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms
shall have the following meanings:
      (1)   Filing deadline. For the low pressure boiler annual inspection
report or any part of that report, fourteen (14) days from the inspection date.
      (2)   First test. An inspection of a newly installed or replaced boiler
required for the department to approve its use and operation.
      (3)   Inspection cycle. January 1st through December 31st of the calendar
year for which the report is being submitted. Annual inspections must be at
least six (6) months apart.
      (4)   Late filing. An inspection report or any part of that report filed
after the fourteen (14) day filing deadline but in no event later than January
14th of the calendar year immediately following the inspection cycle.
      (5)   Owner. Any person, agent, firm, partnership, corporation or other
legal entity having a legal or equitable interest in, or control of, the
premises and/or boiler.
      (6)   Qualified boiler inspector. A qualified boiler inspector as defined
in 1 RCNY §
101-07.
      (7)   Removal or disconnection. Removal or discontinuance, pursuant to §
28-303.9 of the Administrative Code.
      (8)   Small business. A business that employs fewer than one hundred
persons and provides goods or services onsite.
      (9)   Waiver. Removal of the obligation to pay a penalty associated with
a violation. A waiver does not result in dismissal of the violation.
   (d)   Inspection and report filing. The owner shall be responsible for
hiring a qualified boiler inspector to conduct inspections and file low
pressure boiler annual inspection reports pursuant to Article 303 of Title 28
of the Administrative Code and in accordance with the following provisions:
      (1)   Low pressure boiler annual inspection reports must be submitted for
each inspection cycle on such forms and in such manner as required by the
department. The report must include:
         (i)   An inspection report for each boiler identifying the qualified
boiler inspector or inspection agency;
         (ii)   An affirmation of correction that identified defects that have
been corrected, if applicable; and
         (iii)   The filing fee as provided in subdivision (h).
      (2)   If an inspection reveals any dangerous condition in a boiler that
threatens life or safety and that requires an immediate shut down of the
boiler, the inspector must immediately notify the department's boiler division
of the condition via email at the address provided on the department's website,
www.nyc.gov/buildings. Notification of an unregistered boiler must be made by
filing a report electronically in a form and manner required by the department.
      (3)   The filing is deemed accepted upon payment of the fee(s) and any
civil penalties due. If the payment is not honored, the filing will be deemed
invalid and the owner may receive a violation for failure to file and be
subject to all applicable penalties as set forth in subdivision (f).
   (e)   Acceptance of filings. Inspection reports filed after the fourteen
(14) day filing deadline but on or before January 14th of the calendar year
immediately following the inspection cycle will be considered late filings and
will be subject to the appropriate civil penalties as set forth in subdivision
(f) of this section. Reports filed after such late filing period will be
considered expired. In such cases, owners will be subject to the appropriate
civil penalties for failure to file an inspection report, as set forth in
subdivision (f) of this section, and the department will require a new
inspection to be performed for the current inspection cycle and a new report
filed in accordance with this section.
   (f)   Civil penalties, low pressure boiler annual inspection report and
affirmation of correction. 
      (1)   Failure to file. An owner who fails to file the low pressure boiler
annual inspection report or any part thereof for each boiler, pursuant to
Article 303 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code and this section, shall be
liable for a civil penalty of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
per boiler. A low pressure boiler annual inspection report not filed within the
late filing period shall be deemed expired and shall not be accepted by the
department.
      (2)   Late filing. An owner who submits a late filing, but who provides
proof that the inspection took place within the inspection cycle for which the
report was due, shall be liable for a civil penalty of not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) per month, per boiler, commencing on the day following the
filing deadline and ending on the date of submission of a complete report,
including a late filing of the affirmation of correction. The total penalty
shall not exceed six hundred dollars ($600.00) per boiler. For the purposes of
this paragraph, "proof" shall mean a copy of the filed inspection report from
the qualified boiler inspector who conducted the inspection indicating that the
inspection was completed within the inspection cycle for which the report was
due.
      (3)   Failure to file the affirmation of correction. An owner who fails
to correct the defects within the applicable time after the inspection and to
file the affirmation of correction by the date the affirmation was due, stating
that all defects found during the inspection have been corrected pursuant to §
28-303.5 of the Administrative Code shall be liable for a civil penalty of one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per boiler.
      (4)   Challenge of civil penalty. An owner may challenge the imposition
of any civil penalty authorized to be imposed pursuant to this subdivision by
providing written proof of a timely and complete inspection and filing to the
department. Challenges shall be made in writing within thirty (30) days from
the date of service of the violation by the department and sent to the office/
unit of the department that issued the violation. The decision to dismiss or
uphold the penalty shall be at the sole discretion of the department. Examples
of such proof shall include, but are not limited to, the following:
         (i)   A copy of the boiler inspection report for the inspection
performed during the applicable inspection cycle and a copy of the front and
back of the canceled check or money order to the department for the boiler
inspection report fee or proof of electronic payment of such fee; or
         (ii)   The department-assigned transmittal number for the electronic
disk filing report or DOB NOW tracking number.
      (5)   Extension of the filing deadline. An owner may request an extension
of the filing deadline in order to correct low pressure boiler defects and file
an affirmation of correction stating that identified defects have been
corrected in accordance with Article 303 of Title 28 of the Administrative
Code, by submitting proof that the request is based on extraordinary
circumstances and/or that the delay in correction is beyond the owner's
control, not including financial or administrative hardship. The request shall
be made prior to the expiration of the filing deadline, submitted with the
filing fee and shall be made on such forms and in such manner as required by
the commissioner.
      (6)   Waiver of penalties. An owner may request a waiver of penalties
assessed for violation of Article 303 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code
and/or related rules enforced by the department. Requests shall be made in
writing and submitted with the filing fee.
         (i)   Owner status. 
            (A)   New owner. A new owner may be granted a waiver of penalties
contingent upon the department's acceptance of the owner's proof that transfer
of ownership to the new owner occurred after penalties were incurred. Proof
includes a recorded deed evidencing transfer of ownership to the current owner
after penalties were incurred, as well as any other documentation requested by
the Department.
            (B)   Government ownership. An owner may be granted a waiver of
penalties upon submission of official documentation from a government entity
affirming that the premises was owned in its entirety by the entity during the
period for which a waiver is requested.
            (C)   Bankruptcy. An owner may be granted a waiver of penalties
upon submission of a copy of a bankruptcy petition and a decision from the
bankruptcy court.
            (D)   Small business. An owner of a small business may be granted a
one-time waiver of the civil penalty for a violation issued for failure to file
an annual boiler inspection report where all of the following conditions are
met:
               1.   The applicant demonstrates, in a form and manner determined
by the Department, that the individual or entity requesting the waiver is the
owner of the small business;
               2.   The failure to file for which the violation was issued
occurred on or after November 20, 2022;
               3.   The applicant demonstrates, in a form and manner determined
by the Department, that the owner of the small business owns or has
responsibility for the boiler and such boiler exclusively serves the space
occupied by the small business;
               4.   A small business waiver was not previously granted to the
small business owner for any boiler at the subject building that is owned by
the small business or for which the small business is responsible;
               5.   A small business waiver was not previously granted to any
small business for the boiler for which the waiver is being requested; and
               6.   The sole or primary purpose of the business is not filing
representative or expeditor services, real estate, real estate development,
property management, construction or other related services as determined by
the Department.
         (ii)   Device status. An owner may be granted a waiver of penalties
contingent upon the department's acceptance of proof of the following:
            (A)   Removed or disconnected. That the low pressure boiler was
removed from the building or disconnected prior to the inspection cycle for
which the report was due. In the event that proof of removal or disconnection
has not yet been entered into the department's database at the time of the
request for a waiver, the owner shall submit to the department a copy of the
submission for removal or disconnection of the boiler.
            (B)   New or replaced. That the first test was performed during the
inspection cycle for which the report was due.
            (C)   Work in progress. That there is work in progress for the
replacement or installation of a new boiler or burner or a major renovation
requiring that the boiler or burner be deactivated during the work. For the
purposes of this subparagraph, "proof" means the filing of a boiler application
including a projected date of completion of work. Upon completion of such work,
a new inspection and test report must be filed in accordance with this section.
         (iii)   Building status. An owner may be granted a waiver of penalties
contingent upon the department's confirmation of the following:
            (A)   Demolished. That the full demolition of the building occurred
prior to the inspection cycle for which the report was due and that such
demolition was signed off by the department or that a new building permit has
been issued for the property.
            (B)   Sealed or vacated. That the building was ordered to be sealed
or vacated by a government agency (e.g. Department of Buildings, Department of
Housing Preservation and Development, Fire Department of New York or Office of
Emergency Management) or by court order prior to the expiration of the
inspection cycle for which the report was due.
   (g)   Civil penalties, written notice of removal or disconnection of a low
pressure boiler. Failure to file a written notice of removal or disconnection
with the filing fee in accordance with § 28-303.9 of the Administrative Code,
or filing such notice more than thirty (30) days after the date of the removal
or disconnection of a low pressure boiler shall be deemed a lesser violation
and shall subject the owner to penalties as set forth in this subdivision.
      (1)   Failure to file. An owner who fails to file such notice by thirty
(30) days after the end of the inspection cycle shall be liable for a civil
penalty of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000) per boiler.
      (2)   Untimely filing. An owner who files such notice more than thirty
(30) days after the date of removal or disconnection, but by thirty (30) days
after the end of the inspection cycle may submit an untimely filing and shall
be liable for a civil penalty of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) per
month, per boiler, commencing on the day following the date the notice was due
and ending on the date of submission of the notice. The total penalty shall not
exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per boiler.
      (3)   Challenge of civil penalty. An owner may challenge the imposition
of any civil penalty authorized to be imposed pursuant to this subdivision by
providing proof of a timely filing to the department. Challenges shall be made
in writing within thirty (30) days from the date of service of the violation by
the department and sent to the office/unit of the department that issued the
violation. The decision to dismiss or uphold the penalty shall be at the sole
discretion of the department. An example of such proof shall include, but is
not limited to, the following: a stamped and dated copy of the submission for
removal or disconnection of the boiler filed with the department, which may be
supported by a copy of the front and back of a canceled check(s) to the
department for the filing fee or proof of electronic payment of such fee.
   (h)   Fees. Fees for filings related to boilers shall be as set forth in 1
RCNY §
101-03.
(Amended City Record 12/16/2021, eff. 1/15/2022; amended City Record 10/21/
2022, eff. 11/20/2022; amended City Record 9/26/2024, eff. 10/26/2024)
§ 103-02 Elevator Inspections and Tests, Filing Requirements, Penalties and
Waivers.
   (a)   Scope. This rule implements Article 304 of Title 28 of the New York
City Administrative Code ("Administrative Code") by specifying the periodic
elevator inspection and testing requirements to be conducted by an approved
elevator agency on behalf of the owner and the processes through which the
department shall regulate the filings of elevator inspection and test reports
and elevator affirmations of correction and issue penalties and waivers for
failure to file and/or late and untimely filing.
   (b)   References. See Sections 28-201.2.2, 28-202.1 and Article 304 of Title
28 of the Administrative Code.
   (c)   Definitions. For the purposes of this rule, the following terms shall
have the following meanings:
      (1)   Approved elevator agency. An elevator agency as defined in § 28-
401.3 of the Administrative Code, including its directors and insp© who are
licensed pursuant to Articles 421 and 422 of Title 28 of the Administrative
Code.
      (2)   Certificate of compliance. A certificate issued by the department
authorizing the operation of an elevator following the satisfactory report of
an inspection and test.
      (3)   Elevator. For the purposes of this rule, such term shall include
elevators, escalators, moving walkways, material lifts, vertical reciprocating
conveyors ("VRC"), dumbwaiters and other conveying systems.
      (4)   Filing deadline. For category 1, 3, and 5 test reports, twenty-one
(21) days from the date of the test. For periodic inspection reports, fourteen
(14) days from the date of the inspection.
      (5)   Inspection and test cycle. 
         (i)   Category 1. Except as otherwise provided by the commissioner,
January first through December thirty-first of each year.
         (ii)   Category 3. Except as otherwise provided by the commissioner,
within three (3) years from the month of issuance of a certificate of
compliance for a new elevator or within three (3) years from the month of the
most recent category 3 periodic inspection and test performed on an existing
elevator.
         (iii)   Category 5. Except as otherwise provided by the commissioner,
within five (5) years from the month of issuance of a certificate of compliance
for a new elevator or within five (5) years from the month of the most recent
category 5 periodic inspection and test performed on an existing elevator.
         (iv)   Periodic inspection. Except as otherwise provided by the
commissioner, January first through December thirty-first of each year at a
minimum of three months from the date of any Category 1 testing or previous
periodic inspection. Initial periodic inspections on new installations must be
performed in the calendar year following the final acceptance test. For private
residence elevators, the periodic inspection and category testing may be
performed on the same date.
      (6)   Late filing. An inspection and test report that is filed after the
filing deadline.
      (7)   Owner. Any person, agent, firm, partnership, corporation or other
legal entity having a legal or equitable interest in, or control of the
premises and/or elevator.
      (8)   Periodic inspection and test. For the purposes of this rule, such
term shall mean an elevator inspection and test to be conducted in accordance
with Table N 1 of Appendix K of the New York City Building Code ("Building
Code") and this section by an approved elevator agency on behalf of the owner.
      (9)   Waiver. Removal of the obligation to pay a penalty associated with
a violation. A waiver does not result in dismissal of the underlying violation.
   (d)   Inspection and tests, reports and filing requirements. Periodic
elevator inspections and tests conducted by approved elevator agencies on
behalf of the owner and reports filed by such agency or owner shall comply with
Article 304 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code and the following:
      (1)   Category 1, 3 and/or 5 tests and periodic inspections shall be
conducted during the inspection and test cycle.
      (2)   Category 1, 3 and/or 5 test reports and periodic inspection reports
shall be submitted on forms supplied by the department and in such a manner as
required by the commissioner by the filing deadline.
      (3)   Test reports must be filed with the filing fee as provided in
subdivision (l).
      (4)   The filing is deemed accepted upon payment of the fee(s) and any
civil penalties due. If the payment is not honored, the filing will be deemed
invalid and the owner may receive a violation for failure to file and be
subject to all applicable penalties as set forth in subdivisions (h) and (i).
      (5)   Periodic inspection reports for private elevators need not be filed
with the department but must be kept for six (6) years and made available to
the department upon request.
   (e)   Correction of defects and affirmation of correction filing
requirements. In accordance with § 28-304.6.6 of the Administrative Code, all
defects found on a category test or a periodic inspection shall be corrected
within ninety (90) days of the inspection or test conducted by an approved
elevator agency, with the exception of all hazardous conditions and defects
related to firefighters' Phase I emergency recall operations or Phase II
emergency in-car operation as required by section 3003.2 of the New York City
Building Code, which shall be corrected immediately. Within fourteen (14) days
of the date of correction, an affirmation of correction stating that all found
and reported defects have been corrected shall be filed with the department on
such forms and in such a manner as prescribed by the commissioner. Failure to
comply with this subdivision shall be deemed a major violation.
   (f)   Acceptance of filings. Late filings of inspection and test reports
and/or untimely filings of affirmations of correction shall be accepted by the
department as filed upon payment of the appropriate civil penalties as set
forth in subdivisions (h) and (i) of this section, if filed within the
timeframes set forth in subdivisions (h) and (i) of this section. Reports and
affirmations filed after such timeframe shall be deemed expired. In such cases,
the appropriate civil penalties shall be paid, a new inspection and test shall
be performed for the current inspection and test cycle and a new report filed
in accordance with this section.
   (g)   Test notifications. In accordance with § 28-304.6.1.1 of Title 28 of
the Administrative Code, the department shall be notified by an approved
elevator agency on behalf of the owner at least five (5) calendar days prior to
the category 1 (escalators only), 3 and/or 5 testing to be conducted by such
approved elevator agency. The commissioner may require that such agency provide
five- (5) calendar day notifications to the department's Elevator Division for
all periodic inspections if he or she deems it necessary.
   (h)   Civil penalties – owners of buildings that contain (1) or two (2)
single residential units. 
      (1)   Failure to file the test report. An owner who fails to file the
category 1, 3 and/or 5 test report for each elevator by twenty-one (21) days
after the end of the inspection and test cycle, pursuant to Article 304 of
Title 28 of the Administrative Code and this section, shall be liable for a
civil penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per elevator.
      (2)   Late filing of the test report. An owner who submits a late filing,
but who provides proof that the test took place within the period for which the
report was due, shall be liable for a civil penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00)
per month, per elevator, commencing on the day following the filing deadline
and ending on the date of submission of a test report. The total penalty shall
not exceed six hundred dollars ($600.00) per elevator. For the purposes of this
paragraph, "proof" shall mean a copy of the elevator test report for the test
conducted during the applicable period and, if applicable, a copy of the front
and back of a canceled check(s) to the department for the filing fee or proof
of electronic payment of such fee.
      (3)   Failure to file the affirmation of correction. An owner who fails
to correct the defects within the applicable time after the test and to file
the affirmation of correction by the date the affirmation was due, stating that
all defects found and indicated on the test report have been corrected pursuant
to § 28-304.6.6 of the Administrative Code and subdivision (e) of this section,
shall be liable for a civil penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per
elevator, except that this penalty will not be imposed for affirmations due
with respect to defects identified during the 2022 and 2023 test cycles,
provided that such affirmations were submitted by April 14, 2023 or April 14,
2024, respectively.
      (4)   Untimely filing of the affirmation of correction. An owner who
fails to correct the defects within the applicable time after the inspection
and test and to file such affirmation within fourteen (14) days from the date
of correction in accordance with subdivision (e) of this section, shall be
liable for a civil penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) per month, per elevator,
commencing on the day following the date the affirmation was due and ending on
the date of submission of the affirmation. The total penalty shall not exceed
six hundred dollars ($600.00) per elevator.
      (5)   Extension of the filing deadline. An owner may request an extension
of the filing deadline in order to correct defects found during category
testing and to file an affirmation of correction stating that identified
defects have been corrected in accordance with Article 304 of Title 28 of the
Administrative Code by submitting proof that the request is based on
extraordinary circumstances and/or that the delay in correction is beyond the
owner's control, not including financial or administrative hardship. The
request must be made prior to the expiration of the filing deadline, submitted
with the filing fee and made on such forms and in such manner as required by
the commissioner.
   (i)   Civil penalties – owners of commercial buildings, mixed use buildings
or buildings that contain more than two (2) residential units. 
      (1)   Failure to file the inspection and test report. An owner who fails
to file a category 1 test report for each elevator on or by twenty-one (21)
days after the end of the inspection and test cycle, pursuant to Article 304 of
Title 28 of the Administrative Code and this section, shall be liable for a
civil penalty of three thousand dollars ($3000.00) per elevator. An owner who
fails to file a category 3 or 5 test report for each elevator on or by twenty-
one (21) days after the end of the inspection and test cycle, pursuant to
Article 304 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code and this section, shall be
liable for a civil penalty of five thousand dollars ($5000.00) per elevator. An
owner who fails to file the periodic inspection report for each elevator on or
by fourteen (14) days after the end of the inspection and test cycle, pursuant
to Article 304 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code and this section, shall
be liable for a civil penalty of three thousand dollars ($3000.00) per
elevator.
      (2)   Late filing of the inspection and test report. An owner who submits
a category 1 late filing or periodic inspection late filing, but who provides
proof that the inspection and test took place within the period for which the
report was due, shall be liable for a civil penalty of one hundred and fifty
dollars ($150.00) per month, per elevator, commencing on the day following the
filing deadline and ending on the date of submission of a complete report. The
total penalty shall not exceed one thousand eight hundred dollars ($1800.00)
per elevator. An owner who submits a category 3 or 5 late filing, but who
provides proof that the inspection and test took place within the period for
which the report was due, shall be liable for a civil penalty of two hundred
and fifty dollars ($250.00) per month, per elevator, commencing on the day
following the filing deadline and ending on the date of submission of a
complete report. The total penalty shall not exceed three thousand dollars
($3000.00) per elevator. For the purposes of this paragraph, "proof" shall mean
a copy of the elevator inspection and test report for the inspection and test
conducted during the applicable period and, if applicable, a copy of the front
and back of a canceled check(s) to the department for an elevator inspection/
test report fee or proof of electronic payment of such fee.
      (3)   Failure to file the affirmation of correction. An owner who fails
to correct the defects within the applicable time after the inspection and test
and to file the affirmation of correction by the date the affirmation was due,
stating that all defects found during the inspection and test and indicated on
the report have been corrected pursuant to § 28-304.6.6 of the Administrative
Code and subdivision (e) of this section, shall be liable for a civil penalty
of three thousand dollars ($3000.00) per elevator, except that this penalty
will not be imposed for affirmations due with respect to defects identified
during the 2022 and 2023 inspection and test cycles, provided that such
affirmations were submitted by April 14, 2023 or April 14, 2024, respectively.
      (4)   Untimely filing of the affirmation of correction. An owner who
fails to correct the defects within the applicable time after the inspection
and test and to file such affirmation within fourteen (14) days from the date
of correction in accordance with subdivision (e) of this section, shall be
liable for a civil penalty of one hundred and fifty dollars ($150.00) per
month, per elevator, commencing on the day following the date the affirmation
was due and ending on the date of submission of the affirmation. The total
penalty shall not exceed one thousand eight hundred dollars ($1,800.00) per
elevator.
      (5)   Extension of the filing deadline. An owner may request an extension
of the filing deadline in order to correct defects found during category
testing and to file an affirmation of correction stating that identified
defects have been corrected in accordance with Article 304 of Title 28 of the
Administrative Code by submitting proof that the request is based on
extraordinary circumstances and/or that the delay in correction is beyond the
owner's control, not including financial or administrative hardship. The
request must be made prior to the expiration of the filing deadline, submitted
with the filing fee and made on such forms and in such manner as required by
the commissioner.
   (j)   Challenge of a civil penalty. An owner may challenge the imposition of
any civil penalty authorized to be imposed pursuant to this section by
providing written proof of a timely and complete inspection and test and filing
and/or correction of defects and filing to the department. Examples of such
proof shall include, but are not limited to a copy of the elevator inspection/
test report for the inspection and test conducted during the applicable period
and, if applicable, a copy of the front and back of a canceled check(s) to the
department for an elevator inspection and test report fee or proof of
electronic payment of such fee. Challenges shall be made in writing within
thirty (30) calendar days from the date of service of the violation by the
department and sent to the office/unit of the department that issued the
violation. The decision to dismiss or uphold the penalty shall be at the sole
discretion of the department.
   (k)   Waiver of penalties. An owner may request a waiver of penalties
assessed for violation of Article 304 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code,
and/or related rules enforced by the department. Requests shall be made in
writing and submitted with the filing fee.
      (1)   Owner status. 
         (i)   New owner. A new owner may be granted a waiver of penalties
contingent upon the department's acceptance of the owner's proof that transfer
of ownership to the new owner occurred after penalties were incurred. Proof
includes a recorded deed evidencing transfer of ownership to the current owner
after penalties were incurred, as well as any other documentation requested by
the Department.
         (ii)   Government ownership. An owner may be granted a waiver of
penalties upon submission of official documentation from a government entity
affirming that the premises was owned in its entirety by the entity during the
period for which a waiver is requested.
         (iii)   Bankruptcy. An owner may be granted a waiver of penalties upon
submission of a copy of a bankruptcy petition and a decision from the
bankruptcy court.
      (2)   Device status. An owner may be granted a waiver of penalties
contingent upon the department's acceptance of proof of the following:
         (i)   Removed or dismantled. That a permit was issued by the
department for the removal or dismantling of the elevator(s) and that there was
department sign-off, indicating that the elevator was removed or dismantled
prior to the inspection and test cycle for which the report was due.
         (ii)   New or replaced. That a certificate of compliance was issued by
the department as part of a new installation during the inspection and test
cycle for which the report was due.
         (iii)   Work in progress. That there is work in progress for the
replacement or installation of a new elevator or a major renovation requiring
that the elevator be deactivated during the work. For the purposes of this
subparagraph, "proof" shall mean the filing of an elevator application
including a projected date of completion of work. Upon completion of such work,
a new category 1 test report shall be filed in accordance with this section.
      (3)   Building status. An owner may be granted a waiver of penalties
contingent upon the department's confirmation of the following:
         (i)   Demolished. That the full demolition of the building occurred
prior to the inspection and test cycle for which the report was due and that
such demolition was signed off by the department or that a new building permit
has been issued for the property.
         (ii)   Sealed or vacated. That the building was ordered to be sealed
or vacated by a government agency (i.e. DOB, HPD, FDNY or OEM) or by court
order prior to the expiration of the inspection and test cycle for which the
report was due.
   (l)   Fees. Fees for filings related to elevators shall be as set forth in 1
RCNY §
101-03.
(Amended City Record 12/16/2021, eff. 1/15/2022; amended City Record 4/2/2024,
eff. 5/2/2024)
§ 103-03 Existing Elevators and Escalators.
The provisions of American Society of Mechanical Engineers ("ASME") A17.3-2002
shall apply to elevators and escalators built in accordance with the 1968, or
any previous edition, of the Building Code of the City of New York except as
modified in accordance with 1 RCNY §
3610-01.
§ 103-04 Periodic Inspection of Exterior Walls and Appurtenances of Buildings.
   (a)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms
have the following meanings.
      Acceptable report. A technical examination report filed by a Qualified
Exterior Wall Inspector that meets the requirements of the Administrative Code
and this rule as determined and approved by the Department.
      Amended report. A technical examination report filed by a Qualified
Exterior Wall Inspector who certifies that the unsafe conditions reported in
the initial report have been repaired and that no unsafe conditions exist at
the building.
      Appurtenance. An exterior wall element including, but not limited to,
fire escapes, exterior fixtures, ladders to rooftops, flagpoles, signs,
parapets, railings, copings, guard rails, window frames (including hardware and
lites), balcony and terrace enclosures, including greenhouses or solariums,
window guards, window air conditioners, flower boxes, satellite dishes,
antennae, cell phone towers, and any equipment attached to or protruding from
the facade.
      Cavity wall construction. An exterior wall system consisting of an
exterior veneer with a backup wall whereby the exterior veneer relies on a grid
of metal ties to the backup wall for lateral stability. The two layers of wall
are separated by an air cavity which may or may not be filled with insulation.
      Critical examination. An examination conducted to review the exterior of
a building and all parts thereof to determine whether the exterior walls
(facades) and the appurtenances are either safe, unsafe, or safe with a repair
and maintenance program (SWARMP) and whether, in the judgment of a Qualified
Exterior Wall Inspector, they require remedial work.
      Filed report. A report shall be deemed filed with the Department when it
has been received by the Department. The filed report must be completed in
accordance with the provisions of paragraph (3) of subdivision (c) of this
section.
      Filing window. The two-year period during which a report for a particular
building may be filed without penalty.
      Public right-of-way. A public street, avenue, sidewalk, roadway or any
other public place or public way.
      Qualified Exterior Wall Inspector (hereinafter "QEWI"). A qualified
exterior wall inspector as defined in 1 RCNY §
101-07.
      Report filing cycle. The five-year time interval established by the
Commissioner for the filing of each successive report for each successive
critical examination of every building subject to the requirements of Article
302 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code.
      Safe condition. A condition of a building wall, any appurtenances thereto
or any part thereof not requiring repair or maintenance to sustain the
structural integrity of the exterior of the building and that will not become
unsafe during the next five years.
      Safe with a repair and maintenance program (hereinafter "SWARMP"). A
condition of a building wall, any appurtenances thereto or any part thereof
that is safe at the time of inspection, but requires repairs or maintenance
during the next five years, but not less than one year, in order to prevent its
deterioration into an unsafe condition during that five-year period.
      Staggered inspection cycle. The separate time intervals for filing
reports of critical examinations as determined by the last digit of the
building's block number, beginning February 21, 2010, and continuing thereafter
for each subsequent report filing cycle.
      Subsequent report. A technical examination report that is filed by a QEWI
after an acceptable report in order to change the status of the building for
that report filing cycle to reflect changed conditions or the recommended time
frame for repairs of SWARMP or unsafe conditions.
      Unsafe condition. A condition of a building wall, any appurtenances
thereto, or any part thereof that is hazardous to persons or property and
requires repair within one (1) year of completion of critical examinations. In
addition, any condition that was reported as SWARMP in a previous report and
that is not corrected at the time of the current inspection must be reported as
an unsafe condition.
   (b)   Responsibilities of qualified exterior wall inspectors. 
      (1)   A QEWI must conduct critical examinations and file reports in
accordance with this section and Article 302 of Title 28 of the Administrative
Code.
      (2)   A QEWI must maintain records of inspections and tests for at least
six years and must make such records available to the Department upon request.
      (3)   A QEWI must maintain insurance coverage as set forth in paragraph
(7) of subdivision (b) of 1 RCNY §
101-07. Copies of such insurance policies must be made available to the
Department upon request.
   (c)   Critical examinations. 
      (1)   Periodic inspection requirements. In order to maintain a building's
exterior walls and appurtenances in a safe condition, and in accordance with
Article 302 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code, a critical examination of
all parts of all exterior walls and any appurtenances of all existing buildings
greater than six stories in height or buildings hereafter erected that are
greater than six stories in height, except for those parts of any exterior wall
that are less than twelve inches (305 millimeters) from the exterior wall of an
adjacent building, must be conducted at periodic intervals.
      (2)   Inspection procedures.
         (i)   Before any exterior wall for any building is critically
examined, the QEWI retained by or on behalf of the owner of the building must
carefully review the most recent report and any available previous reports. The
Department will maintain a file of such reports submitted in conformance with
Article 302 of Title 28 of the New York City Administrative Code, and furnish
copies upon payment of fees set forth in the rules of the Department.
         (ii)   Examination of a building's exterior walls and appurtenances
thereof pursuant to § 28-302.2 of the Administrative Code must be performed by
or under the direct supervision of a QEWI retained by the owner of the building
or his or her representative.
         (iii)   The QEWI must design an inspection program for the specific
building to be inspected, which must include, but not be limited to, the
methods to be employed in the examination. The inspection program shall be
based on considerations of the type of construction of the building's envelope,
age of the material components, the facade's specific exposure to environmental
conditions and the presence of specific details and appurtenances.
Consideration shall be given to the facade's history of maintenance and repairs
as described in previous reports and submittals to the Department. Architects,
engineers, individuals with a bachelor's degree in architecture or engineering
and three (3) years of relevant FISP inspection experience, or individuals with
five (5) years of relevant FISP inspection experience working under the QEWI's
direct supervision, may be delegated to perform selected inspection tasks.
         (iv)   The methods used to examine the building must permit a complete
inspection of same. Except as herein required, the use of a scaffold or other
observation platform is preferred, but the QEWI may use other methods of
inspection as he/she deems appropriate. Physical examinations from scaffolding
or other observation platform ("close-up inspections") must be performed at
intervals of not more than 60'-0", with the minimum number of physical
examinations per total length of facade elevation noted in the table below. If
the building does not front a public right-of-way, physical examinations are to
be performed at a representative sample of the facade elevations with a minimum
of one examination per building. All physical examinations shall occur along a
path from grade to top of an exterior wall fronting each public right-of-way,
using at least one scaffold drop or other observation platform configuration,
including all exterior wall setbacks. The QEWI shall determine the most
deleterious locations and perform physical examinations at those locations. The
use of drones, high resolution photography, non-destructive testing, or other
similar methods does not eliminate the requirements for close-up inspections.
Length of Facade Elevation Fronting Public Minimum # of Physical Examinations
Right-of-Way (L)
Length of Facade Elevation Fronting Public Minimum # of Physical Examinations
Right-of-Way (L)
L < 60'-0"                                 1
60'-0" ≤ L < 120'-0"                     2
120'-0" ≤ L < 180'-0"                    3
180'-0" ≤ L < 240'-0"                    4
240'-0" ≤ L < 300'-0"                    5
300'-0" ≤ L < 360'-0"                    6
For every additional 60'-0" of length of facade, one additional close-up
inspection is required.
 
         (v)   The known history of the building, the nature of the materials
used and the conditions observed will dictate the extent of the critical
examination. The QEWI must apply a professional standard of care to assess the
building's condition and the individual building systems that comprise the
facades, including splitting or fracturing of terra cotta on buildings,
cracking of masonry and brick work in brick faced buildings, mortar and other
joint materials, loosening or corrosion of metal anchors and supports, water
entry or flow within cavities, mineral build-up, coping materials, movement of
lintel/shelf angles, and must ascertain the cause of these and such other
conditions detected. The QEWI must order any special or additional inspections
and/or tests, including sounding procedures, that may be required to support
investigations and to determine the causes of any defects. Starting with the
ninth cycle, probes must be performed on all cavity wall construction, and, at
a minimum, during every subsequent odd-numbered cycle. The QEWI shall determine
the location of the probes, which shall be in areas not previously renovated.
At a minimum, a single probe must be completed along each required close-up
inspection interval. The QEWI must ensure that the number and size of the
probes are sufficient to report the presence, condition, and spacing of wall
ties. The removal of portions of the facade in order to facilitate the
performance of tests may require a permit from the Landmarks Preservation
Commission.
         Exceptions: The requirement for probes may be waived in the following
cases:
            1.   When a repair campaign addressing cavity wall ties has been
completed within ten (10) years of the filing deadline and the owner or QEWI
provides proof of such repair including, but not limited to, photographs,
special inspection reports, and construction documents, which must be submitted
and found acceptable by the Department.
            2.   When the first Temporary Certificate of Occupancy or
Certificate of Occupancy for a new building was issued within ten (10) years of
the filing deadline and the owner or QEWI provides evidence of tie installation
including, but not limited to, photographs, special inspection reports, and
construction documents, which must be submitted and found acceptable by the
Department.
            3.   Where a QEWI proposes an alternate method of determining tie
condition and spacing, which must be submitted and found acceptable by the
Department.
         (vi)   Photographs must be taken and/or sketches made during the
course of the Critical Examination to properly document the location of all
conditions observed that are either unsafe or SWARMP.
         (vii)   Upon discovery of any unsafe condition, the QEWI must
immediately notify the Department and the owner of the building. The QEWI must
identify the location of any unsafe condition, advise the owner on the
appropriate protective measures to be taken, and include the recommended type
and location of public protection in the notification to the Department.
         (viii)   Completion of a critical examination means that the QEWI has
conducted a final physical inspection to determine that the building conditions
as described in the report are consistent with the actual conditions. Such
final inspection must, at a minimum, include an actual visual examination and a
walk around with binoculars or other inspectorial equipment. A drive-by
inspection is not acceptable.
      (3)   Report requirements.
         (i)   The QEWI must file with the Department a written report
describing the result of the critical examination, clearly documenting all
conditions noted during the inspection and stating that the inspection was
performed and completed in accordance with the Administrative Code and this
rule. A separate acceptable report must be prepared and filed for each building
with a control number, as provided by the Department, even if it shares a Block
and Lot number with other structures. The QEWI must also submit a copy of the
report to the owner of the building.
         (ii)   Technical information in the report must adhere to and follow
the sequence and the labeling of the report requirements as listed in
subparagraph (iii) of this paragraph, and must be provided on such forms and in
such format as the Department requires. Additional information may be provided.
If a requirement is not applicable, this must be indicated on the report.
         (iii)   The report must include an executive overview that consists of
a summary of findings and recommendations, a concise statement of the scope of
the inspection and findings, the conclusions and recommendations and a
determination as to whether the building is categorized as "safe," "SWARMP," or
"unsafe." The report must also include, but not be limited to:
            (A)   The address, any a.k.a. addresses, Block and Lot number, the
Building Identification Number ("BIN"), the landmark status of the building,
and the location from the nearest cross street;
            (B)   The name, mailing address and telephone number of the owner
of the building, or, if the owner is not an individual, the name, mailing
address, telephone number, position/title of a principal of the owner;
            (C)   A description of the building, including the number of
stories, height, plan dimensions, Certificate of Occupancy number if available,
usage, and age and type of exterior wall construction, specifying all materials
present in the exterior wall;
            (D)   A detailed description of any distress, settlements, repairs,
or revisions to exterior enclosures since the previous report, including, but
not limited to, settlement, splitting or fracturing, displacement, bulging,
cracking of any exterior wall elements, loosening of metal anchors and
supports, water entry, movement of lintel or shelf angles, or other defects or
changes;
            (E)   A detailed description of the procedures used in making the
critical examination;
            (F)   The following information:
               1.   The extent and location of all physical examinations
performed, including odd-numbered cycle cavity wall probes;
               2.   The names, addresses, telephone numbers, and license or
registration numbers for riggers, contractors, and consultants involved in the
critical examination;
               3.   A location diagram of a discernable scale and with a north
arrow, indicating the main entrance, dimensions of the length of each facade
elevation, including all setbacks and returns, and nearest cross street and
locations and dates of close-up inspections;
               4.   Dates of the start and completion of the critical
examination; and
               5.   Dated photo documentation of the QEWI and/or his or her
employees performing physical ("close-up") inspections.
            (G)   A description, classification, and mapping of each
significant condition observed, including deterioration and any movement
detected and the apparent water-tightness of the exterior surfaces. The
description must also include a list of all exterior appurtenances and their
condition. Each condition must be classified as safe, unsafe or SWARMP. If the
building is classified as unsafe or SWARMP, the report must include the
locations and descriptions of all unsafe or SWARMP conditions. If unsafe
conditions are noted, the report must recommend the type and location of public
protection. Photographs must be labeled and the report must include key plans,
key elevations and locator drawings documenting these conditions. Guards and
railings, including, but not limited to, balconies, must be inspected to ensure
that their components (balusters, intermediate railings and panel fillers) are
positively secured against movement (e.g. by welds, bolts or screws). If any
guard or railing, balcony enclosure, or greenhouse structure is found not to be
positively secured, the condition is classified as unsafe and must be made safe
pursuant to the requirements of paragraph (5) of subdivision (c) of this
section.
            (H)   An analysis of the causes of the conditions reported as
unsafe or SWARMP;
            (I)   A detailed status report of maintenance work performed up to
the date of submission of the report and the maintenance plan implemented for
building facades;
            (J)   A comparison of currently observed conditions with conditions
observed during the previous report filing cycle examinations, including the
status of the repairs or maintenance performed with respect to the prior
conditions. The following must be included and discussed:
               1.   Work permit numbers relating to facade repairs, including
permits for sheds;
               2.   Job numbers, status and sign-off dates for any facade
related jobs, where applicable; and
               3.   Violation numbers of any open Environmental Control Board
("ECB") facade violations and the status of the repairs of the conditions cited
in the ECB violations;
            (K)   Recommendations for repairs or maintenance of SWARMP and
unsafe conditions, including:
               1.   If a building is categorized as SWARMP:
                  A.   The recommended time frame for such repairs or
maintenance to be performed, which must indicate the date by which the work
must be performed (MM/DD/YYYY) to prevent the conditions from becoming unsafe
and not the date on which work is planned or scheduled;
                  B.   Time frames of less than one (1) year, "ASAP," or
"immediately," shall not be accepted.
               2.   If a building is categorized as unsafe :
                  A.   The QEWI must provide a recommended time frame for
repairs to be performed to bring the building to SWARMP or safe status, and
must indicate the date by which the work will be completed (MM/DD/YYYY);
                  B.   Time frames of more than five (5) years will not be
accepted.
            (L)   A list and description of the work permits required to
accomplish the necessary work. If no work permits will be required, the reason
must be indicated;
            (M)   All photographs must be color, clearly legible, dated, and
high resolution. Digital photos must be a minimum of 800 x 600 pixels.
Photographs must be arranged into PDF uploads of no larger than 11" x 17". The
following photos must be submitted:
               1.   Elevation photos. Color photographs of the primary house
number and at least one view of the entire street front elevation for all
reports regardless of the building's filing condition.
               2.   Detailed condition photos. Color photographs of specific
conditions must be clearly labeled and indicate the status designation.
Detailed conditions must be located on the mapping of the building's facade
required by item G of this subparagraph (iii).
                  A.   All SWARMP and unsafe must be catalogued.
                  B.   If building status is safe, submit a minimum of three
typical conditions.
               3.   Cavity wall probe photos. Color photographs of the
following items:
                  A.   each probe opening showing the location and size of the
probes;
                  B.   the interior of the probe showing the cross section of
the wall;
                  C.   the measurement of the spacing of the wall ties;
                  D.   a close-up of the wall tie type and installation;
                  E.   any other condition that indicates the soundness of the
wall ties and cavity wall;
                  F.   condition of relieving angle, including flashing and
connection; and
                  G.   condition of substrate.
            (N)   The classification of the building for the current report
filing cycle, as determined by the following guidelines:
               1.   If there are no unsafe conditions and no conditions that
are SWARMP, then the building shall be classified as safe;
               2.   If there is at least one unsafe condition, then the
building shall be classified as unsafe.
               3.   If there is at least one condition that is SWARMP and there
are no unsafe conditions, then the building shall be classified as SWARMP. A
report may not be filed describing the same condition at the same location as
SWARMP for two consecutive report filing cycles. The QEWI must certify that all
of the conditions identified in the previous report as requiring repair have
been corrected or the building shall be classified as unsafe;
            (O)   The seal and signature of the QEWI under whose direct
supervision the critical examination was performed.
      (4)   Report filing requirements.
         (i)   The requirements of this rule apply to all buildings with
exterior walls or parts thereof that are greater than six stories, regardless
of the information in the Certificate of Occupancy. For buildings that contain
six (6) stories above grade plane plus a cellar, where more than half the
height of that cellar as measured at any individual exterior wall is above the
adjacent ground level, including but not limited to areaways, yards, and ramps,
all walls of such building shall be subject to facade inspection. Conditions
requiring facade inspections may also include other structures that add to the
height of the building as per section BC 504. The Commissioner shall determine
which additional buildings and/or parts thereof are required to file in
accordance with this rule.
         (ii)   Buildings required to file a report must do so at least once
during each five-year report filing cycle established by the Department.
         (iii)   An acceptable report must be filed within the applicable two-
year filing window to avoid a late filing penalty.
         (iv)   The report must be submitted to the Department along with a
filing fee as specified in the rules of the Department.
         (v)   Staggered inspection cycle: For every five-year report filing
cycle, an acceptable report is due in accordance with the following filing
windows:
            (A)   For buildings located within a block ending with the number
four (4), five (5), six (6), or nine (9), an acceptable report must be filed
within the two-year filing window starting February 21 of years ending in zero
(0) and five (5) and ending February 21 of years ending in two (2) and seven
(7).
            (B)   For buildings located within a block ending with the number
zero (0), seven (7), or eight (8), an acceptable report must be filed within
the two-year filing window starting February 21 of years ending in one (1) and
six (6) and ending February 21 of years ending in three (3) and eight (8).
            (C)   For buildings located within a block ending with the number
one (1), two (2), or three (3), an acceptable report must be filed within the
two-year filing window starting February 21 of years ending in two (2) and
seven (7) and ending February 21 of years ending in four (4) and nine (9).
         Exception: Starting in Cycle 10, owners whose buildings have their
most recent status as "No Report Filed" may file a report prior to the start of
their designated filing window provided that all applicable civil penalties set
out in subdivision (d) of this section are paid at the time of filing.
         (vi)   Initial reports for new buildings greater than six stories in
height must be filed as follows:
            (A)   The report must be filed five years from the date the first
Temporary Certificate of Occupancy or Certificate of Occupancy was issued, if
that five year date falls within the applicable filing window according to the
last digit of the building's block number as provided in subparagraph (v) or
(vi) of this paragraph; or
            (B)   If five years from the date the first Temporary Certificate
of Occupancy or Certificate of Occupancy was issued falls outside the
applicable filing window according to the last digit of the building's block
number as provided in subparagraph (v) of this paragraph, then the initial
report must be filed within the applicable two-year filing window for the next
five-year cycle.
         (vii)   If contiguous zoning lots under single ownership or management
contain multiple buildings that are considered one complex where at least two
buildings of more than six stories in height fall into different filing windows
as described above in items (A), (B) and (C) of subparagraph (v) of this
paragraph, the owner or management must choose one of the following report
filing options:
            (A)   An acceptable report for each building to which this rule
applies may be filed separately according to the filing window corresponding to
the last digit of that individual building's block number; or
            (B)   The owner or his or her representative may choose one of the
applicable filing windows and file a report for all of the buildings within
that filing window, regardless of that building's individual filing window. The
owner or his or her representative must inform the Department 180 days prior to
the end of the assigned filing window if this option is chosen. If an owner or
representative chooses this option, the owner or representative must continue
to file under this same filing window for the duration of the owner's ownership
of the property.
         (viii)   A report must be filed within sixty (60) days of the date on
which the QEWI completed the critical examination (final inspection date), as
defined in subparagraph (viii) of paragraph (2) of subdivision (c) of this
section. Failure to file a report within sixty (60) days of the completed
critical examination requires a new critical examination.
         (ix)   A report may not be filed more than one (1) year after
completion of the close-up inspection.
         (x)   If the report is not acceptable and is rejected by the
Department, a revised report must be filed within forty-five (45) days of the
date of the Department's rejection, after which the original file date will no
longer be valid. If the report is not acceptable after two (2) rejections, a
new initial filing fee as specified in the rules of the Department is required.
Failure to submit a revised report addressing the Department's objections
within one (1) year of the initial filing requires a new critical examination,
including a new close-up inspection.
         (xi)   A subsequent report indicating revised conditions may be filed
within a five-year report filing cycle to change a building's filing status for
that cycle.
      (5)   Unsafe conditions.
         (i)   Upon filing a report of an unsafe condition with the Department,
the owner of the building, his or her agent, or the person in charge of the
building must immediately commence such repairs or reinforcements and any other
appropriate measures such as erecting sidewalk sheds, fences, and safety
netting as may be required to secure the safety of the public and to make the
building's walls and appurtenances conform to the provisions of the
Administrative Code.
         (ii)   All unsafe conditions must be corrected within ninety (90) days
from the submission of the critical examination report.
         (iii)   If, due to the scope of the repairs, the unsafe conditions
cannot be corrected within the required 90 days, the QEWI must recommend a
timeframe for repairs as noted in item (K) of subparagraph (iii) of paragraph
(3) of subdivision (c). The owner of the building is responsible for ensuring
that the conditions described in the critical examination report as unsafe are
corrected and all actions recommended by the QEWI are completed within this
timeframe. The owner must notify the Department of any deviation from the
timeframe to make corrections as specified in QEWI's report. The subsequent
report must include supporting documents from the QEWI justifying the request
for a new time frame.
         (iv)   Within two weeks after repairs to correct the unsafe condition
have been completed, the QEWI must inspect the premises. The QEWI must promptly
file with the Department a detailed amended report stating the revised report
status of the building, along with a filing fee as specified in the rules of
the Department and the owner must obtain permit sign-offs as appropriate. If
the report is not acceptable and is rejected by the Department, a revised
report must be filed within forty-five (45) days of the date of the
Department's rejection. If the report is not acceptable after two (2)
rejections, a new amended filing fee as specified in the rules of the
Department is required. Sheds or other protective measures must remain in place
until an amended report is accepted; however, the QEWI may request permission
for the removal of the shed upon submission of a signed and sealed statement
certifying that an inspection was conducted, the conditions were corrected and
the shed is no longer required. Permission to remove the shed may be granted in
the Commissioner's sole discretion.
         (v)   The Commissioner may grant an extension of up to ninety (90)
days to complete the repairs required to remove an unsafe condition upon
receipt and review of an initial extension application submitted by the QEWI,
together with:
            (A)   Notice that the premises have been secured for public safety
by means of a shed, fence, or other appropriate measures as may be required;
            (B)   A copy of the contract indicating scope of work to remedy
unsafe conditions;
            (C)   The QEWI's estimate of length of time required for repairs;
            (D)   A statement of all applicable permit requirements;
            (E)   A notarized affidavit by the owner of the building that work
will be completed within the time of the QEWI's stated estimate; and
            (F)   A fee as specified in the rules of the Department.
            Note: Financial considerations shall not be accepted as a reason
for granting an extension.
         (vi)   A further extension will be considered only upon receipt and
review of a further extension application, together with notice of:
            (A)   An unforeseen delay (e.g., weather, labor strike) affecting
the substantially completed work; or
            (B)   Unforeseen circumstances (e.g., fire, building collapse); or
            (C)   The nature of the hazard that requires more than ninety (90)
days to remedy (e.g., new wall to be built); or
            (D)   Progress photos showing current facade repairs.
            Note: Financial considerations shall not be accepted as a reason
for granting an extension.
      (6)   Conditions that are safe with a repair and maintenance program
(SWARMP). 
         (i)   The owner of the building is responsible for ensuring that the
conditions described in the critical examination report as SWARMP are corrected
and all actions recommended by the QEWI are completed within the time frame
recommended by the QEWI, and are not left to deteriorate into unsafe
conditions. It is the owner's responsibility to notify the Department of any
deviation from the timeframe to make corrections as specified in the QEWI's
report. The subsequent report must include supporting documents from the QEWI
justifying the request for a new time frame.
         (ii)   A report may not be filed describing the same condition and
pertaining to the same location on the building as SWARMP for two consecutive
report filing cycles.
         (iii)   The QEWI must certify the correction of each condition
reported as requiring repair in the previous report filing cycle, report
conditions that were reported as SWARMP in the previous report filing cycle as
unsafe if not corrected at the time of the current inspection, or report
corrections that were made in the previous cycle as unsafe if they need further
or repeated repair at the time of the current cycle.
   (d)   Civil penalties. 
      (1)   Failure to file. An owner who fails to file the required acceptable
inspection report shall be liable for a civil penalty of five thousand dollars
($5,000) per year immediately after the end of the applicable filing window.
      (2)   Late filing. In addition to the penalty for failure to file, an
owner who submits a late filing shall be liable for a civil penalty of one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per month, commencing on the day following the
filing deadline of the assigned filing window period and ending on the filing
date of an acceptable initial report.
      (3)   In addition to the penalties provided in this section, an owner who
fails to correct an unsafe condition shall be liable for a civil penalty as
detailed in the table below, until the unsafe condition is corrected. Unless
the Commissioner grants an extension of time to complete repairs pursuant to
this section, the penalties will be incurred as detailed in the table below.
This penalty shall be imposed until receipt of an acceptable amended report by
the Department indicating the unsafe conditions were corrected, the sidewalk
shed has been removed and the associated permits are signed off with the
Department, including shed permits, or an extension of time is granted by the
Commissioner.
 
       Base penalty Plus
Year 1 $1,000/month NA
Year 2 $1,000/month $10 / linear foot (l.f.) of shed / month
Year 3 $1,000/month $20 / l.f. shed / month
Year 4 $1,000/month $30 / l.f. shed / month
Year 5 $1,000/month $40 / l.f. shed / month
 
      (4)   Failure to correct SWARMP conditions. An owner who fails to correct
a SWARMP condition reported as requiring repair in the previous report filing
cycle and subsequently files the condition as unsafe shall be liable for a
civil penalty of two thousand dollars ($2,000).
      (5)   Challenge of civil penalty. 
         (i)   An owner may challenge the imposition of any civil penalty
authorized to be imposed pursuant to this subdivision by providing proof of
compliance. Examples of such proof must include, but are not limited to, a copy
of an acceptable initial report, a copy of the acceptable amended report,
copies of approved extension of time requests while work was/is in progress or
written proof from a QEWI that the unsafe conditions observed at the building
were corrected and the violation was dismissed.
         (ii)   Challenges must be made in writing within thirty (30) days from
the date of service of the violation by the Department and sent to the office/
unit of the Department that issued the violation. The decision to dismiss or
uphold the penalty shall be at the sole discretion of the Department.
   (e)   Full or partial penalty waivers; eligibility and evidentiary
requirements. Owners may request a full or partial waiver of penalties assessed
for violation of Article 302 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code, the New
York City Building Code and/or rules enforced by the Department. Requests must
be made in writing and must meet eligibility and evidentiary requirements as
follows:
      (1)   Owner status.
         (i)   A new owner requesting a waiver due to change in ownership must
submit proof of a recorded deed evidencing transfer of ownership to the current
owner after penalties were incurred, as well as any other documentation
requested by the Department, and only in one of the following circumstances:
            (A)   A new owner of a property previously owned by a government
entity requesting a waiver due to change in ownership must submit official
documentation from the government entity affirming that the premises was
entirely owned by the government entity during the period for which a waiver is
requested.
            (B)   A new owner who receives a notice of violation for failure to
comply with the requirements of this section or Article 302 of Title 28 of the
Administrative Code that was issued to the property after the transfer of
ownership must submit a recorded deed showing the date that the property was
acquired or transferred. The waiver period shall be from the date of the deed
to the date of the violation issuance.
         (ii)   An owner may be granted a waiver of penalties upon submission
of a copy of an order signed by a bankruptcy court judge.
         (iii)   If a state of emergency is declared that prevents an owner
from conducting an inspection, filing a report or correcting unsafe conditions,
an owner may be granted a waiver of penalties.
      (2)   Building status. An owner requesting a waiver because the building
was demolished must submit city or departmental records evidencing the
demolition of the building prior to the filing deadline.
   (f)   Posting of conditions certificate. A conditions certificate issued by
the Commissioner must be posted in a frame with a transparent cover in the
lobby or vestibule of the subject building within thirty (30) days of issuance.
The certificate must indicate the most recent condition of the building's
exterior walls and appurtenances.
(Amended City Record 1/21/2020, eff. 2/20/2020; amended City Record 10/13/2021,
eff. 11/12/2021)
§ 103-05 High-Pressure Boiler Inspection and Filing Requirements, Penalties and
Waivers.
   (a)   Scope. This rule implements Article 303 of Title 28 of the New York
City Administrative Code ("Administrative Code") by specifying the high-
pressure boiler annual inspection requirements, the processes through which the
department shall regulate the filings of high-pressure boiler annual inspection
reports and shall issue penalties and waivers for failure to file and/or late
filing, and the penalties for failure to file and/or untimely filing of a
written notice of removal or disconnection of a high-pressure boiler.
   (b)   References. See §§ 28-201.2.2, 28-202.1 and Article 303 of Title 28 of
the Administrative Code.
   (c)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms
shall have the following meanings:
      (1)   Department. The department of buildings.
      (2)   External high-pressure boiler annual inspection. An inspection made
while the boiler is in operation.
      (3)   Filing deadline. For the high-pressure boiler annual inspection
report or any part thereof, fourteen (14) days from the date of the inspection.
      (4)   First test. An inspection of a newly installed or replaced boiler
required for the department to approve its use and operation.
      (5)   Inspection cycle. January 1st through December 31st of the calendar
year for which an owner submits the report.
      (6)   Inspection type. An external high-pressure boiler annual inspection
or an internal high-pressure boiler annual inspection.
      (7)   Internal high-pressure boiler annual inspection. An inspection made
when the boiler is shut down and handholes and manholes or other inspection
openings are opened or removed for inspection of the interior.
      (8)   Late filing. An inspection report or any part of that report filed
after the fourteen (14) day filing deadline but in no event later than January
14th of the calendar year immediately following the inspection cycle.
      (9)   Owner. Any person, agent, firm, partnership, corporation or other
legal entity having a legal or equitable interest in, or control of, the
premises and/or boiler.
      (10)   Qualified boiler inspector. A qualified boiler inspector as
defined in 1 RCNY §
101-07.
      (11)   Removal or disconnection. Removal or disconnection shall have the
same meaning as the term "removal or discontinuance" as used in § 28-303.9 of
the Administrative Code.
      (12)   Small business. A business that employs fewer than one hundred
persons and provides goods or services onsite.
      (13)   Waiver. Removal of the obligation to pay a penalty associated with
a violation. A waiver does not result in dismissal of the violation.
   (d)   Fees. Fees for filings related to high-pressure boilers shall be as
set forth in 1 RCNY §
101-03.
   (e)   Inspections, tests and filing requirements. The owner shall be
responsible for hiring a qualified boiler inspector to conduct inspections and
tests and file high pressure boiler annual inspection reports pursuant to
Article 303 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code. Such inspections shall
comply with Article 303, applicable provisions of the New York State Labor Law
and the following:
      (1)   Internal and external high-pressure boiler annual inspection
reports along with the appropriate filing fee(s) shall be submitted for each
inspection cycle on such forms and in such manner as required by the
department. The reports shall include:
         (i)   An inspection report for each boiler identifying the qualified
boiler inspector;
         (ii)   An affirmation of correction along with the filing fee stating
that identified defects have been corrected, if applicable; and
         (iii)   The filing fee as provided in subdivision (d).
      (2)   The reports shall be filed by the filing deadline. Any required
part of the report not filed by the filing deadline shall be deemed late and
shall subject the owner to penalties as set forth in subdivision (i) of this
section.
      (3)   The filing is deemed accepted upon payment of the fee(s) and any
civil penalties due. If the payment is not honored, the filing will be deemed
invalid and the owner may receive a violation for failure to file and be
subject to all applicable penalties as set forth in subdivision (i).
      (4)   High-pressure boiler annual inspections shall be conducted twelve
(12) months from the preceding annual inspection of the same inspection type.
      (5)   Internal and external high-pressure boiler annual inspections shall
be performed approximately six (6) months from each other during the inspection
cycle.
      (6)   The inspector must verify that a valid department-issued boiler
number is affixed to the boiler, and this number must be used in all
correspondence between the inspector and the department.
      (7)   If an inspection reveals any dangerous condition in a boiler that
threatens life or safety and that requires an immediate shutdown of the boiler,
the inspector must immediately notify the department's boiler division of the
condition via email at the address provided on the department's website, http:/
/www.nyc.gov/buildings. Notification of an unregistered boiler must be made by
filing a report electronically in a form and manner required by the department.
   (f)   Acceptance of filings. Inspection reports filed after the fourteen
(14) day filing deadline but on or before January 14th of the calendar year
immediately following the inspection cycle will be considered late filings and
will be subject to the appropriate civil penalties as set forth in subdivision
(i) of this section. Reports filed after such late filing period will be
considered expired. In such cases, owners will be subject to the appropriate
civil penalties for failure to file a report as set forth in subdivision (i) of
this section, and the department will require a new inspection to be performed
for the current inspection cycle and a new report filed in accordance with this
section.
   (g)   Ten (10) day notifications. The inspector shall notify the department
at least ten (10) days prior to the performance of an internal high-pressure
boiler annual inspection.
   (h)   Tenant notification. An owner of a building containing a high-pressure
boiler(s) shall notify any affected tenants of the planned shutdown of the
boiler for inspection at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to such shutdown by
(i) distributing a notice regarding such plan to each occupied dwelling unit
and (ii) posting a notice regarding such plan in a conspicuous manner in the
building lobby.
   (i)   Civil penalties, high-pressure boiler annual inspection report and
affirmation of correction. 
      (1)   Late filing. An owner who submits a late filing, but who provides
proof that the inspection took place within the inspection cycle for which the
report was due, shall be liable for a civil penalty of not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) per month, per boiler, per inspection type, commencing on the
day following the filing deadline and ending on the date of submission of a
complete report, including a late filing of the affirmation of correction. The
total penalty shall not exceed six hundred dollars ($600.00) per boiler, per
inspection type. For the purposes of this paragraph, "proof" shall mean a copy
of the filed inspection report from the qualified boiler inspector who
conducted the inspection indicating that the inspection was completed within
the inspection cycle for which the report was due.
      (2)   Failure to file. An owner who fails to file the high-pressure
boiler annual inspection report or any part thereof for each boiler and
inspection type, pursuant to Article 303 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code
and this section, shall be liable for a civil penalty of not less than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per boiler, per inspection type. A high- pressure
boiler annual inspection report not filed within the late filing period shall
be deemed expired and shall not be accepted by the department.
      (3)   Failure to file the affirmation of correction. An owner who fails
to correct the defects within the applicable time after the inspection and to
file the affirmation of correction by the date the affirmation was due, stating
that all defects found during the inspection have been corrected pursuant to §
28-303.5 of the Administrative Code shall be liable for a civil penalty of one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per boiler.
      (4)   Challenge of civil penalty. An owner may challenge the imposition
of any civil penalty authorized pursuant to this subdivision by providing
written proof of a timely and complete inspection and filing to the department.
Challenges shall be made in writing within thirty (30) days from the date of
service of the violation by the department and sent to the office/unit of the
department that issued the violation. The decision to dismiss or uphold the
penalty shall be at the sole discretion of the department. Examples of such
proof shall include, but are not limited to, the following:
         (i)   A copy of the high-pressure boiler annual inspection report for
the inspection performed during the applicable inspection cycle and a copy of
the front and back of the canceled check or money order to the department for
the high-pressure boiler annual inspection report fee or proof of electronic
payment of such fee; or
         (ii)   The department-assigned transmittal number for the electronic
disk filing report or DOB NOW tracking number.
      (5)   Extension of the filing deadline. An owner may request an extension
of the filing deadline in order to correct high-pressure boiler defects and to
file an affirmation of correction stating that identified defects have been
corrected in accordance with Article 303 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code
by submitting proof that the request is based on extraordinary circumstances
and/or that the delay in correction is beyond the owner's control, not
including financial or administrative hardship. The request shall be made prior
to the expiration of the filing deadline, submitted with the filing fee and
made on such forms and in such manner as required by the commissioner.
      (6)   Waiver of penalties. An owner may request a waiver of penalties
assessed for violation of Article 303 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code
and/or related rules enforced by the department. Requests shall be made in
writing and submitted with the filing fee.
         (i)   Owner status. 
            (A)   New owner. A new owner may be granted a waiver of penalties
contingent upon the department's acceptance of the owner's proof that transfer
of ownership to the new owner occurred after penalties were incurred. Proof
includes a recorded deed evidencing transfer of ownership to the current owner
after penalties were incurred, as well as any other documentation requested by
the Department.
            (B)   Government ownership. An owner may be granted a waiver of
penalties upon submission of official documentation from a government entity
affirming that the premises was owned in its entirety by the entity during the
period for which a waiver is requested.
            (C)   Bankruptcy. An owner may be granted a waiver of penalties
upon submission of a copy of a bankruptcy petition and a decision from the
bankruptcy court.
            (D)   Small business. An owner of a small business may be granted a
one-time waiver of the civil penalty for a violation issued for failure to file
an annual boiler inspection report where all of the following conditions are
met:
               1.   The applicant demonstrates, in a form and manner determined
by the Department, that the individual or entity requesting the waiver is the
owner of the small business;
               2.   The failure to file for which the violation was issued
occurred on or after November 20, 2022;
               3.   The applicant demonstrates, in a form and manner determined
by the Department, that the owner of the small business owns or has
responsibility for the boiler and such boiler exclusively serves the space
occupied by the small business;
               4.   A small business waiver was not previously granted to the
small business owner for any boiler at the subject building that is owned by
the small business or for which the small business is responsible;
               5.   A small business waiver was not previously granted to any
small business for the boiler for which the waiver is being requested; and
               6.   The sole or primary purpose of the business is not filing
representative or expeditor services, real estate, real estate development,
property management, construction or other related services as determined by
the Department.
         (ii)   Device status. An owner may be granted a waiver of penalties
contingent upon the department's acceptance of proof of the following:
            (A)   Removed or disconnected. That the high-pressure boiler was
removed from the building or disconnected prior to the inspection cycle for
which the report was due. In the event that proof of removal or disconnection
has not yet been entered into the department's database at the time of the
request for a waiver, the owner shall submit to the department a copy of the
submission for removal or disconnection of the boiler.
            (B)   New or replaced. That the first test was performed during the
inspection cycle for which the report was due.
            (C)   Work in progress. That there is work in progress for the
replacement or installation of a new boiler or burner or a major renovation
requiring that the boiler or burner be deactivated during the work. For the
purposes of this clause, "proof" shall mean the filing of a boiler application
including a projected date of completion of work. Upon completion of such work,
a new inspection and test report shall be filed in accordance with this
section.
         (iii)   Building status. An owner may be granted a waiver of penalties
contingent upon the department's confirmation of the following:
            (A)   Demolished. That the full demolition of the building occurred
prior to the inspection cycle for which the report was due and that such
demolition was signed off by the department or that a new building permit has
been issued for the property.
            (B)   Sealed or vacated. That the building was ordered to be sealed
or vacated by a government agency (e.g. Department of Buildings, Department of
Housing Preservation and Development, Fire Department of New York or Office of
Emergency Management) or by court order prior to the expiration of the
inspection cycle for which the report was due.
   (j)   Civil penalties, written notice of removal or disconnection of a high-
pressure boiler. Failure to file a written notice of removal or disconnection
with the filing fee in accordance with § 28-303.9 of the Administrative Code,
or filing such notice more than thirty (30) days after the date of the removal
or disconnection of a high-pressure boiler shall be deemed a lesser violation
and shall subject the owner to penalties as set forth in this subdivision.
      (1)   Untimely filing. An owner who files such notice more than thirty
(30) days after the date of removal or disconnection, but by thirty (30) days
after the end of the inspection cycle, may submit an untimely filing and shall
be liable for a civil penalty of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) per
month, per boiler, commencing on the thirty-first (31) day after the date of
removal or disconnection and ending on the date of submission of the notice.
The total penalty shall not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per boiler.
      (2)   Failure to file. An owner who fails to file such notice by thirty
(30) days after the end of the inspection cycle, shall be liable for a civil
penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000) per boiler.
      (3)   Challenge of civil penalty. An owner may challenge the imposition
of any civil penalty authorized to be imposed pursuant to this subdivision by
providing proof of a timely filing to the department. Challenges shall be made
in writing within thirty (30) days from the date of service of the violation by
the department and sent to the office/unit of the department that issued the
violation. The decision to dismiss or uphold the penalty shall be at the sole
discretion of the department. An example of such proof shall include, but is
not limited to, the following: a stamped and dated copy of the submission for
removal or disconnection of the boiler filed with the department, which may be
supported by a copy of the front and back of a canceled check(s) to the
department for the filing fee or proof of electronic payment of such fee.
(Amended City Record 11/30/2015, eff. 12/30/2015; amended City Record 12/16/
2021, eff. 1/15/2022; amended City Record 10/21/2022, eff. 11/20/2022; amended
City Record 9/26/2024, eff. 10/26/2024)
§ 103-06 Benchmarking Energy and Water Use.
   (a)   Purpose. This section establishes the procedures for benchmarking
certain buildings.
   (b)   References. Article 309 of Chapter 3 of Title 28 of the New York City
Administrative Code ("Article 309").
   (c)   Requirement. Owners of covered buildings, as defined in Article 309,
must benchmark their whole buildings using the online Portfolio Manager tool of
the United States Environmental Protection Agency ("EPA").
   (d)   Definitions. Terms defined in Article 309 of Title 28 have the same
meanings in this section. For the purposes of this section, the following
additional terms are defined as follows:
      ACTUAL ENERGY DATA: Actual energy data is data taken directly from 1)
utility meters or billing information, or data for the entire building provided
by the utility; and/or 2) sub-meters for entire buildings that share heating,
cooling and/or service (domestic) hot water systems with other buildings; and/
or 3) extrapolated energy data calculated in accordance with clause (A) of
subparagraph (ii) of paragraph (2) of subdivision (g) of this section.
      AGGREGATED ENERGY DATA: Aggregated energy data means total energy data
for a specified period as provided by the utility company for the building for
a given energy type.
      ENERGY TYPE: Energy type is electricity, natural gas, steam, and/or fuel
oil. Energy type for a building may take the form of chilled or hot water when
heating, cooling and/or service (domestic) hot water systems are shared by
multiple buildings.
      GROSS FLOOR AREA: Gross floor area is the total number of square feet
measured between the exterior surfaces of the enclosing fixed walls. It
includes vent shafts, elevator shafts, flues, pipe shafts, vertical ducts,
stairwells, light wells, basement space, mechanical/electrical rooms, and
interior parking. It excludes unroofed courtyards and unroofed light wells. For
atria, gross floor area only includes the area of atrium floors. For tenant
spaces, interior demising walls should be measured to the centerline of the
wall.
      GROSS SQUARE FEET (GROSS SQUARE FOOTAGE): Gross square feet or gross
square footage means a building's total square footage as provided in
Department of Finance records.
      NEW YORK CITY BENCHMARKING COMPLIANCE REPORT ("COMPLIANCE REPORT"): The
New York City Benchmarking Compliance Report is an electronic report generated
from the benchmarking data in Portfolio Manager.
      PORTFOLIO MANAGER: Portfolio Manager is the benchmarking tool as defined
in § 28-309.2 of the Administrative Code.
   (e)   Requirement to calculate gross floor area. The owner must calculate
the gross floor area and enter it into Portfolio Manager. All space areas
entered into Portfolio Manager for a building must add up to the building's
gross floor area. Gross floor areas as calculated by the owner under this
provision are not related to the Department of Finance records that determine
whether a building or buildings qualify as covered buildings under § 28-309 of
the Administrative Code.
   (f)   Period of benchmarking. The owner must enter energy consumption data
into Portfolio Manager for the period covering January 1 through December 31 of
the year being benchmarked for each energy type.
   (g)   Energy data entry into Portfolio Manager. In accordance with § 28-
309.4 of the Administrative Code, the owner of a covered building must enter
energy data for each applicable energy type into Portfolio Manager.
      Exception for energy data entry. Covered buildings that exceed 25,000
gross square feet but do not exceed 50,000 gross square feet, shall not be
required to directly enter energy data into Portfolio Manager and, per § 28-
309.4 of the Administrative Code, may rely on their utility company to directly
upload their building's energy data into Portfolio Manager, based on the
owner's request, and in accordance with § 28-309.5 of the Administrative Code.
The failure of the owner to either request upload of the energy data by their
utility, per § 28-309.5 of the Administrative Code, or upload the data
themselves, may result in a violation per § 28-309.4.3 of the Administrative
Code.
         (i)   Common area energy: For each energy type, the owner must enter
actual energy data for common areas, and all common or central systems,
including but not limited to heating, cooling, lighting and/or service
(domestic) water heating as applicable.
         (ii)   Tenant energy data – residential: Where energy use data is
unavailable for some or all dwelling units in a building, the owner must use
one of the following methods to determine energy use for dwelling units. For
the purpose of this subparagraph, "apartment" means "dwelling unit."
 
                                     When an owner obtains representative billing or meter data as described below for a
                                     given energy type from tenants, the owner may extrapolate such information for the
                                     building and enter it into Portfolio Manager as actual energy data. Extrapolation
                                     may be used only as follows:
                                        A.   The owner must obtain all meter data for such energy type for a minimum of
                                     ten percent (10%) of apartments in each apartment line in the building. Apartments
                                     are considered in the same line if they have similar shape and square footage and
                                     are stacked one above another.
                                        B.   For a given energy type, extrapolation must be performed each month as
                                     follows:
Actual-energy data – Extrapolation       Total energy use = [(E 1 /N 1 ) * T 1 ] + [(E 2 /N 2 ) * T 2 ] + [(E 3 /N 3 )
method                               * T 3 ]...[(E n /N n ) * T n ],
                                           where:
                                           E is the total energy collected by the owner for the month for 10% or more of
                                     the apartments in the specified apartment line for a given energy type;
                                           N is the number of apartments in the specified apartment line for which the
                                     energy was collected;
                                           T is the total number of apartments in the specified apartment line;
                                           1 refers to apartment line 1;
                                           2 refers to apartment line 2;
                                           n refers to the total number of apartment lines in the building, or the final
                                     apartment line under consideration in the building.
 
         (iii)   Tenant energy data – non-residential: The owner must use one
of the following methods to determine non-residential tenant energy use, as
applicable, and must enter the energy data into Portfolio Manager.
 
                   The building owner must request information from his or her
                   non-residential tenants on the non-residential tenant
                   information collection form. This form is available at the
                   Mayor's Office of Sustainability website: www.nyc.gov/ggbp.
                   If the building owner has access to aggregated energy data,
                   the owner does not need to collect energy meter information
                   on this form; all other information requested on the form
Actual energy data must be completed, including, but not limited to, the
                   service address and other information affecting energy use
                   in the building. If the building owner does not have access
                   to aggregated energy data, the owner must use the non-
                   residential tenant information collection form to collect
                   separately metered energy information from the non-
                   residential tenants. In either case, the building owner must
                   enter this information in Portfolio Manager as actual energy
                   data.
 
         (iv)   Non-residential vacant space: The owner must account for non-
residential vacant space in Portfolio Manager as directed by the EPA.
   (h)   Water data entry into Portfolio Manager. Buildings provided with
automatic meter-reading equipment by the Department of Environmental Protection
("DEP") for the entire calendar year will be benchmarked by DEP in accordance
with § 28-309.5.2 of the Administrative Code. Building owners are not required
to enter such data.
   (i)   Special conditions. The following special conditions must be addressed
in the following ways:
      (1)   Space use attributes for multi-family housing spaces. Building
owners must enter all optional space use attributes for multi-family housing
spaces as such attributes are defined in Portfolio Manager. Optional space use
attributes for multi-family housing spaces include, but are not limited to:
number of occupied and unoccupied apartment units in building, number of
bedrooms in building, and maximum number of floors.
      (2)   Multiple buildings on a tax lot. Multiple buildings on a tax lot
must be benchmarked as a covered building, as defined in § 28-309.2 of the
Administrative Code, and that covered building must provide an aggregate number
to represent the energy and water usage of all buildings comprising that
covered building.
      (3)   Buildings on multiple tax lots that share systems. Buildings on
multiple lots that share systems must be benchmarked as follows:
         (i)   Buildings that are separately metered or are sub-metered for a
given energy type must be benchmarked individually for that energy type.
         (ii)   For buildings that are neither separately metered nor sub-
metered for a given energy type, the owner(s) must provide an aggregate number
to represent the energy and water usage of all buildings that share systems.
      (4)   New buildings. Owners of new buildings must begin benchmarking such
buildings in the first full calendar year following the year the building
receives its first Temporary Certificate of Occupancy. Energy use for unused
spaces or incomplete tenant areas must be estimated in accordance with
subparagraph (iv) of paragraph (2) of subdivision (g) of this section.
      (5)   Buildings with change in ownership. When a building changes
ownership, the new owner must benchmark such building for the first full
calendar year following transfer of ownership and must submit the Compliance
Report by May 1 of the following year and by the same date every year
thereafter.
      (6)   Demolished buildings. Buildings for which a full demolition permit
has been issued are not required to benchmark for the prior calendar year,
provided that demolition work has commenced, some energy-related systems have
been compromised and legal occupancy is no longer possible prior to May 1 of
the year the benchmarking report is due.
      (7)   Exemptions. The owner shall not be required to include the
following in a building's benchmarking:
         (i)   Broadcast antennas, when metered or sub-metered separately from
the building;
         (ii)   Cellular towers, when metered or sub-metered separately from
the building;
         (iii)   Illuminated signs required by Section 81-732 of the New York
City Zoning Resolution, when metered or sub-metered separately from the
building;
         (iv)   Natural gas, when separately metered for kitchens in
apartments.
   (j)   Submission to the City of New York. By May 1 following each
benchmarked year, the owner must submit the Compliance Report to the Department
of Finance. Submission must be made through a web-link provided by the Mayor's
Office of Long-Term Planning and Sustainability at their website: www.nyc.gov/
ggbp.
   (k)   Required records. Owners of covered buildings as defined in § 28-309.2
of the Administrative Code must maintain the following records as proof of
benchmarking of energy and water use as required in Article 309:
      (1)   The confirmation email from EPA for proof of submission date;
      (2)   Proof of request to non-residential tenants for information related
to the non-residential tenant's separately metered energy use;
      (3)   Back-up information regarding energy use inputs, including, but not
limited to, utility bills, fuel oil bills, calculations, and correspondence;
and
      (4)   A copy of water and energy input data entered into Portfolio
Manager. Such records must be retained for three (3) years from the required
submission date of May 1 and must be made available to the Department and/or
the Mayor's Office of Long Term Planning and Sustainability upon request.
   (l)   Violations and penalties. 
      (1)   Failure to benchmark energy and water use for the prior calendar
year by May 1 may result in a penalty of $500. Continued failure to benchmark
may result in additional violations on a quarterly basis and an additional
penalty of $500 per violation.
      (2)   Failure to annually post the energy efficiency grade and the energy
efficiency score for the building within thirty (30) days after October 1, the
date upon which the energy efficiency grade will be available, in accordance
with the requirement of § 28-309.12.3 of the Administrative Code, may result in
a penalty of $1,250.
   (m)   Challenge to violations.
      (1)   An owner may challenge a violation for failure to benchmark issued
pursuant to paragraph (1) of subdivision (l) of this section. Proof in support
of any such challenge may include, but need not be limited to:
         (i)   Proof from the Department of Finance that the building in
question is not a covered building as defined in § 28-309.2 of the
Administrative Code;
         (ii)   Proof of timely benchmarking as indicated by a confirmation
email from the EPA that includes a date-stamped copy of data released to the
city;
         (iii)   Proof of change in ownership during the year in question;
         (iv)   Proof of each factor listed in the "Exception" provision of §
28-309.4.3 of the Administrative Code, including proof of a request for
benchmarking assistance, as defined in § 28-309.11 of the Administrative Code.
Such proof shall consist of a completed copy of the submitted Department form
for requesting benchmarking assistance; or
         (v)   Proof of owner's request to their utility company, no later than
fourteen days prior to the benchmarking due date, to directly upload
information necessary to benchmark energy use for such building, as described
in § 28-309.4 of the Administrative Code.
      (2)   An owner may challenge a violation for failure to post issued
pursuant to paragraph (2) of subdivision (l) of this section. Proof in support
of such challenge may include, but not be limited to, photographic proof of
timely posting of the energy efficiency grade and the energy efficiency score,
as directed in § 28-309.12.3 of the Administrative Code.
      (3)   Such challenge must be made in writing to the Department within
thirty (30) days from the postmark date of the violation served by the
Department.
(Amended City Record 5/7/2018, eff. 6/6/2018; amended City Record 1/21/2020,
eff. 2/20/2020)
§ 103-07 Energy Audits and Retro-commissioning of Base Building Systems.
   (a)   Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      ACCEPTABLE ENERGY EFFICIENCY REPORT (EER). An acceptable EER is a
technical energy audit and retro-commissioning report filed by an energy
auditor and retro-commissioning agent that meets the requirements of the
Administrative Code and this section, as determined by the department.
      COMMON AREA. Common area is an area that is not considered a tenant area.
Common area typically includes but is not limited to non-occupiable spaces such
as egress corridors, egress stairwells, elevators, lobbies, public restrooms,
janitorial closets, shared amenities, storage, mechanical or electrical rooms
containing equipment that is owned, maintained and operated by the building
owner.
      MAJOR EQUIPMENT, SUB-EQUIPMENT AND COMPONENTS. Major equipment is a base
building system listed in Table 1:
Table 1 – Major Equipment 
 Group R occupancies All occupancies other than Group R
                          Group R occupancies        All occupancies other than
                                                     Group R
Boilers                   All boilers with rated input capacity greater than or
                          equal to 300,000 Btu/h
Chillers                  All chillers               All chillers
Cooling towers and dry    All cooling towers and dry All cooling towers and dry
coolers                   coolers                    coolers
Air handling units (AHU),
fan coil units (FCU),
heat recovery units       Capacity greater than or   Capacity greater than or
(HRU), heating and        equal to 2,500 CFMs        equal to 5,000 CFMs
ventilation units (H&V),
packaged and split air
conditioning units
HVAC motors, fans and     Greater than or equal to   Greater than or equal to 5
pumps                     2.5HP                      HP
Heat exchangers           Serving 10,000 square feet or more
Domestic hot water
heaters                   All water heaters with rated input capacity greater
(Storage and              than 155,000 Btu/h
instantaneous)
Domestic water pumps      Greater than or equal to 10 HP
 
      Sub-equipment and components of the associated major equipment are listed
in Table 2:
Table 2 – Sub-Equipment and Components of the Major Equipment 
Sub-equipment and components
Sub-equipment and components
Existing cabinets/casing          Valves                     Grilles
Terminal and induction units      Actuators                  Filters
Access doors                      Dampers                    Air outlets
Control panels                    Chilled or hot water coils Fans and motors
Controls and sensors              Steam or DX coils          VFDs
Interlocks                        Belts                      Ductwork
Electrical/mechanical switches    VAV and fan powered boxes  Piping
Operating and modulating pressure Steam traps
controls
 
      NON-COMMON OWNER AREA. A non-common owner area is an occupiable space, as
defined in Section 202 of the Building Code, that: (1) is not a non-common
tenant area; and (2) is maintained by and accessible to the building owner.
      NON-COMMON TENANT AREA. A non-common tenant area is an area of a dwelling
unit or other space leased or intended to be leased.
   (b)   References. 
      Energy audit: Article 308 of Chapter 3 of Title 28 of the Administrative
Code (Article 308); American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-
conditioning Engineers Inc. ("ASHRAE") Standard for Commercial Building Energy
Audits – ASHRAE 211-2018 (American National Standards Institute (ANSI)
approved/Air Conditioning Contractors of America (ACCA) co-sponsored).
      Retro-commissioning: Article 308; National Environmental Balancing Bureau
(NEBB) Standard S120-2016 – Technical Retro-Commissioning of Existing Buildings
(ANSI approved).
   (c)   Energy auditor and retro-commissioning agent qualifications. 
      (1)   The energy auditor performing or supervising the audit may not be
on the staff of the building being audited. The energy auditor must be a
registered design professional, and the energy auditor or an individual under
the direct supervision of the energy auditor must be one of the following:
         (i)   a Certified Energy Manager or Certified Energy Auditor,
certified by the Association of Energy Engineers (AEE);
         (ii)   a High-Performance Building Design Professional certified by
ASHRAE;
         (iii)   a Building Energy Assessment Professional certified by ASHRAE;
         (iv)   for audits of multifamily residential buildings only, a
Multifamily Building Analyst, certified by the Building Performance Institute;
or
         (v)   an Energy Management Professional certified by the Energy
Management Association.
      (2)   The retro-commissioning agent performing or supervising the retro-
commissioning may not be on the staff of the building being retro-commissioned.
The retro-commissioning agent must be a registered design professional, a
certified Refrigerating System Operating Engineer, or a licensed High Pressure
Boiler Operating Engineer. In addition, the retro-commissioning agent or an
individual under the direct supervision of the retro-commissioning agent must
be one of the following:
         (i)   a Certified Commissioning Professional certified by the Building
Commissioning Association;
         (ii)   a Certified Building Commissioning Professional certified by
the AEE;
         (iii)   an Existing Building Commissioning Professional as certified
by the AEE;
         (iv)   a Commissioning Process Management Professional certified by
ASHRAE;
         (v)   an Accredited Commissioning Process Authority Professional
approved by the University of Wisconsin;
         (vi)   a Certified Commissioning Authority certified by the Associated
Air Balance Council Commissioning Group;
         (vii)   a Building Commissioning Professional certified by ASHRAE;
         (viii)   a Commissioning Process Professional certified by NEBB;
         (ix)   a Technical Retro-Commissioning Professional certified by NEBB;
or
         (x)   a Building Systems Commissioning Professional certified by NEBB.
      (3)   Registrations. An energy auditor or a retro-commissioning agent who
is currently registered with the department and is not a registered design
professional may continue to submit the EER as an approved agent until the
expiration of the registration or December 31, 2021, whichever occurs first. No
registration shall be renewed once expired. The provisions of §§ 28-401.6, 28-
401.8 and 28-401.19 of the Administrative Code apply to such registered energy
auditors and retro-commissioning agents.
   (d)   Energy audit procedures. An energy audit must be performed on the base
building systems of a covered building prior to filing an EER. The scope of
such energy audit must be at a minimum equivalent to the procedures,
requirements, and reporting described for a Level 2 energy audit in accordance
with ANSI/ASHRAE/ACCA Standard 211-2018 – Standard for Commercial Building
Energy Audits, published by ASHRAE.
   (e)   Contents of the energy audit report. An audit report must be prepared
for the owner that is at a minimum equivalent to the report prescribed by ANSI/
ASHRAE/ACCA Standard 211-2018, or any subsequent, edition – Standard for
Commercial Building Energy Audits, published by ASHRAE, and must include the
information required by § 28-308.2 of the Administrative Code. The table of
contents of the audit report must include all of the sections provided in the
Level 2 energy audit report outline in Informative Annex D of standard 211-
2018, or subsequent edition. Such report must be retained by the owner in
accordance with subdivision (j) of this section. The energy auditor must
certify that the audit satisfies the requirements of § 28-308.2 of the
Administrative Code and this section. The energy audit report and certification
form must be uploaded through the web-based Energy Audit template tool.
   (f)   Retro-commissioning procedures. The base building system components
subject to retro-commissioning as per § 28-308.3 of the Administrative Code
must be assessed in accordance with NEBB Standard S120-2016,or any subsequent,
edition – Technical Retro-Commissioning of Existing Buildings and § 28-308.3 of
the Administrative Code, as applicable to the requirements of this section,
including the technical retro-commissioning process, the testing protocols,
master list of findings and repairs and deficiencies corrected, deliverables
and documentation. Deficiencies found in the assessment must be corrected,
prior to submission of the EER, as required by this subdivision.
   The Current Facility Requirements (CFR) will be the following for all space
uses served by a base building system, unless the agent provides acceptable
rationale demonstrating otherwise. Acceptable rationale must be documented and
can include needs of a space use as defined by owner interviews, tenant leasing
requirements, and tenant controlled set points and setbacks. The CFR must be
justified by references including ASHRAE fundamentals, heating, ventilation,
and air conditioning (HVAC) systems and equipment, and applications handbooks,
ANSI references, Illuminating Engineering Society (IES) lighting handbook, New
York City Housing Maintenance Code (HMC), New York City Building Code (BC),
approved design drawings and/or manufacturer's guidelines. Acceptable rationale
does not include needs as a result of deficient equipment or historic
operations.
   •   Winter indoor space temperatures should be between 68 and 76 degrees F
and summer indoor space temperatures should be between 72 and 80 degrees F
during occupied periods of time for non-common tenant areas (without individual
HVAC controls) and non-common owner areas of the facility.
   •   Operating steam system pressure (cut-out setting) should not be greater
than four psig for low pressure steam heated buildings. For any building
requiring higher operating steam pressure, substantial documentation, including
design/as-built documents indicating design operating steam pressure shall be
submitted to, and accepted by the department.
   •   Domestic hot water is stored and delivered per the HMC for Group R
occupancies and per the New York City Plumbing Code requirements for all other
occupancies.
   •   Minimum outside air requirements are met in areas with mechanical supply
ventilation per the design and/or New York City Mechanical Code effective at
the time of installation of the major equipment.
   •   Lighting levels (foot candles) are in accordance with the BC and HMC for
all egress lighting, including common laundry rooms, and in accordance with the
IES lighting handbook for all other space use types in the common areas and
non-common owner areas.
   •   Daily, weekly, and seasonal operating hours, including occupied and non-
occupied hours, of the building and base building systems.
   •   A description of the current space use of base building areas.
   •   A description of any changes in space use that impact the energy
consumption of the heating, cooling, ventilation, or domestic hot water
systems.
   Retro-commissioning agent must consider the following to develop, document,
and define the CFR:
   •   Age of facility.
   •   Interviews with owners, facility manager, and occupants.
   •   Available design or as-built drawings.
   •   Lease terms with regard to energy usage.
      (1)   HVAC and service water equipment. 
         (i)   Pre-testing verification. An inspection, documented through pre-
test verification forms, of all major equipment and its sub-equipment and
components located in all common areas, at least 20% of such equipment located
in non-common owner areas and at least 10% of such equipment located in
accessible non-common tenant areas must be conducted to check for cleanliness
and proper operation. Such inspection ensures that the system is able to be
tested. Where major equipment, sub-equipment, and components are found to
require cleaning, repair or correction for proper operation, correct all
deficiencies prior conducting functional performance testing and document the
post-correction condition in the retro-commissioning report under issues log.
         (ii)   Functional performance testing. Performance verification
through functional performance testing for all major equipment and its sub-
equipment and components located in the common areas, at least 20% of such
equipment located in the non-common owner areas and at least 10% of such
equipment located in the non-common tenant areas must be performed during
normal operating conditions. Functional performance testing includes but is not
limited to all controls, actuation, automation and sequencing functions
impacting energy consumption of the major equipment such as control sequence of
operation, economizer function, staging and load distribution, automatic reset
function and integrated system level testing. The functional performance test
process and results must be reported on forms acceptable to the department.
Proper function must be determined from field observation and may include
interviews with facility staff, trend analysis, or dedicated data loggers.
Where equipment requires correction, the condition must be corrected and the
post-correction condition must be documented in the retro-commissioning report.
Completed functional performance test forms must be included in the retro-
commissioning report.
         (iii)   Temperature and pressure setpoints and setbacks. All major
equipment and its sub-equipment and components located in all common areas, at
least 20% of such equipment located in the non-common owner areas and at least
10% of such equipment located in the non-common tenant areas must be tested to
verify that such system set points are appropriate to the CFR and setbacks
operate during unoccupied periods as stated by the CFR. Where set points and
setbacks require correction, the condition must be corrected and the post-
correction condition must be documented in the retro-commissioning report.
         (iv)   Sensors. Sensors include the following in Table 3 below, if
present and serving major equipment(s).
Table 3 – Critical and Monitoring Sensors Associated with Major Equipment 
 
AHU/FCU/H&V/packaged
and                  Boiler            Cooling tower     Chiller
split AC units
OA temp              OA temp           OA temp (Dry bulb OA temp
                                       and wet bulb)
Supply and return    Return temp       Inlet water temp  Evap. water temp in
air temp
Mixed air temp       Supply temp       Outlet water temp Evap. water temp out
Supply and return    System pressures  Flow rate         Cond water temp in
air flow rate        (Steam Boilers)
Static pressure      Indoor zone temp  Humidity          Cond water temp out
Zone temp            -                 Supply and return Zone temp and system
                                       temp              pressures
 
            (A)   All critical sensors that are part of a control sequence and
have direct control of major equipment located in the common area must be
tested for proper calibration. Acceptable and allowable tolerances for proper
calibration must be supported by a reference acceptable to industry or
manufacturer's guidelines. Where sensors require correction, the condition must
be corrected and the post-correction condition must be documented in the retro-
commissioning report.
            (B)   For monitoring sensors that are not part of a control
sequence, a sample set constituting at least 10% of all monitoring sensors
within the common area must be tested for proper calibration. Acceptable and
allowable tolerances for proper calibration must be supported by a reference
acceptable to industry or manufacturer's guidelines. If more than 80% of the
sample set is found to be satisfactory, then no further sampling is required
for the purposes of the retro-commissioning report. If less than 80% of the
sample set is found to be satisfactory, then all monitoring sensors must be
tested for proper calibration. Where sensors require correction, the condition
must be corrected and the post-correction condition must be documented in the
retro-commissioning report.
         (v)   Simultaneous heating and cooling. All major equipment air
handling units located in the common areas and at least 20% of the major
equipment air handling units in the non-common owner areas must be tested to
verify that simultaneous heating and cooling is not occurring, unless intended.
Where unintended simultaneous cooling and heating is occurring, the condition
must be corrected and post-correction condition must be documented in the
retro-commissioning report.
         (vi)   Boilers tuned for optimal efficiency. A combustion efficiency
test must be conducted for each low pressure major equipment boiler (includes
H-stamped domestic hot water heater). Each boiler must be tuned and cleaned to
perform as per manufacturer's guidelines for combustion efficiency (%), oxygen
(%), carbon dioxide (%), ambient air temperature (degrees F), stack temperature
(flue gas temp minus combustion air temp, degrees F), carbon monoxide (ppm),
and smoke number, as applicable. If manufacturer's guidelines are not
available, cleaning/tuning and combustion efficiency testing must be conducted
to meet the requirements in Table 4 below at high and low fire rates for all
fuel types. Results (Actual print-outs directly obtained from the calibrated
combustion analyzer) of the combustion efficiency test must be included in the
retro-commissioning report.
Table 4 – Acceptable Range for Combustion Efficiency Test Results 
 
             High fire                            Low fire
             Residential/Commercial Commercial    Commercial    Commercial
             gas fired              oil fired     gas fired     oil fired
             Atmospheric
             and fan     Power      Power burners Power burners Power burners
             assist      burners
             boilers
Oxygen (%)   6% to 9%    3% to 6%   3% to 6%      5% to 8%      6% to 10%
Stack
temperature  325 to 450  350 to 550 350 to 500    300 to 380    300 to 400
(deg. F)
Carbon
monoxide     <50 ppm     <100 ppm   <100 ppm      <100 ppm      <100 ppm
(ppm) air
free
                                    Zero or per                 Zero or per
Smoke number -           -          manufacturer  -             manufacturer
                                    requirements                requirements
 
         (vii)   Manual override remediation. In all cases where the major
equipment has the capability of being operated automatically, the retro-
commissioning agent must confirm that major equipment is not being manually
operated. Where a manual override condition exists, it must be noted as a
deficiency to be corrected, and the post-correction condition must be
documented in the retro-commissioning report.
         (viii)   Leaks. Major equipment and its sub-equipment and components
in all common areas, at least 20% of such equipment located in non-common owner
areas and at least 10% of such equipment located in the accessible non-common
tenant areas must be visually checked for water, steam, oil, or air leaks.
These checks do not include duct tightness testing. All leaks identified must
be repaired, and the post-correction condition must be documented in the retro-
commissioning report.
      (2)   HVAC and service water distribution. 
         (i)   Pipe insulation. All exposed (uninsulated and/or with
deteriorated insulation) pipes three inches or greater in diameter, pipe
fittings, and associated valves located in the common areas, at least 20% of
such equipment located in non-common owner areas and at least 10% of such
equipment located in the non-common tenant areas, containing steam or fluid
outside the operating temperature range of 60 degrees F and 105 degrees F must
be thermally insulated in accordance with the New York City Energy Conservation
Code in effect at the time of installation, and the post-correction condition
must be documented in the retro-commissioning report.
         Exception: Existing insulation with asbestos containing materials is
not required to be removed or replaced for the purposes of the retro-
commissioning report. The condition must be noted on the retro-commissioning
report and correction of such condition is not required.
         (ii)   High pressure steam traps. All high pressure steam traps
operating above 15 PSI of pressure must be tested using ultrasonic leak
detection to verify proper operations or replaced. All steam traps found to be
functioning improperly must be replaced, repaired or rebuilt, and the condition
must be noted on the retro-commissioning report.
         (iii)   One-pipe steam distribution. 
            (A)   All one-pipe steam distribution systems serving the major
equipment must have steam traveling from the steam header to the end of each
main loop vent(s) at an average of less than five minutes. Retro-commissioning
agents must conduct the steam and travel time test using temperature data
loggers (temperature sensors/thermocouples) that provide an output of
timestamps and surface temperature readings. At the beginning of each test, the
temperature at the end of each main loop vent must be 140 degrees F or less. At
the end of the test, the end of each main loop vent must be 195 degrees F or
more.
            (B)   The average time at which the steam header reaches at least
195 degrees F and the end of each main loop vent(s) reaching at least 195
degrees F must be less than five minutes. A temperature (degrees F) vs. time
(minutes) curve to be plotted in 10-second intervals and all data points logged
used to plot this curve must be provided in a tabular format in the report.
Data points must include time from the start of the boiler/burner until the
steam reaches the header and then to the end of all main loops.
            (C)   The retro-commissioning agent must provide a schematic plan
of the steam piping distribution in the common area. This schematic plan should
indicate the location of the boiler(s), supply lines, header and each main line
vent.
         (iv)   Two-pipe steam distribution.
            (A)   The main supply and main return piping surface temperatures
for all two-pipe steam distribution systems serving major equipment must have a
differential of 30 degrees F or more. The retro-commissioning agent must
conduct the differential temperature test utilizing temperature data loggers
(temperature sensors or thermocouples) that provide an output listing
timestamps and surface temperature readings. The retro-commissioning agent must
provide Pressure vs. Time and Temperature vs. Time plots, as recorded in
intervals of 5 minutes. The temperature readings must be recorded using data
loggers insulated and located on the main supply/header and main return piping,
and on the inlet of a condensate/vacuum tank. This test cannot be performed on
systems with master traps or double steam traps; it also cannot be performed on
systems with heat exchangers and heat recovery that are used to cool the
condensate down. The data loggers must provide readings during two consecutive
cycles of the boiler where each cycle (boiler run time) takes at least 30
minutes at the design operating pressure.
            (B)   In the event that a two-pipe steam distribution system has a
differential between the main supply and main return piping surface
temperatures of not more than 30 degrees F for any duration of the test
specified above, all steam traps in the common areas, at least 20% of steam
traps in the non-common owner areas and at least 10% of steam traps in the non-
common tenant area, served by the major equipment, must be tested to verify for
proper function. If less than 80% of the sample set, for each sample size, is
found to be functioning properly, then all respective areas served by the two
pipe steam distribution system must be tested to verify the steam traps are
functioning properly. All steam traps found to be functioning improperly must
be replaced, repaired, rebuilt, or removed and the post-correction condition
must be documented in the retro-commissioning report. Steam trap testing must
utilize ultrasonic leak detection technology and/or a thermal imaging camera,
as necessary to determine the trap condition. A comprehensive steam trap
schedule including number, type, location, size (orifice) of traps and test
results must be included in the retro-commissioning report. If the work
required is so extensive that it would require more time than available to meet
the compliance deadline, the condition may be corrected within two years of
submitting the retro-commissioning report to the department and must be noted
in the report. Documented verification must be submitted on a form provided by
the department showing that the differential between the main supply and main
return piping surface temperatures is more than 30 degrees F for any duration
of the test specified in the differential temperature test described in
subparagraph (A), above, after replacement, repair or rebuilding of deficient
steam traps.
            Exception: If all steam traps in the common areas, at least 20% of
steam traps in the non-common owner areas and at least 10% of the steam traps
in the non-common tenant areas have been replaced and/or tested and verified as
functioning properly, within five years from the date the EER was submitted,
and supporting documentation acceptable to the department is provided, then
testing of steam traps is not required. Acceptable supporting documentation
includes, but is not limited to, copies of paid invoices for the completed
work, steam trap test reports and post-correction findings.
         (v)   Air-side distribution. All dampers, fans, actuators and controls
associated with air-side distribution serving major equipment must be
functionally tested for proper operation as per CFR. Where deficiency is
identified, the condition must be corrected and the post-correction condition
must be documented in the retro-commissioning report. Completed functional
performance test forms must be included in the retro-commissioning report.
         (vi)   Water-side distribution. All valves on coils, automatic
isolation valves at pumps, actuators and controls associated with water-side
distribution serving major equipment must be functionally tested for proper
operation as per CFR. Where deficiency is identified, the condition must be
corrected and the post-correction condition must be documented in the retro-
commissioning report. Completed functional performance test forms must be
included in the retro-commissioning report.
         (vii)   Domestic hot water system temperature settings. All storage
and delivery hot water temperatures of major equipment hot water heaters must
be checked to verify that the water temperature settings are appropriate for
the CFR. Where the temperature settings are found to require correction, the
condition must be corrected and the post-correction condition must be
documented in the retro-commissioning report.
         (viii)   Mechanical ventilation rates. A sample set constituting at
least 10% of all mechanical outdoor air intakes, but in no event fewer than
three outdoor air intakes, must be measured to verify that the flow rates are
appropriate for the CFR. If more than 80% of the sample set is found to be
appropriate, then no further sampling is required for the purposes of the
retro-commissioning report. If less than 80% of the sample set is found to be
appropriate, then all mechanical outdoor air intakes serving base building
systems must be measured. Where flow rates require correction, the condition
must be corrected and the post-correction condition must be documented in the
retro-commissioning report.
      (3)   Lighting system. 
         (i)   Light levels. Lighting levels (foot candles) in all common areas
and lighting levels in at least 20% of the non-common owner areas must comply
with the CFR. The sample set should include at least 10% of each area of
different use. Where the light levels are found to require correction, the
condition must be corrected and the post-correction condition must be
documented in the retro-commissioning report.
         (ii)   Sensors and controls. All interior lighting systems in the
common areas, at least 20% of the interior lighting systems in the non-common
owner areas, and all exterior lighting systems must be checked to verify that
the lighting sensors and associated automatic lighting controls are functioning
properly. Where lighting sensors and controls are found to require correction,
the condition must be corrected and the post-correction condition must be
documented in the retro-commissioning report.
      (4)   Envelope. 
         (i)   Sealants and weather-stripping. An inspection must be conducted
in all common areas, at least 20% of non-common owner areas and at least 10% of
non-common tenant areas to confirm that accessible sealants and weather
stripping are installed around doors, windows, conduits, piping, joints, and
other areas of potential major air infiltration and in good condition. Where
any sealant or weather stripping is found to require correction, the condition
must be corrected and the post-correction condition must be documented in the
retro-commissioning report.
         Exception: Sealants and weather stripping with asbestos containing
materials shall not be required to be removed or replaced for the purposes of
retro-commissioning. The condition must be noted on the retro-commissioning
report and correction of such condition is not required.
         (ii)   Windows and doors. An inspection must be conducted in common
areas to confirm that all windows and doors are in good condition. Where any
door or window is not in good condition, the condition must be corrected and
the post-correction condition must be documented in the retro-commissioning
report.
      (5)   Training and documentation. On-site documentation in accordance
with § 28-308.3(3) of the Administrative Code must be verified and noted on the
retro-commissioning report. Training of critical operations and maintenance
staff on the energy conservation techniques and preventative maintenance
schedules, based on manufacturer's guidelines or recognized industry standards,
for all major equipment and subsystems must be documented in the retro-
commissioning report.
   (g)   Contents of the retro-commissioning report. In accordance with § 28-
308.3.1 of the Administrative Code, the retro-commissioning agent must prepare
and certify a retro-commissioning report that satisfies the requirements of §
28-308.3 of the Administrative Code and this rule. In establishing the table of
contents, the retro-commissioning agent shall refer to "K. Informative Appendix
– Retro-Commissioning Report" of the NEBB Standard S120-2016, or any
subsequent, edition – Technical Retro-Commissioning of Existing Buildings as
guidelines until a final retro-commissioning report outline is prescribed by
the department. Such report must include the model number, serial number, last
calibration date and manufacturer recommended calibration frequency for each
reference instrument used for functional performance testing. The report must
also include photos of deficiencies, adjustments and repairs. All photos must
include a timestamp visible on the front of the photo within the report.
Calibration certificates and additional photos must be provided, if requested
by the department. The retro-commissioning report must be uploaded through the
web-based Energy Audit template tool when submitting to the department. Such
report must be retained by the owner in accordance with subdivision (j) of this
section.
   (h)   Contents of the EER. An EER in accordance with § 28-308.5 of the
Administrative Code must be submitted to the department in accordance with §
28-308.4 of the Administrative Code on forms prescribed by the department. The
EER must include the Deep Energy Retrofit Plan Analysis tool when submitted to
the department. The results of this tool must also be presented to the owner
prior submitting to the department.
   (i)   Multiple buildings. 
      (1)   Multiple buildings on a lot. Two or more buildings on a lot that
constitute a covered building in accordance with § 28-308.1 of the
Administrative Code are subject to an energy audit and retro-commissioning of
base building systems as follows:
         (i)   Multiple buildings on a covered lot that are equipped with base
building systems that are wholly separate from each other are subject to the
requirements for an EER for each individual building.
         (ii)   Multiple buildings on a covered lot that share base building
systems are subject to the requirements for an EER for each grouping of
buildings that share base building systems.
      (2)   Multiple buildings on multiple tax lots that share systems. Two or
more buildings on more than one tax lot that share base building systems are
subject to the requirements for an EER for each grouping of buildings that
share base building systems.
      (3)   Buildings on different blocks with shared base building systems.
Two or more buildings on separate blocks that constitute a covered building in
accordance with § 28-308.1 of the Administrative Code are subject to the
requirements for an EER for each grouping of buildings that share base building
systems. The due date for the EER will be in the calendar year with a final
digit that is the same as the last digit of the block number that is highest or
with respect to a city building as defined in § 28-308.1 of the Administrative
Code in accordance with the schedule of the Department of Citywide
Administrative Services. The owner must notify the department by December 31 of
the year in which the earliest covered building is due to comply, out of all
covered buildings on different blocks with shared base building system(s),
through the form prescribed by the department.
      (4)   Multiple covered buildings under cooperative corporations. A
cooperative corporation that owns multiple covered buildings located on
different tax block numbers that is required to file an EER for more than one
covered building in different calendar years, may consolidate all such EERs
into one report, disaggregated by covered building, due no later than the year
in which the last EER would be due, which shall be accepted by the department
in satisfaction of the requirements of this section for each covered building
included in such consolidated report. The owner must notify the department by
December 31 of the year in which the earliest covered building is due to comply
through the form prescribed by the department.
   (j)   Record retention. Owners of covered buildings as defined in § 28-308.1
of the Administrative Code must maintain the Energy Audit Report required by §
28-308.2.1 of the Administrative Code and the Retro-commissioning Report
required by § 28-308.3.1 of the Administrative Code as proof of energy audits
and retro-commissioning as required in Article 308. Such records must be
retained for eleven years from the required submission date and must be made
available to the department upon request.
   (k)   Fees. Owners of covered buildings must pay a filing fee as provided in
1 RCNY §
101-03.
   (l)   Extension of time to file report.
      (1)   An owner may apply for an extension of time to file an EER if,
despite good faith efforts, the owner is unable to complete the required energy
audit and retro-commissioning prior to the due date of the report, for reasons
other than financial hardship of the building. The application must be on a
form provided by the department and must be filed by December 31 of the year in
which the report is due.
      (2)   An owner may apply for annual extensions of time to file an EER
based on the financial hardship of the building. The application must be on a
form provided by the department and must be filed by October 1 of the year in
which the report is due and by December 31 of every subsequent year for which
an extension is requested.
   (m)   EER under comprehensive review. A violation will be issued if an EER
submission that is chosen for comprehensive review fails to resolve all issued
objections after three revisions, or two years from the date of issuance of the
first Notice of Objections, whichever occurs first. Such EER submission shall
be subject to a penalty for failure to submit an acceptable EER in accordance
with subdivision (n) of this section.
   (n)   Violation and penalty. Failure to submit an acceptable EER is a Major
(Class 2) violation which may result in a penalty of $3,000 in the first year
and $5,000 for each additional year until the EER is submitted to the
department.
   (o)   Challenge to violations. 
      (1)   An owner may challenge a violation issued, pursuant to this section
by providing:
         (i)   proof from the Department of Finance that the building in
question is not a "covered building" as defined in § 28-308.1 of the
Administrative Code; or
         (ii)   proof of early compliance with the filing requirements,
pursuant to § 28-308.7 of the Administrative Code; or
         (iii)   proof that the building is a new building (NB) with a first
temporary certificate of occupancy less than ten years old at the time the
building was due to comply; or
         (iv)   proof that the application to defer filing an EER was approved;
or
         (v)   proof that the owner was granted an extension of time to file
the report.
      (2)   Such challenge must be made in writing on a form provided by the
department within thirty days from the postmark date of the violation served by
the department.
(Amended City Record 10/13/2017, eff. 11/12/2017; amended City Record 7/5/2019,
eff. 8/4/2019 & 1/1/2020; amended City Record 12/20/2024, eff. 1/19/2025)
§ 103-08 Machine-room-less Elevators. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 7/24/2015, eff. 8/23/2015)
§ 103-09 Periodic Inspection of Retaining Walls.
   (a)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms
have the following meanings.
      Acceptable report. A report of critical examination filed by a qualified
retaining wall inspector that meets the requirements of the Administrative Code
and this section as determined by the Department.
      Amended report. A report of critical examination filed by a qualified
retaining wall inspector who certifies that the unsafe conditions reported in
the initial report have been repaired and that the retaining wall is no longer
unsafe.
      Appurtenance. A retaining wall element including, but not limited to,
fences (including attachments and other hardware), lighting fixtures, railings,
protective screening, signs, mesh wires for gabion walls, coping, and any non-
structural components attached to or protruding from the retaining wall.
      Close-up inspection. A physical examination performed on a retaining wall
for the purpose of performing a critical examination.
      Critical examination. An examination conducted to review a retaining wall
and all parts of it, including any appurtenances of such wall, to determine
whether the retaining wall and its parts are either safe, unsafe, safe with
minor repairs, or safe with a repair and maintenance program and whether, in
the judgment of a qualified retaining wall inspector, it requires remedial
work.
      Filed report. A report is deemed filed with the Department when it has
been received by the Department. The filed report must be completed in
accordance with the provisions of paragraph (3) of subdivision (c) of this
section.
      Filing window. The one-year period during which an acceptable report for
a particular retaining wall may be filed with the Department without penalty.
      Height (of retaining wall). The vertical distance, measured from the
ground surface above the toe of the wall to the top of the wall, wall stem, or
wall step for tiered walls, including any parapets or fencing intended for
retaining material.
      Maintenance. The cyclical or recurring upkeep of a retaining wall
including, but not limited to, vegetation removal, weep holes, cleaning wall
drains, removing debris from culverts, replacing dislodged chinking, painting
soldier piles, cleaning and sealing concrete and wood facings.
      Physical examination. Hands-on engineering inspection of retaining walls
and appurtenance elements applying various methods of examination other than
visual, including, but not limited to, sounding, probing, coring, testing, soil
test pits and soil borings.
      Public right-of-way. A public highway, railroad, street, avenue, alley,
public driveway, sidewalk, roadway or any other public place or public way.
      Qualified retaining wall inspector ("QRWI"). A qualified retaining wall
inspector as defined in 1 RCNY §
101-07.
      Repair. The non-routine fixing and restoring of wall elements to their
intended function, including, but not limited to, resetting dislodged
stonework, repointing stone masonry, re-grading or reseeding adjacent slopes,
patching concrete spalls, mending damaged wire baskets, and repair or
replacement of the drainage system.
      Report of critical examination ("Report"). A written report filed with
the Department by a QRWI clearly documenting the conditions noted during the
assessment; areas that need repair, maintenance, or engineering monitoring; a
final wall rating; and any other requirements mandated by this rule.
      Report filing cycle. The five-year time interval established by the
Commissioner for the filing of each successive report for each successive
critical examination of every retaining wall subject to the requirements of
Article 305 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code.
      Retaining wall. A wall that resists lateral or other forces caused by
soil, rock, water, or other materials, thereby preventing lateral displacement
and the movement of the mass by sliding to a lower elevation. Such term does
not include basement walls and vault walls that are part of a building, and
underground structures, including but not limited to utility vault structures,
tunnels, transit stations and swimming pools.
      Safe condition. A wall rating in which a retaining wall is determined to
be fully functional with no action required at the time of assessment and that
will not become unsafe during the next five years.
      Safe with minor repairs ("SMR") condition. A wall rating in which a
retaining wall is found at the time of assessment to be safe but requires minor
repair or routine maintenance within the next five years to correct minor
deficiencies in order to minimize or delay further wall deterioration and
remain safe.
      Safe with repairs and/or engineering monitoring ("SREM") condition. A
wall rating in which a retaining wall is found at the time of assessment to be
safe but requires repair within the next five years, but not less than one
year, to correct deficiencies in order to prevent its deterioration into an
unsafe condition during that five-year period. In addition to repair, the QRWI
deems it necessary to regularly monitor and/or investigate further the
retaining wall to determine the nature or cause of observed distress and what
action may be required.
      Staggered filing cycle. The separate time intervals for filing reports as
determined by borough beginning January 1, 2024, and continuing thereafter for
each subsequent report filing cycle.
      Subsequent report. A technical examination report that is filed by a QRWI
after an acceptable report in order to change the status of a retaining wall
for that reporting cycle to reflect changed conditions or the recommended time
frame for repairs of SREM or unsafe conditions, except where an amended report
should be filed.
      Unsafe condition. A condition of a retaining wall and any appurtenances
found at the time of assessment that is a hazard to persons or property and
requires repair within one (1) year of completion of critical examinations. In
addition, any condition that was reported as SREM in a previous report and that
is not corrected at the time of the current inspection must be reported as an
unsafe condition.
   (b)   Responsibilities of qualified retaining wall inspectors. 
      (1)   A QRWI must conduct critical examinations and file reports in
accordance with this section and § 28-305.4 of the Administrative Code.
      (2)   A QRWI must maintain records of inspections and tests for at least
six years and must make such records available to the Department upon request.
      (3)   A QRWI must maintain insurance coverage as set forth in paragraph
(7) of subdivision (b) of 1 RCNY §
101-07. Copies of such insurance policies must be made available to the
Department upon request.
      (4)   A QRWI must be in good standing with the New York State Education
Department and the New York City Department of Buildings.
   (c)   Critical examinations. 
      (1)   Periodic inspection requirements. In order to maintain a retaining
wall and its appurtenances in a safe condition, and in accordance with Article
305 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code, a critical examination of any
retaining wall: (i) with a height of ten feet or more at any point along the
length of such wall; and (ii) which fronts on a public right-of-way must be
conducted by a QRWI once every five (5) years. The results of the critical
examination must be submitted to the Department in accordance with the
requirements of paragraph (3) of this subdivision.
      (2)   Inspection procedures. 
         (i)   Before performing a critical examination of a retaining wall,
the QRWI retained by or on behalf of the owner must review the most recent
report and any available previous reports, structural design or repair
drawings, and violations. The Department will maintain a file of such reports
submitted in conformance with Article 305 of Title 28 of the Administrative
Code and provide copies upon payment of fees set forth in the rules of the
Department.
         (ii)   Examination of retaining walls and appurtenances thereof
pursuant to § 28-305.4 of the Administrative Code and this section must be
performed by or under the direct supervision of a QRWI retained by the owner of
such wall or a representative of the owner.
         (iii)   The QRWI must design and implement an assessment program that
is specific to the retaining wall to be assessed, including, but not limited
to, observations of the entire length of the wall from both sides of the
retaining wall, data collection and method of evaluation. The assessment
program and methods to be employed must be based on the consideration of the
wall construction type, wall function, year built, location, age of materials,
specific exposure to environmental conditions, and the presence of specific
details and appurtenances. Consideration must be given to the retaining wall's
history of maintenance and repairs as described in previous reports and
submittals to the Department, if applicable. Professional Engineers,
individuals with a bachelor's degree in engineering and three years of relevant
experience, or individuals with five (5) years of relevant experience working
under the QRWI's direct supervision may be delegated to perform selected
inspection tasks other than the final inspection.
         (iv)   The methods used to assess the retaining wall in question must
permit a complete critical examination of the wall, including, but not limited
to, retaining wall type, cross sections, architectural finishes, selective
probes, cores, measurements of wall dimensions, including, but not limited to,
thickness and soil investigation.
         (v)   The QRWI must utilize a professional standard of care to assess
the condition of the retaining wall and surrounding elements that impact the
wall's stability. The known history of the retaining wall, the nature of the
materials used, and the conditions observed will dictate the extent of the
critical examination, provided, however, that the following elements must be
assessed whenever they are present:
            (A)   Primary wall elements, including, but not limited to, piles
and shafts, lagging, anchor heads, wire or geo-synthetic facing elements, bins
or cribs, concrete, shotcrete, mortar, manufactured block or brick, placed
stone and wall foundation material.
            (B)   Secondary wall elements and appurtenances, including, but not
limited to, wall drains and water management systems, architectural facing,
traffic barrier, fencing, roads, sidewalks, shoulders, upslope, downslope,
lateral slope, vegetation, culverts, curbs, berms and ditches.
         (vi)   The QRWI must amend the scope of the critical examination and
add additional testing and investigation as required to characterize wall
distresses, overall performance or if distresses warrant additional
investigations.
         (vii)   During the course of the critical examination, photographs
must be taken and maps made to document the exact location of all distresses
that require repair, maintenance, or monitoring, or that cause a retaining wall
to have a final wall rating of unsafe, SREM, or SMR.
         (viii)   Upon the discovery of an unsafe condition, the QRWI must
immediately notify the Department and the owner of the property on which the
retaining wall is located. The QRWI must identify the location of any unsafe
condition, advise the owner on the appropriate protective measures to be taken,
and include the recommended type and location of public protection in the
notification to the Department.
         (ix)   A critical examination is complete when the QRWI has conducted
a final physical inspection to determine that the retaining wall conditions
described in the report are consistent with actual conditions. Such final
inspection must, at a minimum, include an in-person visual examination of the
entire length from both sides of the retaining wall. A drive-by inspection is
not acceptable.
      (3)   Report requirements. 
         (i)   The QRWI must file a written report of critical examination with
the Department and submit a copy to the owner of the retaining wall. The report
must clearly document all conditions noted during the assessment and state that
the assessment was performed and completed in accordance with the
Administrative Code and this section. A separate acceptable report must be
prepared and filed for each property with a retaining wall that meets the
conditions set forth in paragraph (1) of this subdivision.
         (ii)   Technical information in the report must adhere to and follow
the sequence and the labeling of the report requirements listed in subparagraph
(iii) of this paragraph, and must be provided on such forms and in such format
as the Department requires. Additional information may be provided. If a
requirement is not applicable, this must be indicated on the report under the
relevant number.
         (iii)   The report must include an executive overview that consists of
a summary of findings and recommendations, a concise statement of the scope of
the assessment and findings, the conclusions and recommendations, and a final
wall rating that categorizes the retaining wall as "safe," "SMR," "SREM," or
"unsafe." The report must also include, but not be limited to:
            (A)   The address, any a.k.a. addresses, the Block and Lot number,
the Building Identification Number ("BIN"), when applicable, for the block and
lot on which the retaining wall is located, and the location from the nearest
cross street;
            (B)   The name, mailing address and telephone number of the owner
of the retaining wall, or, if the owner is not an individual, the name, mailing
address, telephone number, and position/title of a principal of the owner;
            (C)   A detailed description of the retaining wall, including the
height, plan and section dimensions, construction type, all materials present,
age, and type of veneer if applicable;
            (D)   A detailed description of any maintenance, repairs, or the
results of engineering monitoring performed to the retaining wall since the
previous report, including but not limited to foundation settlement, bulging or
cracking of the retaining wall, movement of any elements of the remaining wall
or appurtenances, or other defects or changes;
            (E)   A detailed description of the scope and procedures used in
making the critical examination;
            (F)   The following information:
               1.   The extent and location of all physical examinations and
tests performed;
               2.   The names, addresses, telephone numbers, and license or
registration numbers of contractors and consultants involved in the critical
examination;
               3.   A location or plot plan of a discernible scale and with a
north arrow that shows the entire earth-retaining length of the wall;
               4.   All structures located on the lot or on the adjacent lots
and within the zone of influence of the wall. The information provided shall
include the number of stories and the type of occupancy of all structures, and
all public rights-of-way;
               5.   The dates when the critical examination was started and
completed and when tests were performed; and
               6.   Dated photo documentation of the QRWI or, where applicable,
persons supervised by the QRWI as permitted by this section, performing
physical examinations;
            (G)   At least one cross-section of the retaining wall with details
adequate to indicate the following:
               1.   Retaining wall construction type;
               2.   Architectural finishes or surface treatment;
               3.   Maximum exposed wall height;
               4.   Height of earth on each side of the retaining wall;
               5.   Average vertical distance from the public right-of-way to
cut wall toe or ground-line at the top of the fill wall;
               6.   Horizontal distance to wall face from the edge of the
public right-of-way;
               7.   Wall face angle (batter) measured from the vertical;
               8.   Maximum earth retaining length of the wall;
               9.   Surcharges applied to the wall; and
               10.   Additional cross-sections when the wall geometry or
plumbness changes;
            (H)   A description, classification and the location of each
significant condition observed, including deterioration and any movement
detected. The description must also include a list of all appurtenances and
their condition. Each condition must be classified as safe, unsafe, SMR, or
SREM. If the retaining wall structure is classified as unsafe, SMR, or SREM,
the compliance report must include the locations and descriptions of all
unsafe, SREM, or SMR conditions. If unsafe conditions are noted, the report
must recommend the type and location of public protection or clearly delineate
the extent of areas that have been cordoned off and the methods used.
Photographs must be labeled and the report must include key plans and locator
drawings documenting these conditions. Guards and railings must be inspected to
ensure that their components, including balusters, intermediate railings, and
panel fillers, are positively secured against movement, such as by welds,
bolts, or screws. If any guard or railing is found not to be positively
secured, the condition must be classified as unsafe and made safe pursuant to
the requirements of paragraph (5) of this subdivision;
            (I)   An analysis of the causes of the conditions reported as
unsafe or SREM;
            (J)   A detailed status report of maintenance work performed up to
the date of submission of the report and the maintenance plan implemented for
the retaining wall;
            (K)   Where a retaining wall is categorized with a final wall
rating of SREM:
               1.   A plan detailing the proposed monitoring program;
               2.   The name of the engineer performing the monitoring;
               3.   A stability analysis of the retaining wall that reports a
factor of safety which shows that the wall is stable under current and expected
loading conditions; and
               4.   If only repairs are required, with no monitoring, a
statement to that effect.
            (L)   A comparison of currently observed conditions with conditions
observed during the previous examinations, including the status of the repairs
or maintenance performed with respect to the prior conditions. The following
must be included and discussed:
               1.   Work permit numbers relating to repairs performed;
               2.   Job numbers, status and sign-off dates for any retaining
wall related jobs, where applicable; and
               3.   Violation numbers of any open Environmental Control Board
("ECB") violations associated with the retaining wall and the status of the
repairs of the conditions cited in the ECB violations.
            (M)      Recommendations for repairs or maintenance of conditions
classified as unsafe, SMR or SREM, including:
               1.   If a retaining wall is categorized as SREM:
                  A.   The QRWI must provide the time frame for any required
repairs or maintenance to be completed (MM/DD/YYYY) to prevent the conditions
from becoming unsafe and not the date on which work is planned or scheduled;
and
                  B.   Time frames of less than one (1) year, "ASAP," or
"immediately," will not be accepted.
               2.   If a retaining wall is categorized as unsafe:
                  A.   The QRWI must provide the time frame for repairs to be
completed to bring the retaining wall to SREM, SMR, or safe status and must
indicate the date by which the work will be completed (MM/DD/YYYY); and
                  B.   Time frames of more than five (5) years will not be
accepted.
            (N)   A list and description of the work permits required to
accomplish the necessary work. If no work permits will be required, the reason
must be indicated;
            (O)   All photographs must be dated, printed in color, clearly
legible, and high resolution. Digital photos must be a minimum of 800 x 600
pixels. Photographs must be arranged into PDF no larger than 11" x 17". The
following photos must be submitted:
               1.   Elevation photos. Color photographs of at least one view of
the entire public right-of-way facing elevation for all reports, regardless of
the retaining wall's filing condition;
               2.   Representative photos. Color photographs showing the
general conditions of the retaining wall must be included with the report.
Additionally, photographs of the high side of the retaining wall, including
ground conditions immediately behind and in the front of the retaining wall are
also required.
               3.   Detailed condition photos. Color photographs of specific
conditions must be clearly labeled and indicate the status designation. The
locations of conditions required by item H of this subparagraph (iii) must be
provided.
                  A.   All SREM, SMR, and unsafe conditions must be cataloged.
                  B.   If retaining wall status is safe, submit a minimum of
three typical conditions.
            (P)   The classification of the retaining wall for the current
report filing cycle, as determined by the following guidelines:
               1.   If there are no unsafe conditions, no conditions that are
SREM or SMR, then the retaining wall is classified as safe.
               2.   If there is at least one unsafe condition, then the
retaining wall must be classified as unsafe.
               3.   If there is at least one condition that is SREM and there
are no unsafe conditions, then the retaining wall must be classified as SREM.
               4.   If there is at least one condition that is SMR and there
are no unsafe or SREM conditions, then the retaining wall must be classified as
SMR.
               5.   A report may not be filed describing the same condition at
the same location as SREM for two consecutive report filing cycles. The QRWI
must certify that all of the conditions identified in the previous report as
requiring repair have been corrected, or the retaining wall must be classified
as unsafe;
            (Q)   The seal and signature of the QRWI who performed the critical
examination, or under whose direct supervision the critical examination was
performed.
      (4)   Report filing requirements. 
         (i)   The requirements of this rule apply to owners of retaining walls
with a height of ten feet or more and fronting a public right-of-way. The
Commissioner will determine which additional retaining walls and/or parts
thereof are required to file in accordance with this section.
         (ii)   Owners of retaining walls who are required to file a report
must do so once during each five-year report filing cycle established by the
Department, depending on the borough, as described in subparagraph (v) below.
         (iii)   An acceptable report must be filed within the applicable one-
year filing window to avoid a late filing penalty.
         (iv)   The report must be submitted to the Department along with a
filing fee as specified in the rules of the Department.
         (v)   Staggered inspection cycle. Beginning January 1, 2024 an
acceptable report is due in accordance with the following windows:
            (A)   For retaining walls located within the Borough of the Bronx,
an acceptable report must be filed within the one-year window starting January
1, 2024 and ending December 31, 2024, and every fifth year thereafter.
            (B)   For retaining walls located within the Borough of Manhattan,
an acceptable report must be filed within the one-year window starting January
1, 2025 and ending December 31, 2025, and every fifth year thereafter.
            (C)   For retaining walls located within the Borough of Staten
Island, an acceptable report must be filed within the one-year window starting
January 1, 2026 and ending December 31, 2026, and every fifth year thereafter.
            (D)   For retaining walls located within the Borough of Queens, an
acceptable report must be filed within the one-year window starting January 1,
2027 and ending December 31, 2027, and every fifth year thereafter.
            (E)   For retaining walls located within the Borough of Brooklyn,
an acceptable report must be filed within the one-year window starting January
1, 2028 and ending December 31, 2028, and every fifth year thereafter.
            Exception: Beginning on January 1, 2029, owners whose retaining
walls have their most recent status as "No Report Filed" may file a report
prior to the start of their designated filing window provided that all
applicable civil penalties set out in subdivision (d) of this section are paid
at the time of filing. No additional filing is required in the designated
filing window.
         (vi)   Initial compliance reports for new retaining walls that are
subject to this rule shall be filed as follows:
            (A)   The report must be filed five years from the date of first
work permit issued for the construction of retaining wall, if that five-year
date falls within the applicable filing window according to the location of the
wall.
            (B)   If five years from the date of first work permit issued falls
outside the applicable filing window according to the location of the wall,
then the initial report must be filed within the applicable one-year filing
window for the next five-year cycle.
         (vii)   A report must be filed within sixty (60) days of the date on
which the QRWI completed the critical examination, as defined in subparagraph
(ix) of paragraph (2) of subdivision (c) of this section. If such report is not
filed within such sixty (60) days, a new critical examination is required.
         (viii)   A report may not be filed more than one (1) year after
completion of the critical examination.
         (ix)   If the report is not acceptable and is rejected by the
Department, a revised report must be filed within forty-five (45) days of the
date of the Department's rejection, after which the original file date will no
longer be valid. If the report is not acceptable after two (2) rejections, a
new initial filing fee must be paid, as specified in the rules of the
Department.
         (x)   Failure to submit a revised report addressing the Department's
objections within one (1) year of the initial filing requires a new critical
examination, including a new close-up inspection.
         (xi)   A subsequent report may be filed within a five-year report
filing cycle to change a retaining wall's status or the completion date for
repairs of SREM or unsafe conditions for that cycle.
      (5)   Unsafe conditions. 
         (i)   Upon discovery of an unsafe condition, the owner of the
retaining wall, his or her agent, or the person in charge of the retaining wall
must immediately commence such repairs or reinforcements and any other
appropriate measures, such as cordoning off areas that may be dangerous, and
erecting fences, sidewalk sheds and safety netting as may be required to secure
the safety of the public and to make the retaining wall's structure and
appurtenances conform to the provisions of the Administrative Code.
         (ii)   All unsafe conditions must be corrected within 90 days from the
submission of the critical examination report.
         (iii)   If, due to the scope of the repairs, the unsafe conditions
cannot be corrected within the required 90 days, the QRWI must recommend a
timeframe for repairs as noted in item (M) of subparagraph (iii) of paragraph
(3) of subdivision (c). The owner of the retaining wall is responsible for
ensuring that the conditions described in the compliance report as unsafe are
corrected and all actions recommended by the QRWI are completed within this
timeframe. The owner must notify the Department of any deviation from the
timeframe to make corrections as specified in the QRWI's report. The subsequent
report must include supporting documents from the QRWI justifying the request
for a new time frame.
         (iv)   Within two weeks after repairs to correct the unsafe condition
have been completed, the QRWI must inspect the premises. The QRWI must promptly
file with the Department a detailed amended report stating the revised report
status of the retaining wall, along with a filing fee as specified in the rules
of the Department, and the owner must obtain permit sign-offs as appropriate.
         (v)   If the report is not acceptable and is rejected by the
Department, a revised report must be filed within forty-five (45) days of the
date of the Department's rejection.
         (vi)   If the report is not acceptable after two (2) rejections, a new
amended filing fee as specified in the rules of the Department is required.
         (vii)   Protective measures must remain in place until an amended
report is accepted; however, the QRWI may request permission for the removal of
the protective measures upon submission of a signed and sealed statement
certifying that an assessment was conducted, the conditions were corrected, and
the protective measures are no longer required. Permission may be granted at
the Commissioner's sole discretion.
         (viii)   The Commissioner may grant an extension of up to ninety (90)
days to complete the repairs required to correct an unsafe condition upon
receipt and review of an extension application submitted by the QRWI on behalf
of the owner, together with:
            (A)   Notice that the premises have been secured for public safety
by means of a fence or other appropriate measures as may be required;
            (B)   A copy of the contract indicating scope of work to correct
unsafe conditions;
            (C)   The QRWI's estimate of length of time required for repairs;
            (D)   A statement of all applicable permit requirements;
            (E)   A fee as specified in the rules of the Department;
            (F)   An unforeseen delay or circumstance (e.g., weather, labor
strike, fire) affecting the substantially completed work; and
            (G)   Progress photos showing current repairs.
            Financial considerations will not be accepted as a reason for
granting an extension.
      (6)   Conditions classified as SREM. 
         (i)   The owner of the retaining wall is responsible for ensuring that
the conditions described in the report of critical examination as safe with
repair and/or engineering monitoring are corrected and all actions recommended
by the QRWI are completed within the time frame recommended by the QRWI and are
not left to deteriorate into unsafe conditions. It is the owner's
responsibility to notify the Department of any deviation from the timeframe to
make corrections as specified in the QRWI's report. The subsequent report must
include supporting documents from the QRWI justifying the request for a new
time frame.
         (ii)   A report may not be filed describing the same condition and
pertaining to the same location on the retaining wall as SREM for two
consecutive report filing cycles.
         (iii)   The QRWI must certify the correction of each condition
reported as requiring repair in the previous report filing cycle, report
conditions that were reported as SREM in the previous report filing cycle as
unsafe if not corrected at the time of the current critical examination, or
report corrections that were made in the previous cycle as unsafe if they need
further or repeated repair at the time of the current cycle.
   (d)   Civil penalties. 
      (1)   Failure to file. An owner who fails to file the required acceptable
initial compliance report will be liable for a civil penalty of five thousand
dollars ($5,000) per year immediately after the end of the applicable filing
window.
      (2)   Late filing. In addition to the penalty for failure to file, an
owner who submits a late filing will be liable for a civil penalty of one
thousand dollars ($1,000) per month, commencing on the day following the filing
deadline of the assigned filing window period and ending on the filing date of
an acceptable initial report.
      (3)   Failure to correct unsafe conditions. An owner who fails to correct
an unsafe condition will be liable for a civil penalty of one thousand dollars
($1,000) per month, pro-rated daily, until the unsafe condition is corrected,
unless the commissioner grants an extension of time to complete repairs
pursuant to this section. This penalty will be imposed until the Department
receives an acceptable amended report indicating the unsafe conditions were
corrected or an extension of time is granted.
      (4)   Failure to correct SREM conditions. An owner who fails to correct a
SREM condition reported as requiring repair in the previous report filing cycle
and subsequently files the condition as unsafe shall be liable for a one-time
civil penalty of two thousand dollars ($2,000).
      (5)   Challenge of civil penalty. 
         (i)   An owner may challenge the imposition of any civil penalty
authorized to be imposed pursuant to this subdivision by providing proof of
compliance. Examples of such proof must include, but are not limited to, a copy
of an acceptable initial report, a copy of the acceptable amended report,
copies of approved extension of time requests while work was/is in progress, or
written proof from a QRWI that the unsafe conditions observed at the retaining
wall were corrected and the violation was dismissed.
         (ii)   Challenges must be made in writing within thirty (30) days from
the date of service of the violation by the Department and must be sent to the
office/unit of the Department that issued the violation. The decision to
dismiss or uphold the penalty is at the sole discretion of the Department.
   (e)   Full or partial penalty waivers; eligibility and evidentiary
requirements. Owners may request a waiver of penalties assessed for violation
of Article 305 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code, or rules enforced by the
Department. Requests must be made in writing and must meet eligibility and
evidentiary requirements as follows:
      (1)   Owner status. 
         (i)   A new owner requesting a waiver due to change in ownership who
receives a notice of violation that was issued to the property after the
transfer of ownership must submit proof of a recorded deed showing evidence of
transfer of ownership to the current owner after penalties were incurred, as
well as any other documentation requested by the Department. The waiver period
shall be from the date of the deed to the date of the violation issuance.
         (ii)   A new owner of a government-owned property requesting a waiver
due to change in ownership must submit official documentation from the
government entity affirming that the premises was entirely owned by the
government entity during the period for which a waiver is requested.
         (iii)   An owner may be granted a waiver of penalties upon submission
of a copy of an order signed by a bankruptcy judge.
         (iv)   An owner may be granted a waiver of penalties if a state of
emergency is declared that prevents an owner from conducting an inspection,
filing a report, or correcting unsafe conditions.
      (2)   Retaining wall status. An owner requesting a waiver because the
wall was removed must submit city or Departmental records showing evidence of
the removal of the retaining wall prior to the filing deadline.
(Amended City Record 4/23/2021, eff. 5/23/2021; amended City Record 2/21/2025,
eff. 3/23/2025)
§ 103-10 Periodic Inspection of Gas Piping Systems.
   (a)   Inspection requirements. 
      (1)   In accordance with Article 318 of Title 28 of the Administrative
Code, building gas piping systems, except for gas piping systems in buildings
classified in occupancy group R-3 in Section 310.1.3 of the Building Code, must
be periodically inspected as set forth in this section.
      (2)   This requirement for periodic inspections does not apply to
buildings that contain no gas piping system, provided that the owner of such a
building submits to the Department, in a form and manner determined by the
commissioner, along with a filing fee as specified in the rules of the
Department, a certification from a registered design professional or a licensed
master plumber or an individual under the direct and continuing supervision of
a licensed master plumber, stating that the building contains no gas piping
system. The due date for submitting such a certification pursuant to this
paragraph shall be as follows:
         (i)   June 30, 2021, as extended by local law 12 for the year 2021, no
later than December 31 in calendar year 2024, and every fourth calendar year
thereafter, for buildings in community districts 1, 3, and 10 in all boroughs.
         (ii)   June 30, 2022 as extended by local law 137 for the year 2021,
and no later than December 31 in calendar year 2025, and every fourth calendar
year thereafter, for buildings in community districts 2, 5, 7, 13, and 18 in
all boroughs.
         (iii)   December 31, 2022, and no later than December 31 within every
fourth calendar year thereafter, for buildings in community districts 4, 6, 8,
9, and 16 in all boroughs.
         (iv)   December 31, 2023, and no later than December 31 within every
fourth calendar year thereafter, for buildings in community districts 11, 12,
14, 15, and 17 in all boroughs.
      (3)   A building that contains gas piping but is not currently supplied
with gas, that does not contain any appliance connected to any gas piping, and
that complies with § 28-318.3.5 of the Administrative Code is not required to
undergo a gas piping inspection otherwise required under this section. The due
date for submitting the statements required by Section 28-318.3.5 is the same
as the due dates set forth in paragraph 2 of this subdivision. Such statements
need only be submitted once, provided that there continues to be no gas
service. Where the owner seeks to resume gas service, the owner must comply
with the provisions of Section 28-318.3.6.
      (4)   Inspections of building gas piping systems required under this
section must be conducted at least once every four years and in accordance with
the following periodic inspection schedule:
         (i)   Between January 1, 2020 and June 30, 2021 (inclusive), as
extended by local law 12 for the year 2021, no later than December 31 in
calendar year 2024, and every fourth calendar year thereafter, building gas
piping systems shall be inspected in community districts 1, 3, and 10 in all
boroughs.
         (ii)   Between January 1, 2021 and June 30, 2022, and in calendar year
2025, and every fourth calendar year thereafter, building gas piping systems
shall be inspected in community districts 2, 5, 7, 13, and 18 in all boroughs.
         (iii)   In calendar year 2022, and within every fourth calendar year
thereafter, building gas piping systems shall be inspected in community
districts 4, 6, 8, 9, and 16 in all boroughs.
         (iv)   In calendar year 2023, and within every fourth calendar year
thereafter, building gas piping systems shall be inspected in community
districts 11, 12, 14, 15, and 17 and in any community district not specified in
this paragraph (3) in all boroughs.
      (5)   The initial inspection for a new building with a gas piping system
shall be performed during the tenth year after the Department has issued a
certificate of occupancy for such building. Following such initial inspection,
a new building's subsequent periodic inspection must be conducted in accordance
with the periodic inspection schedule set forth in paragraph (3) of this
subdivision. For the purposes of this section, the term "new building" means a
building, or any portion thereof, for which the Department has issued a
temporary, interim or final certificate of occupancy on or after December 6,
2016.
   (b)   Inspection Entity Qualifications. 
      (1)   Inspections of gas piping systems required pursuant to Article 318
of Title 28 of the Administrative Code and this section must be conducted by a
qualified gas piping system inspector on behalf of the building owner.
      (2)   Persons qualified to perform such gas piping system inspections
shall be either:
         (i)   Licensed master plumbers; or
         (ii)   Individuals, working under the direct and continuing
supervision of a licensed master plumber, with at least five (5) years of full-
time experience working under the direct and continuing supervision of a
licensed master plumber and who has successfully completed a training program
acceptable to the Department. Such training program must be no less than seven
(7) classroom hours and must include the following course content:
            (A)   Regulations on piping safety;
            (B)   Properties of natural gas;
            (C)   Combustible gas indicators and leak detection;
            (D)   Atmospheric corrosion inspection;
            (E)   Interior piping leak survey;
            (F)   Hands-on gas indicator instruction;
            (G)   Jurisdictional / non-jurisdictional piping connections;
            (H)   Purging gas piping into/out of service;
            (I)   Recognizing illegal connections and substandard conditions;
            (J)   Reporting and documenting inspections; and
            (K)   Atmospheric corrosion and leak survey inspection procedure.
   (c)   Inspection scope. Inspections of a building's gas piping system
pursuant to this section must be completed in accordance with requirements in §
28-318.3.2 of the Administrative Code and any other requirements prescribed by
the Department.
   (d)   Report and certification requirements. 
      (1)   The inspection entity that performs an inspection of a building's
gas piping system pursuant to this section must submit, in a form and manner
determined by the commissioner, an inspection report and a certification of
inspection to the building owner no later than thirty (30) days following the
date of such inspection.
         (i)   The certification of inspection must be completed by the
licensed master plumber who performed or exercised direct and continuing
supervision over such inspection, must state that an inspection pursuant to
Article 318 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code has been completed for the
building, must indicate the date such inspection was performed, and must
indicate whether any conditions requiring correction were identified in the
inspection report.
         (ii)   The inspection report must be certified by the licensed master
plumber who performed or exercised direct and continuing supervision over the
inspection and, if applicable, by any individual who performed the inspection
under such supervision. Such inspection report shall include, for each gas
piping system inspected, the following information:
            (A)   A list of conditions requiring correction, including
instances where one or more parts of such system is worn to an extent that the
safe and reliable operation of the system may be affected;
            (B)   Gas leaks;
            (C)   Observed non-code compliant installations or illegal
connections;
            (D)   Observed conditions described in § 28-318.3.4 of the
Administrative Code; and,
            (E)   Any additional information required by the Department.
      (2)   No later than sixty (60) days following a building's inspection
date, the building owner must submit to the Department, in a form and manner
determined by the commissioner, a certification of inspection as described in
paragraph (1) of this subdivision, along with a filing fee as specified in the
rules of the Department. Such certification must indicate the date the
inspection was performed and whether there are conditions requiring correction.
Certifications of inspections submitted more than sixty (60) days after a
building's inspection date will not satisfy the requirement of this paragraph.
Failure to file a certification of inspection within sixty (60) days of the
building's inspection date will require a new inspection.
      (3)   No later than one hundred twenty (120) days following the
building's inspection date, the building owner must submit to the Department,
in a form and manner determined by the commissioner, along with a filing fee as
specified in the rules of the Department, a certification from a licensed
master plumber stating that all conditions identified in the inspection report
described in paragraph (1) of this subdivision have been corrected. Such
certification may indicate that correction of one (1) or more conditions will
take additional time. If such certification of inspection pursuant to paragraph
(2) of this subdivision indicates that no conditions requiring correction were
identified in the inspection report, then no certification pursuant to this
paragraph shall be required. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this
paragraph, for building gas piping systems in community districts 1, 3 and 10
in each borough that are inspected between September 1, 2020 and December 31,
2020 (inclusive), such building owners may submit such certification and fee to
the department on or before June 30, 2021. Notwithstanding the foregoing
provisions of this paragraph, for building gas piping systems in community
districts 2, 5, 7,13, and 18 in each borough that are inspected between January
1, 2021 and December 31, 2021 (inclusive), and that contain one or more
conditions requiring correction, such building owners may submit such
certification and fee to the Department on or before June 30, 2022.
      (4)   If additional time to correct the condition(s) was indicated in the
certification submitted pursuant to paragraph (3) of this subdivision, the
building owner must submit to the Department, no later than one hundred eighty
(180) days following the building's inspection date, in a form and manner
determined by the commissioner, a certification from a licensed master plumber
that all conditions identified in the building's inspection report have been
corrected, along with a filing fee as specified in the rules of the Department.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this paragraph, for building gas
piping systems in community districts 1, 3 and 10 in each borough that are
inspected between September 1, 2020 and December 31, 2020 (inclusive), such
building owners may submit such certification and fee to the Department on or
before June 30, 2021. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this
paragraph, for building gas piping systems in community districts 2, 5, 7, 13,
and 18 in each borough that are inspected between January 1, 2021 and December
31, 2021 (inclusive), and that contain one or more conditions requiring
correction, such building owners may submit such certification and fee to the
Department on or before June 30, 2022.
      (5)   The building owner and inspection entity must keep on file, for ten
(10) years following the date of inspection, all reports and certifications
required by § 28-318.3.3 of the Administrative Code and make them available to
the Department upon request.
      (6)   Owners who are unable to obtain an inspection of a building's gas
piping systems pursuant to this section by the date set forth in paragraph (4)
of subdivision (a) of this section may receive a 180-day extension of the due
date for such inspection and the filing of any certification required to be
filed after such inspection, upon notification to the Department in a form and
manner determined by the commissioner.
   (e)   Unsafe or hazardous conditions. If an inspection reveals any
conditions set forth in § 28-318.3.4 of the Administrative Code, the inspection
entity performing such inspection must immediately notify the building owner,
the utility providing gas service to such building, and the Department. The
building owner must take immediate action to correct such conditions in
compliance with the New York City Construction Codes.
   (f)   Civil penalties for failure to file certification. A building owner
who fails to submit a certification required to be submitted pursuant to this
section on or before the filing due date specified in paragraph (4) of
subdivision (a) of this section will be liable for a civil penalty of:
      (1)   One thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for a 3-family
building; or
      (2)   five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for all other buildings.
   (g)   Challenge of a civil penalty. A building owner may challenge the
imposition of any civil penalty authorized to be imposed pursuant to this
section by submitting satisfactory proof of a timely and acceptable filing to
the Department. Challenges must be made in writing, in a form and manner
determined by the Department, within thirty (30) days from the date of
violation.
(Added City Record 9/23/2019, eff. 10/23/2019; amended City Record 7/12/2021,
eff. 8/11/2021; amended City Record 9/22/2022, eff. 10/22/2022; amended City
Record 11/18/2024, eff. 12/18/2024)
§ 103-11 Sprinkler Reports.
   (a)   Sprinkler report required. Owners of buildings required to comply with
the provisions of § 27-929.1 of the Administrative Code must file with the
department a report prepared by an architect or an engineer, certifying the
installation of the required sprinklers as required by subdivision (b) of
section 27-228.5.
   (b)   Civil Penalties. 
      (1)   Failure to file. An owner who fails to file an acceptable sprinkler
report, indicating that sprinklers were installed as required by subdivision
(b) of § 27-228.5 and § 27-929.1 of the Administrative Code, shall be liable
for a civil penalty of five thousand dollars ($5,000) per year beginning
January 1, 2022 and ending on the filing date of an acceptable report.
      (2)   Late filing. In addition to the penalty for failure to file, an
owner who submits a late filing shall be liable for a civil penalty of one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per month, beginning February 1, 2022 and ending
on the filing date of an acceptable report.
      (3)   Challenge of civil penalty. 
         (i)   An owner may challenge the imposition of any civil penalty
authorized to be imposed pursuant to this subdivision by providing proof of
compliance. Examples of such proof include, but are not limited to, a copy of
an acceptable report, or a certificate of occupancy indicating the building
does not need to comply with the requirement to install sprinklers in
accordance with section 27-929.1.
         (ii)   Challenges must be submitted in writing to the office/unit of
the Department that issued the violation within thirty (30) days from the date
of service of the violation. The decision to dismiss or uphold the penalty
shall be at the sole discretion of the Department.
   (c)   Full or partial penalty waivers; eligibility and evidentiary
requirements. Owners may request a full or partial waiver of penalties assessed
for violation of subdivision (b) of § 27-228.5 and § 27-929.1 of the
Administrative Code. Requests must be made in writing and must meet eligibility
and evidentiary requirements as follows:
      (1)   Owner status. 
         (i)   A new owner requesting a waiver due to change in ownership must
submit proof of a recorded deed evidencing transfer of ownership to the current
owner after penalties were incurred, as well as any other documentation
requested by the Department, and only in one of the following circumstances:
            (A)   A new owner of a property previously owned by a government
entity requesting a waiver due to change in ownership must submit official
documentation from the government entity affirming that the premises was
entirely owned by the government entity during the period for which a waiver is
requested.
            (B)   A new owner who receives a notice of violation for failure to
comply with the requirements of subdivision (b) of § 27-228.5 and § 27-929.1 of
the Administrative Code that was issued to the property after the transfer of
ownership for a violation that occurred before the transfer must submit a
recorded deed showing the date that the property was acquired or transferred.
The waiver period shall extend from the date of the deed transfer to the date
of the violation issuance.
         (ii)   An owner may be granted a waiver of penalties upon submission
of a copy of an order signed by a bankruptcy court judge.
         (iii)   If a state of emergency is declared that prevents an owner
from conducting an inspection, filing a report or correcting unsafe conditions,
an owner may be granted a waiver of penalties.
      (2)   Building status. An owner requesting a waiver because the building
was demolished must submit city or departmental records evidencing the
demolition of the building prior to the filing deadline.
(Added City Record 10/15/2021, eff. 11/14/2021)
§ 103-12 Requirements for Filing Applications for an Adjustment of Annual
Greenhouse Gas Emission Limits.
   (a)   Procedures for filing an application for an adjustment of the
Greenhouse Gas (GHG) Emission limits pursuant to § 28-320.9 for buildings owned
by or leased to not-for-profit hospitals and healthcare facilities.
Applications for an adjustment must be filed by a registered design
professional. Applications must include the following:
      (1)   2018 benchmarking data submitted in accordance with Article 309 of
Title 28 of the Administrative Code. Applicants must demonstrate:
         (i)   the actual building emissions for calendar year 2018,
         (ii)   the gross floor area, where the whole building is occupied by a
not-for-profit healthcare organization, or the total area occupied exclusively
by a not-for-profit healthcare organization, and
         (iii)   the occupancies in the building.
The documentation should confirm the building emissions intensity based on
actual emissions for 2018 for the purpose of establishing a new limit if an
adjustment is approved. Energy benchmarking data from 2018 may be modified if
an applicant can justify the reason for a correction to the energy consumption
data, gross floor area, and/or occupancies recorded for the covered building.
      (2)   Documentation of not-for-profit status. Applicants must submit a
copy of the New York City Department of Finance Notice of Property Value as
documentation of the owner's designation as a not-for-profit organization. For
buildings with a not-for-profit healthcare organization as a tenant, partial
adjustments may be granted for area occupied exclusively by a not-for-profit
healthcare organization for the purposes of healthcare services. An owner must
submit a copy of the tenant's 501(c)(3) determination letter from the Internal
Revenue Service.
      (3)   Documentation of separate metering for electricity. Owners may seek
an adjustment for space leased to a not-for-profit healthcare tenant only if
the space leased to the tenant is separately metered or sub-metered for
electricity.
      (4)   Documentation of the lessor/lessee agreement. Applicants with a
tenant that is a not-for-profit healthcare organization whose space is
separately metered or sub-metered must submit documentation of the terms of the
lessor/lessee agreement, including the term of the lease and the total area of
space leased to the tenant for their exclusive use, in the form of an
affidavit, signed by the owner. The current lease or a prior lease for the same
space must have been effective for the entirety of calendar year 2018. If the
lease is terminated and not renewed at any time between 2024 and 2034, the
adjustment will be terminated for that space. The Department may request
additional documentation as needed to support the adjustment.
      (5)   Effective period. An adjustment granted pursuant to § 28-320.9 may
be effective for the reporting years 2025 through 2034, provided that, when
granted to an owner for a not-for-profit tenant, the tenant remains in the
building. Owners may be required to provide additional documentation, as
requested by the Department, to support the application for an adjustment.
   (b)   Procedures for filing an application for an adjustment of the GHG
Emission limits pursuant to § 28-320.7(1) for buildings subject to a provision
of law or affected by a physical condition. Applications for an adjustment must
be filed with the annual building emissions report by a registered design
professional. Applications must include the materials listed in paragraphs (1)
through (6) below. Owners may be required to provide additional documentation,
as requested by the Department.
      (1)   Confirmation that the building was in existence, or that a permit
for construction of such building was issued, prior to November 15, 2019; and
      (2)   The annual building emissions report for the calendar year prior to
the submission of the application for an adjustment, submitted in accordance
with Article 320 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code and 1 RCNY §
103-14; and
      (3)   A detailed description of the provision of law or physical
condition of the building or building site preventing compliance with the
annual building emissions limit and a technical explanation of how such
provision or condition makes it not reasonably possible for the building to
achieve strict compliance with the annual building emissions limit; and
      (4)   A technical explanation of the building’s efforts to achieve
compliance with the annual building emissions limit to the maximum extent
possible, including:
         (i)   all carbon reduction alterations and energy efficiency measures
implemented since 2019, including actual emissions reductions and efficiency
increases achieved,
         (ii)   a plan for decarbonizing such building to the maximum extent
possible, and
         (iii)   all alternative methods to achieve compliance considered and
why such methods were not deemed reasonably possible; and
      (5)   An affidavit from an entity funded by the city to provide
compliance resources, pursuant to guidance issued by the Department, stating
the owner availed itself of all city, state, federal, private, and utility
incentive programs related to energy reduction or renewable energy, for which
they could reasonably apply; and
      (6)   Evidence that the owner has purchased the maximum amount of
greenhouse gas offsets authorized under 1 RCNY §
103-14 and pursuant to guidance issued by the Department.
      (7)   Effective period. An adjustment granted pursuant to this
subdivision may be effective for a maximum of three calendar years.
   (c)   Procedures for filing an application for an adjustment of the GHG
Emission limits pursuant to § 28-320.7(2) for buildings constrained by
finances. Applications for an adjustment must be filed with the annual building
emissions report by a registered design professional. Applications must include
the materials listed in paragraphs (1) through (4) below. Owners may be
required to provide additional documentation, as requested by the Department.
      (1)   Confirmation that the building was in existence, or that a permit
for construction of such building was issued, prior to November 15, 2019; and
      (2)   The annual building emissions report for the calendar year prior to
the submission of an application for an adjustment, submitted in accordance
with Article 320 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code and 1 RCNY §
103-14; and either paragraph 3 or 4 below:
      (3)   For the most recent calendar year(s) prior to the application for
an adjustment:
         (i)   An affidavit from an entity funded by the city to provide
compliance resources, pursuant to guidance issued by the Department, stating
that:
            (a)   the owner has been working with such entity in an effort to
comply with the applicable building emissions limit prior to the application;
and
            (b)   the owner availed itself of all city, state, federal,
private, and utility incentive programs related to energy reduction or
renewable energy, for which they could reasonably apply; and
            (c)   the owner availed itself of all programs funded by the city
or enabled by local law that provide financing for the purpose of energy
reduction or sustainability measures, in which they could reasonably
participate; and
         (ii)   Evidence that the owner has purchased the maximum amount of
greenhouse gas offsets or renewable energy credits authorized under 1 RCNY §
103-14 and pursuant to guidance issued by the Department; and
         (iii)   Documentation prepared by a certified public accountant
demonstrating one of the following:
            (a)   For buildings held in a condominium or cooperative form of
ownership: a 3-year average increase in annual carrying charges per unit of 5%
above the average rate of inflation for the same 3-year period; or
            (b)   For buildings exempt from real property taxes pursuant to
sections 420-a, 420-b, 446, or 462 of the real property tax law and applicable
local law: the building owner had negative revenue after subtraction of
expenses for the combined 2 years prior to the application; or
            (c)   For buildings that are party to an affordable housing
regulatory agreement and buildings with no debt: the building’s income-expense
ratio, as calculated pursuant to guidance issued by the department, is less
than 1.05; or
            (d)   For all other building types: the building’s debt service
coverage ratio, as calculated pursuant to guidance issued by the department, is
less than 1.15; or
      (4)   For the combined 2 calendar years prior to the application for an
adjustment:
         (i)   Attestation that the building had arrears of property taxes or
water or wastewater charges that resulted in the property’s inclusion on the
Department of Finance’s annual New York City tax lien sale list; or
         (ii)   Attestation that the building had outstanding balances under
the Department of Housing Preservation and Development’s emergency repair
program that resulted in the property’s inclusion on the Department of
Finance’s annual New York City tax lien sale list.
      (5)   Effective period. An adjustment granted pursuant to § 28-320.7(2)
may be effective for a maximum of 1 calendar year.
   (d)   Fees. Owners seeking an adjustment pursuant to this section must pay a
filing fee as provided in 1 RCNY §
101-03.
(Added City Record 3/10/2021, eff. 4/9/2021; amended City Record 12/20/2024,
eff. 1/19/2025)
§ 103-13 Periodic Inspection of Parking Structures.
   (a)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms
have the following meanings.
      Acceptable report. A compliance report filed by a qualified parking
structure inspector, as defined in section 101-07 of the rules of the
Department, that meets the requirements of Article 323 of Title 28 of the
Administrative Code and this rule as determined by the Department.
      Amended report. A compliance report filed by a qualified parking
structure inspector (1) certifying that the unsafe conditions identified in the
most recent report have been repaired and that no unsafe conditions exist at
the parking structure or (2) certifying, within two years of the most recent
safe with repair and/or engineering monitoring (SREM) filing, to the current
status of the building based on a condition assessment.
      Appurtenance. An element including, but not limited to, rolldown gates,
attendant booths, lighting fixtures, gates, staircases, fire protection, column
protection, signs, parapets, railings, guard rails, enclosures, antennae,
bollards, vehicle barriers, vehicle impact protection, electric vehicle
charging stations, and any other equipment attached to the parking structure.
Appurtenance does not include mechanical devices for vehicles moving from and
to street levels or within the structure such as parking machines, lifts,
mechanical stackers, automated parking systems, and elevators in which public
occupancy is prohibited.
      Compliance Report. A report prepared by a qualified parking structure
inspector summarizing the condition assessment of the subject parking structure
and attesting to its accompanying classification.
      Condition assessment. An examination conducted to review a parking
structure and all parts thereof, as defined in Article 323 of Title 28 of the
Administrative Code, to determine whether the parking structure and all parts
thereof are either safe, unsafe, or safe with repairs and/or engineering
monitoring and whether, in the judgment of a qualified parking structure
inspector, remedial work is required.
      Engineer. An engineer as defined in § 28-101.5 of the Administrative
Code. The engineer must be in good standing with the New York State Education
Department and New York City Department of Buildings.
      Filed report. A compliance report shall be deemed filed with the
Department when it has been received by the Department. The filed report must
be completed in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (3) of subdivision
(c) of this section.
      Filing window. The two-year period during which a compliance report for a
particular parking structure may be filed without penalty.
      Parking structure. A building or portion of a building used for the
parking or storage of motor vehicles and an open or enclosed parking garage as
defined in the New York City Building Code. A parking structure does not
include an autobody repair shop, an automotive showroom, a garage with
occupancy of fewer than three cars, unenclosed and unattached lots, an
automotive service station, an automotive repair shop, or a private garage as
such term is defined in the Building Code.
      Physical Examination. Hands-on engineering inspection of parking
structure systems and elements applying various methods of examination other
than visual, including, but not limited to, sounding, probing or testing.
      Qualified Parking Structure Inspector (hereinafter "QPSI"). A qualified
parking structure inspector as defined in section 101-07 of the rules of the
Department.
      Report filing cycle. The six-year time interval established by the
Commissioner for the filing of each successive compliance report for every
parking structure subject to the requirements of Article 323 of Title 28 of the
Administrative Code.
      Safe condition. A condition of a parking structure, any appurtenances
thereto or any part thereof not requiring repair or maintenance to sustain the
structural integrity of the parking structure and that is to remain safe during
the next six years.
      Safe with repairs and/or engineering monitoring (hereinafter "SREM"). A
condition of a parking structure, any appurtenances thereto or any part thereof
that is safe at the time of inspection but requires repairs or maintenance
during the next one to six years in order to prevent its deterioration into an
unsafe condition during that six-year period.
      Staggered filing cycle. The separate time intervals for filing compliance
reports as determined by borough beginning January 1, 2022 and continuing
thereafter for each subsequent report filing cycle.
      Subsequent report. A compliance report that is filed by a QPSI after an
acceptable report in order to change the status of the parking structure for
that report filing cycle to reflect changed conditions or the recommended time
frame for repairs of SREM or unsafe conditions.
      Unsafe condition. A condition of a parking structure, any appurtenances
thereto, or any part thereof that is hazardous to persons or property and
requires repair within one year of completion of condition assessments. In
addition, any condition that was reported as SREM in a previous compliance
report and that is not corrected at the time of the current inspection must be
reported as an unsafe condition.
   (b)   Responsibilities of qualified parking structure inspectors. 
      (1)   A QPSI must conduct condition assessments and file compliance
reports in accordance with this section and Article 323 of Title 28 of the
Administrative Code.
      (2)   A QPSI must maintain records of inspections and tests for at least
six years and must make such records available to the Department upon request.
      (3)   A QPSI must maintain insurance coverage as set forth in paragraph
(7) of subdivision (b) of 1 RCNY §
101-07. Copies of such insurance policies must be made available to the
Department upon request.
   (c)   Condition Assessments. 
      (1)   Periodic inspection requirements. In order to maintain a parking
structure and its appurtenances in a safe condition, and in accordance with
Article 323 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code, a condition assessment of
all components of a parking structure must be conducted at periodic intervals
specified herein.
         Exceptions: The facade of the structure does not need to be included
in the parking structure compliance report if:
            1.   the building is subject to the Facade Inspection Safety
Program (FISP); or
            2.   the parking structure occupies less than 50% of the total
square footage of the building.
      (2)   Inspection procedures. 
         (i)   Before any parking structure is inspected, the QPSI retained by
or on behalf of the owner of the building in which the parking structure is
located must carefully review the most recent compliance report and any
available previous reports, all annual observation checklists, as defined in §
28-323.2 of the Administrative Code, for the prior cycle, any available
structural design or repair drawings, violations, and FISP reports where
applicable.
         (ii)   A condition assessment of a parking structure and appurtenances
thereof pursuant to § 28-323.3 of the Administrative Code must be performed by
or under the direct supervision of a QPSI retained by the owner of the building
in which the parking structure is located or his or her representative.
         (iii)   The QPSI must design a condition assessment program for the
specific structure to be inspected, which must include, but not be limited to,
inspection methods to be employed in the assessment. The program must be based
on the considerations of the type of construction of the parking structure, age
of the material components, the parking structure's specific exposure to
environmental conditions and the presence of specific details and
appurtenances. Consideration must be given to the structure's history of
maintenance and repairs. Professional Engineers, individuals with a bachelor's
degree in engineering and three years of relevant experience, or individuals
with five years of relevant building experience, working under the QPSI's
direct supervision, may be delegated to perform selected inspection tasks other
than the final inspection.
         (iv)   The methods used to evaluate the parking structure in question
must permit a complete physical examination of the structure, including, but
not limited to, sounding, load tests, optical survey, non-invasive scanning,
and cores. The QPSI must identify the most deleterious locations and perform
physical examinations at those locations. Physical examinations as described in
this rule must be performed on a minimum of 10% of each structural element
including, but not limited to, beams, columns, and slabs.
         (v)   The known history of the parking structure, the nature of the
materials used, and the conditions observed will dictate the extent of the
condition assessment. The QPSI must apply a professional standard of care to
assess the structure's condition and the individual building systems that
comprise the structure including, but not limited to, the building's structural
components, waterproofing systems, fire proofing and fire stopping systems, and
wearing surfaces. When the QPSI finds any deficiencies, he/she must ascertain
the cause of these and any other possible building defects detected. The QPSI
must order any special or additional inspections, probes, and/or tests,
including sounding procedures, that may be required to support the condition
assessment and to determine the causes of any defects.
         (vi)   The QPSI must develop a unique annual observation checklist, as
defined in § 28-323.2 of the Administrative Code, during each condition
assessment.
         (vii)   Photographs must be taken, sketches made and/or any other
methods of documentation utilized to properly document the location of all
conditions observed during the course of the condition assessment, that are
either unsafe or SREM.
         (viii)   Upon discovery of any unsafe condition, the QPSI must
immediately notify the Department and the owner of the building in which the
parking structure is located. The QPSI must identify the location of any unsafe
condition, advise the owner on the appropriate protective measures to be taken,
and include the recommended type and location of public protection in the
notification to the Department.
         (ix)   Completion of a condition assessment means that the QPSI has
conducted a final inspection to determine that the parking structure conditions
as described in the compliance report are consistent with the actual
conditions. Such final inspection must, at a minimum, include an actual visual
assessment and a complete walkthrough of each level dedicated to parking with
inspectorial equipment. A drive-by inspection is not acceptable.
      (3)   Report requirements. 
         (i)   The QPSI must file with the Department a written compliance
report describing the result of the condition assessment, clearly documenting
all conditions noted during the inspection, including the physical examination,
and stating that the inspection was performed and completed in accordance with
Article 323 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code and this rule. The QPSI must
also submit a copy of the report to the owner of the building in which the
parking structure is located.
         (ii)   Technical information in the report must adhere to and follow
the sequence and the labeling of the report requirements as listed in
subparagraph (iii) of this paragraph and must be provided on such forms and in
such format as the Department requires. Additional information may be provided.
If a requirement is not applicable, this must be indicated on the report.
         (iii)   The report must include an executive overview that consists of
a summary of findings and recommendations, a concise statement of the scope of
the inspection and findings, the conclusions and recommendations and a
determination as to whether the parking structure is categorized as "safe,"
"SREM," or "unsafe." The report must also include, but not be limited to:
            (A)   The address, any a.k.a. addresses, Block and Lot number, the
Building Identification Number ("BIN"), the landmark status of the building in
which the parking structure is located, and the location from the nearest cross
street;
            (B)   The name, mailing address and telephone number of the owner
of the building in which the parking structure is located, or, if the owner is
not an individual, the name, mailing address, telephone number, position/title
of a principal of the owner;
            (C)   A description of the building, including the total number of
stories, the number of stories and/or locations occupied by the parking
structure, plan dimensions, Certificate of Occupancy number if available,
usage, and age and type of construction, specifying all materials present in
the parking structure;
            (D)   A description of the all components of the parking
structure's gravity and lateral load carrying systems specific to the area
being used as a parking structure or the entirety of the building if its sole
use is as a parking structure. Where applicable, areas to be included are:
               1.   Ramps and other spaces used to access parking areas;
               2.   In the case of a parking structure located at a floor or
floors above floors of other occupancies, the slab and columns immediately
below the lowest level of the parking structure;
               3.   In the case of a parking structure located at a floor or
floors below floors of other occupancies, the slab and beams/joists forming the
ceiling of the topmost level of the parking structure;
               4.   Any area outside of that described in 1, 2 and 3 that may
exhibit deterioration extending from or caused by the structure comprising the
parking area.
            (E)   A detailed description of any distress, settlements, repairs,
or revisions to the structure since the previous compliance report, including,
but not limited to, deteriorated framing members, deteriorated joint material,
displacement, cracking, spalling of parking structure components, or other
defects or changes;
            (F)   A detailed description of the procedures used in making the
condition assessment;
            (G)   The following information:
               1.   The extent and location of all physical examinations
performed;
               2.   The names, addresses, telephone numbers, and license or
registration numbers for contractors and consultants involved in the condition
assessment;
               3.   A location diagram of a discernable scale and with a north
arrow, indicating the main entrance, locations of other entrances, and nearest
cross street and locations and dates of physical examinations; and
               4.   Dates of the start and completion of the condition
assessment.
            (H)   A description, classification, and mapping of each
significant condition observed including deterioration and any movement
detected and the apparent integrity of the joints and wearing surfaces. The
description must also include a list of all appurtenances and their condition.
Each condition must be classified as safe, unsafe or SREM. If the parking
structure is classified as unsafe or SREM, the compliance report must include
the locations and descriptions of all unsafe or SREM conditions. If unsafe
conditions are noted, the report must recommend the type and location of public
protection or clearly delineate the extent of areas that have been cordoned off
and the methods used. Photographs must be labelled and the report must include
key plans and locator drawings documenting these conditions. Guards and
railings must be inspected to ensure that their components (balusters,
intermediate railings and panel fillers) are positively secured against
movement (e.g. by welds, bolts or screws). If any guard or railing is found not
to be positively secured, the condition is classified as unsafe and must be
made safe pursuant to the requirements of paragraph (5) of subdivision (c) of
this section;
            (I)   An analysis of the causes of the conditions reported as
unsafe or SREM;
            (J)   A detailed status report of maintenance work performed up to
the date of submission of the report and the maintenance plan implemented for
the parking structure;
            (K)   A blank annual observation checklist as described in § 28-
323.2 of the Administrative Code prepared by the QPSI specifically for the
parking structure in question
            (L)   here a parking structure is categorized with a final rating
SREM:
               1.   A plan detailing the proposed monitoring program;
               2.   The name of the engineer performing the monitoring;
               3.   A stability analysis of the parking structure that reports
the required structural loading conditions and the calculated load carrying
capacity of typical and worst case structural framing members which shows that
the structure is stable under current and expected loading conditions; and
               4.   It is to be explicitly stated if only repairs are required
with no monitoring.
            (M)   A comparison of currently observed conditions with conditions
observed during the previous report filing cycle condition assessments,
including the status of the repairs or maintenance performed with respect to
the prior conditions. The following must be included and discussed:
               1.   Work permit numbers relating to parking structure repairs;
               2.   Job numbers, status and sign-off dates for any parking
structure repair related jobs, where applicable; and
               3.   Violation numbers of any open Environmental Control Board
("ECB") violations and the status of the repairs of the conditions cited in the
ECB violations that are directly associated with the parking structure;
            (N)   Recommendations for repairs or maintenance of SREM and unsafe
conditions, including:
               1.   If a parking structure is categorized as SREM:
                  A.   The recommended time frame for such repairs or
maintenance to be performed, which must indicate the date by which the work
must be performed (MM/DD/YYYY) to prevent the conditions from becoming unsafe
and not the date on which work is planned or scheduled;
                  B.   Time frames of less than one year, "ASAP," or
"immediately," shall not be accepted.
               2.   If a parking structure is categorized as unsafe:
                  A.   The QPSI must provide a recommended time frame for
repairs to be performed to bring the parking structure to SREM or safe status,
and must indicate the date by which the work will be completed (MM/DD/YYYY);
                  B.   Time frames of more than six years will not be accepted.
            (O)   A list and description of the work permits required to
accomplish the necessary work. If no work permits will be required, the reason
must be indicated;
            (P)   All photographs must be color, clearly legible, dated, and
high resolution. Digital photos must be a minimum of 800 x 600 pixels.
Photographs must be arranged into PDF uploads of no larger than 11" x 17". The
following photos must be submitted:
               1.   Elevation photos. Color photographs of all entrances, the
primary address and at least one view of each entire street front elevation.
               2.   Representative photos of each parking level showing general
conditions.
               3.   Detailed condition photos. Color photographs of specific
conditions must be clearly labeled and indicate the status designation.
Detailed conditions must be located on the mapping of the parking structure
required by item H of this subparagraph (iii).
                  A.   All SREM and unsafe conditions must be catalogued.
                  B.   If parking structure status is safe, submit a minimum of
one representative photograph for each structural element and appurtenance.
            (Q)   The classification of the parking structure for the current
report filing cycle, as determined by the following guidelines:
               1.   If there are no unsafe conditions and no conditions that
are SREM, then the parking structure shall be classified as safe;
               2.   If there is at least one unsafe condition, then the parking
structure must be classified as unsafe.
               3.   If there is at least one condition that is SREM and there
are no unsafe conditions, then the parking structure shall be classified as
SREM. A compliance report may not be filed describing the same condition at the
same location as SREM for two consecutive report filing cycles. The QPSI must
certify that all of the conditions identified in the previous report as
requiring repair have been corrected or the parking structure shall be
classified as unsafe;
            (R)   The seal and signature of the QPSI under whose direct
supervision the condition assessment was performed.
      (4)   Report filing requirements. 
         (i)   The requirements of this rule apply to all parking structures.
The Commissioner shall determine which additional buildings and/or parts
thereof are required to file in accordance with this rule.
         (ii)   Owners of buildings in which parking structures are located are
required to file a compliance report at least once during each report filing
cycle established by the Department.
         (iii)   An acceptable report must be filed within the applicable two-
year filing window to avoid a late filing penalty.
         (iv)   The report must be submitted to the Department along with a
filing fee as specified in the rules of the Department.
         (v)   Staggered filing cycle: Beginning January 1, 2022 an acceptable
report for each parking structure to which this rule applies is due in
accordance with the following filing windows:
            (A)   For parking structures located within the Borough of
Manhattan Community Districts 1 through 7 an acceptable report must be filed
within the two-year filing window starting January 1, 2022, and every sixth
year thereafter.
            (B)   For parking structures located within all Community Districts
in the Borough of Manhattan not listed in (A), above, and all Community
Districts in the Borough of Brooklyn, an acceptable report must be filed within
the two-year filing window starting January 1, 2024, and every sixth year
thereafter.
            (C)   For parking structures located within all Community Districts
in the Boroughs of Queens, the Bronx and Staten Island an acceptable report
must be filed within the two-year filing window starting January 1, 2026, and
every sixth year thereafter.
            Exceptions: 
               1.   Starting in Cycle 2, owners whose buildings have their most
recent status as "No Report Filed" may file a report prior to the start of
their designated filing window provided that all applicable civil penalties set
out in subdivision (e) of this section are paid at the time of filing.
               2.   If the building in which the parking structure is located
is included in the FISP, the owner may choose to change the assigned filing
window of the parking structure compliance report to a parking structure filing
window that corresponds with the next FISP filing window so that both reports
may be filed at the same time. This shall be the reassigned parking structure
filing window. The owner must inform the Department 180 days prior to the end
of the assigned parking structure filing window if this option is chosen. If an
owner chooses this option, the owner must continue to file under the reassigned
parking structure filing window.
         (vi)   Initial compliance reports for new buildings in which parking
structures that must comply with this rule are located must be filed as
follows:
            (A)   The report must be filed six years from the date the first
Temporary Certificate of Occupancy, Interim Certificate of Occupancy or
Certificate of Occupancy was issued, if that date falls within the applicable
filing window as provided in subparagraph (v) of this paragraph; or
            (B)   If six years from the date the first Temporary Certificate of
Occupancy, Interim Certificate of Occupancy or Certificate of Occupancy was
issued falls outside the applicable filing window as provided in subparagraph
(v) of this paragraph, then the initial report must be filed within the
applicable two-year filing window for the next six-year cycle.
         (vii)   A report must be filed within 60 days of the date on which the
QPSI completed the condition assessment (final inspection date), as described
in subparagraph (ix) of paragraph (2) of subdivision (c) of this section.
Failure to file a report within 60 days of the completed condition assessment
requires a new condition assessment.
         (viii)   If the report is not acceptable and is rejected by the
Department, a revised report must be filed within 45 days of the date of the
Department's rejection, after which the original file date will no longer be
valid.
         (ix)   If the report is not acceptable after two rejections, a new
initial filing fee as specified in the rules of the Department is required.
         (x)   Failure to submit a revised report addressing the Department's
objections within one year of the initial filing requires a new condition
assessment, including a new physical examination.
         (xi)   A subsequent report indicating revised conditions may be filed
within the six-year report filing cycle to change a parking structure's filing
status or the recommended time frame for repairs of SREM or unsafe conditions
for that cycle.
      (5)   Unsafe conditions. 
         (i)   Upon filing a report of an unsafe condition with the Department,
the owner of the building in which the parking structure is located, his or her
agent, or the person in charge of the building in which the parking structure
is located must immediately commence such repairs or reinforcements and any
other appropriate measures such as cordoning off areas that may be dangerous,
erecting fences, sidewalk sheds and safety netting as may be required to secure
the safety of the public and to make the building's structure and appurtenances
conform to the provisions of the Administrative Code.
         (ii)   All unsafe conditions must be corrected within 90 days from the
submission of the compliance report.
         (iii)   If, due to the scope of the repairs, the unsafe conditions
cannot be corrected within the required 90 days, the QPSI must recommend a
timeframe for repairs as noted in item (N) of subparagraph (iii) of paragraph
(3) of subdivision (c). The owner of the building in which the parking
structure is located is responsible for ensuring that the conditions described
in the compliance report as unsafe are corrected and all actions recommended by
the QPSI are completed within this timeframe. The owner must notify the
Department of any deviation from the timeframe to make corrections as specified
in the QPSI's report. The subsequent report must include supporting documents
from the QPSI justifying the request for a new time frame.
         (iv)   Within two weeks after repairs to correct the unsafe condition
have been completed, the QPSI must inspect the premises. The QPSI must promptly
file with the Department a detailed amended report stating the revised report
status of the parking structure, along with a filing fee as specified in the
rules of the Department and the owner must obtain permit sign-offs as
appropriate. If the report is not acceptable and is rejected by the Department,
a revised report must be filed within 45 days of the date of the Department's
rejection after which the original filing date will no longer be valid. If the
report is not acceptable after two rejections, a new amended filing fee as
specified in the rules of the Department is required. Protective measures must
remain in place until an amended report is accepted; however, the QPSI may
request permission for the removal of the protective measures, shoring or any
other public safety measures upon submission of a signed and sealed statement
certifying that an inspection was conducted, the conditions were corrected, and
the protective measures are no longer required.
         (v)   The Commissioner may grant extensions of up to 90 days to
complete the repairs required to correct an unsafe condition upon receipt and
review of an extension application submitted by the QPSI, together with:
            (A)   Notice that the premises have been secured for public safety
by means of a fence or other appropriate measures as may be required;
            (B)   A copy of the contract indicating scope of work to correct
unsafe conditions;
            (C)   The QPSI's estimate of length of time required for repairs;
            (D)   A statement of all applicable permit requirements;
            (E)   A fee as specified in the rules of the Department;
            (F)   An unforeseen delay or circumstance (e.g., weather, labor
strike, fire) affecting the substantially completed work; and
            (G)   Progress photos showing current repairs.
         Note: Financial considerations shall not be accepted as a reason for
granting an extension.
      (6)   Conditions that are safe with repairs and/or engineering monitoring
(SREM). 
         (i)   The owner of the building in which the parking structure is
located is responsible for ensuring that the conditions described in the
compliance report as SREM are corrected and all actions recommended by the QPSI
are completed within the time frame recommended by the QPSI and are not left to
deteriorate into unsafe conditions. It is the owner's responsibility to notify
the Department of any deviation from the timeframe to make corrections as
specified in the QPSI's report. The subsequent report must include supporting
documents from the QPSI justifying the request for a new time frame.
         (ii)   A condition assessment is required no earlier than 18 months
and no later than two years after the initial filing date and an amended report
detailing the results of that assessment must be filed with the Department in
accordance with § 28-323.9.1 of the Administrative Code within 60 days of the
final inspection date but no later than two years after the initial filing
date. The amended report must include, but not be limited to:
            (A)   The scope of the monitoring campaign, if applicable,
including but not limited to the name of the engineer performing the
monitoring, the type and frequency of monitoring, and all findings;
            (B)   The status of the conditions identified in the most recent
compliance report classifying the building as SREM, including any maintenance
and repairs undertaken; and
            (C)   A description and classification of any new conditions
identified and how they have been or will be addressed, including any repairs
or maintenance.
            Exception: If the SREM compliance report is filed less than 1 year
from the start of the next cycle filing window, a condition assessment is not
required and an amended report does not need to be filed with the Department.
         (iii)   A report may not be filed describing the same condition and
pertaining to the same location on the parking structure as SREM for two
consecutive report filing cycles.
         (iv)   The QPSI must certify the correction of each condition reported
as requiring repair in the previous report filing cycle, report conditions that
were reported as SREM in the previous report filing cycle as unsafe if not
corrected at the time of the current inspection, or report corrections that
were made in the previous cycle as unsafe if they need further or repeated
repair at the time of the current cycle.
   (d)   Annual observation. A building owner is responsible to have an annual
observation performed in accordance with the provisions of § 28-323.4 of the
Administrative Code. Such annual observation must be based on the checklist
included in the most recent compliance report accepted by the Department and as
described in § 28-323.2 of the Administrative Code.
      (1)   This checklist is to be completed annually by a QPSI on behalf of
the owner each year after submission of the current cycle's report has been
accepted and until the next cycle's report has been accepted.
      (2)   The completed checklists must be kept on site and be made available
to the Department and the QPSI upon request.
      (3)   The person performing the annual observation shall notify the owner
and the Department immediately upon discovering any conditions that may be
hazardous to the public.
   (e)   Civil Penalties. 
      (1)   Late filing. An owner who submits a late filing shall be liable for
a civil penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000) per month, commencing on the
day following the filing deadline of the applicable filing window period and
ending on the filing date of an acceptable initial compliance report or
acceptable amended SREM compliance report.
      (2)   Failure to file. In addition to the late filing penalty, an owner
who fails to file the required acceptable initial or amended SREM compliance
report shall be liable for a civil penalty of five thousand dollars ($5,000)
per year beginning one year after the end of the applicable filing window.
      (3)   Failure to correct unsafe conditions. In addition to the penalties
provided in this section, an owner who fails to correct an unsafe condition
within 90 days shall be liable for a civil penalty of one thousand dollars
($1,000) per month until the unsafe condition is corrected, unless the
Commissioner grants an extension of time to complete repairs pursuant to this
section. This penalty shall be imposed until receipt of an acceptable amended
compliance report by the Department indicating the unsafe conditions were
corrected, or an extension of time is granted by the Commissioner.
      (4)   Failure to correct SREM conditions. An owner who fails to correct a
SREM condition reported as requiring repair in the previous report filing cycle
and subsequently files the condition as unsafe shall be liable for a one-time
civil penalty of two thousand dollars ($2,000).
      (5)   Challenge of civil penalty. 
         (i)   An owner may challenge the imposition of any civil penalty
authorized to be imposed pursuant to this subdivision by providing proof of
compliance. Such proof must include, but not be limited to, a copy of an
acceptable initial compliance report, a copy of the acceptable amended report,
copies of approved extension of time requests while work was/is in progress or
written proof from a QPSI that the unsafe conditions observed at the parking
structure were corrected and the violation was dismissed.
         (ii)   Challenges must be made in writing within 30 days from the date
of service of the violation by the Department and sent to the office/unit of
the Department that issued the violation. The decision to dismiss or uphold the
penalty shall be at the sole discretion of the Department.
   (f)   Full or partial penalty waivers; eligibility and evidentiary
requirements. Owners may request a full or partial waiver of penalties assessed
for violation of Article 323 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code, and/or
rules enforced by the Department. Requests must be made in writing and must
meet eligibility and evidentiary requirements as follows:
      (1)   Owner status. 
         (i)   A new owner requesting a waiver due to change in ownership must
submit proof of a recorded deed evidencing transfer of ownership to the current
owner after penalties were incurred, as well as any other documentation
requested by the Department, and only in one of the following circumstances:
            (A)   A new owner of a property previously owned by a government
entity requesting a waiver due to change in ownership must submit official
documentation from the government entity affirming that the premises was
entirely owned by the government entity during the period for which a waiver is
requested.
            (B)   A new owner who receives a notice of violation for failure to
comply with the requirements of this section or Article 323 of Title 28 of the
Administrative Code that was issued to the property after the transfer of
ownership must submit a recorded deed showing the date that the property was
acquired or transferred. The waiver period shall be from the date of the deed
to the date of the violation issuance.
         (ii)   An owner may be granted a waiver of penalties upon submission
of a copy of an order signed by a bankruptcy court judge.
         (iii)   If a state of emergency is declared that prevents an owner
from conducting an inspection, filing a report or correcting unsafe conditions,
an owner may be granted a waiver of penalties.
      (2)   Building status. An owner requesting a waiver because the parking
structure was demolished must submit city or departmental records evidencing
the demolition of the parking structure prior to the filing deadline.
(Added City Record 5/23/2022, eff. 6/22/2022; amended City Record 10/24/2023,
eff. 11/23/2023; amended City Record 1/24/2025, eff. 2/23/2025) [
§ 103-14 Requirements for Reporting Annual Greenhouse Gas (GHG) Emissions for
Covered Buildings.
   (a)   Definitions. Terms defined in Article 320 of Chapter 3 of Title 28 of
the Administrative Code have the same meanings in this section. For the
purposes of this section, the following terms have the following meanings:
      Affordable Housing Reinvestment Fund (AHRF). The AHRF is a third-party
fund established by the Department in collaboration with the New York City
Department of Housing Preservation and Development (HPD) to receive, encumber,
and distribute funds for qualifying building electrification projects and
generate offsets for such activities.  
      Beneficial electrification. “Beneficial electrification” means the
installation and use of energy efficient electric-based heating, cooling and
domestic hot water systems to displace the use of fossil fuel sources (e.g.,
fuel oil, natural gas, district steam) and/or less efficient electric-based
heating systems. Qualifying equipment shall have a minimum efficiency as
determined based on the reference test procedure associated with the equipment
as follows:  
 
Equipment Type                                                       Minimum Efficiency                Test
                                                                                                       Procedure
                                                                                                       10 C.F.R.
                                                                                                       Part 430,
                                                                                                       Subpart B,
                                                                                                       Appendix E;
Service hot water heat pumps with max current 24A at 250 V           NA                                or other
                                                                                                       test
                                                                                                       procedure
                                                                                                       approved by
                                                                                                       the
                                                                                                       Department.
                                                                                                       AHRI 1300-
                                                                                                       2013; or
                                                                                                       ASHRAE
                                                                                                       118.1-2012;
                                                                                                       or 10
                                                                                                       C.F.R. Part
Service hot water heat pumps with                                                                      431.106,
Input capacity > 12kW and ≤ 50kW                                   NA                                Subpart G,
                                                                                                       Appendix E;
                                                                                                       or other
                                                                                                       test
                                                                                                       procedure
                                                                                                       approved by
                                                                                                       the
                                                                                                       Department.
                                                                                                       AHRI 210/
                                                                                                       240-2023,
Unitary heat pump equipment – air source only                                                        or AHRI
                                                                                                       340/360-
                                                                                                       2022, as
                                                                                                       applicable
Variable refrigerant flow (VRF) multi-split heat pump – air source                                   AHRI 1230-
only                                                                 > 1.5 COP @ 5°F outdoor dry bulb 2021
Packaged terminal heat pumps                                         (maximum heating capacity)        AHRI 310/
                                                                                                       380-2017
                                                                                                       AHRI 310/
                                                                                                       380-2017,
Packaged terminal heat pumps                                                                           or AHRI
                                                                                                       390-2021,
                                                                                                       as
                                                                                                       applicable
 
Note: Equipment and systems not listed in the table that otherwise meet the
definition of beneficial electrification shall have a coefficient of
performance (COP) for the system equivalent to greater than 1.5 when the
outdoor dry bulb temperature is 5°F or lower, where the COP of the system is
calculated based on the energy required for all parts of the system to deliver
the peak capacity.
      Biofuel. Biofuel means biodiesel and renewable diesel.  
      Campus energy resource. A campus energy resource is any form of energy
that is generated by a central plant energy system and distributed to multiple
buildings in a campus setting. A campus energy resource may include but is not
limited to electricity, chilled water, condenser water, steam, high temperature
hot water, medium temperature hot water, and low temperature hot water.
      Critical facility. A critical facility means a facility the operation of
which is critical to human life or safety, such as a hospital, dialysis clinic,
or a facility that manufactures vaccines.  
      Emissions factor. An emissions factor is the building emissions intensity
limit for an occupancy group or property type as determined in accordance with
§ 28-320.3 of the Administrative Code.
      Energy audit. An energy audit is a systematic process of identifying and
developing modifications and improvements of the base building systems,
including but not limited to alterations of such systems and the installation
of new equipment, insulation, or other generally recognized energy efficiency
technologies to optimize energy performance of the building and achieve energy
savings.  
         For buildings 50,000 square feet and greater, such process shall not
be less stringent than the Level 2 energy audit in accordance with ANSI/ASHRAE/
ACCA Standard 211-2018 – Standard for Commercial Building Energy Audits.  
         For buildings below 50,000 square feet, such process shall not be less
stringent than the Level 1 energy audit in accordance with ANSI/ASHRAE/ACCA
Standard 211-2018 – Standard for Commercial Building Energy Audits.  
      Energy service. Energy service is the delivery of energy from the energy
supply or energy distribution system to or throughout a building, including any
equipment used for such delivery. Two or more buildings may share energy
service. Two or more buildings share energy service if such buildings share a
meter or other point of connection to the energy supply or energy distribution
system.
      Fund Administrator. The fund administrator is a third party retained to
administer the Affordable Housing Reinvestment Fund pursuant to a contract with
the City.  
      Gross floor area. Gross floor area is the total area in square feet of
all floors and spaces in a covered building, as measured between the exterior
surfaces of the enclosing fixed walls. Gross floor area includes vent shafts,
elevator shafts, flues, pipe shafts, vertical ducts, stairwells, light wells,
basement space, cellar space, mechanical / electrical rooms, and interior
parking. Gross floor area does not include unroofed courtyards or unroofed
light wells. For atria, gross floor area only includes the area of atrium
floors. For the purposes of calculating gross floor area in tenant spaces,
interior demising walls should be measured to the centerline of the wall.  
      Location based marginal price. A location based marginal price (LBMP) is
the value, expressed in dollars per megawatt hour (MWh), of a particular type
of fuel for a particular hour on the day preceding the day of use, as published
by the New York Independent System Operator (NYISO) for Zone J.
      Marginal fuel. The marginal fuel is natural gas or fuel oil, whichever
has the lower marginal fuel spot price on a particular day and time.
      Marginal fuel spot price. The marginal fuel spot price on a given day and
time is the price of natural gas or fuel oil, expressed in dollars per Million
British thermal units (MMBtu), for the day preceding the day of use, as
determined as follows utilizing spot prices published by the United States
Energy Information Administration:
 
Marginal Fuel Spot Price for Natural Gas
Calendar Day  Mon*     Tue*     Wed*     Thu*      Fri*     Sat      Sun
Marginal Fuel
Spot Price
publication   Fri Spot Fri Spot Mon Spot Tues Spot Wed Spot Thu Spot Fri Spot
date for      Price    Price    Price    Price     Price    Price    Price
calendar day
hours before
10 a.m. EST
Marginal Fuel
Spot Price
publication
date for      Fri Spot Mon Spot Tue Spot Wed Spot  Thu Spot Fri Spot Fri Spot
hours         Price    Price    Price    Price     Price    Price    Price
beginning at
10 a.m. EST
or after
Marginal Fuel
Spot Price    Fri Spot Mon Spot Tue Spot Wed Spot  Thu Spot Fri Spot Fri Spot
publication   Price    Price    Price    Price     Price    Price    Price
date
 
*For calendar days following a holiday, the marginal fuel spot price shall be
determined utilizing the most recently published spot price.
      Plant input energy. Plant input energy is energy, such as electricity,
fossil fuel, district steam, hot water, and chilled water, that is purchased
from a public utility or commercial energy provider and is used to generate
energy in a central plant in a campus-style energy system.
      Qualified energy auditor. The term qualified energy auditor means a
person who holds one of the following credentials in good standing:  
         (i)   Certified Energy Manager (CEM), certified by the Association of
Energy Engineers (AEE);  
         (ii)   Certified Energy Auditor (CEA), certified by AEE;  
         (iii)   Certified Measurement and Verification Professional (CMVP),
certified by AEE;  
         (iv)   High Performance Building Design Professional (HBDP), certified
by ASHRAE;  
         (v)   Building Energy Assessment Professional (BEAP), certified by
ASHRAE;  
         (vi)   Multifamily Building Analyst (MFBA), certified by the Building
Performance Institute (BPI), for portions of a covered building that are
classified by the US EPA’s Energy Star Portfolio Manager as a multifamily
property type; or  
         (vii)   Registered Design Professional (RDP).  
      Qualified generation facility. A qualified generation facility is any
combined heat and power system, permitted prior to September 1, 2024, that (i)
operates at a minimum annual average efficiency as established by this rule,
(ii) emits levels of Nitrogen Oxide (NOx) below the limits established by this
rule, (iii) is not owned by a utility, and (iv) meets the requirements of the
New York City Air Pollution Control Code.  
      Variable operating and maintenance cost. The variable operating and
maintenance cost (VOM) is the total cost incurred by operating a generator,
excluding fuel costs. For reporting purposes, VOM shall be $3.00 per megawatt
hour (MWh).
   (b)   Reporting. By May 1, 2025, a building emissions report for calendar
year 2024, and by May 1 of every year thereafter, except as provided in
paragraph 8 of this subdivision, a building emissions report for the previous
calendar year is required to be submitted to the Department by the owner of a
covered building and must be submitted in accordance with the requirements of
this section.  
      (1)   Reporting tool. Energy use and emissions information for a covered
building must be submitted in a form and manner as determined by the
Department. Owners must maintain all documentation and information used in
preparing the building emissions report for a minimum of six (6) years. Such
documentation and information shall be submitted to the Department upon
request.
      (2)   Condominium buildings. Building emissions for a covered building
held in the condominium form of ownership must be submitted in a single report
that includes the emissions for all condominium units in such building. Such
report shall be submitted to the Department by the board of managers of such
covered building.
      (3)   Multiple buildings that do not share energy service. Where two or
more covered buildings (i) are on the same tax lot, and (ii) do not share
energy service, the owner must submit individual and separate building
emissions calculations for each covered building on the tax lot.
      (4)   Multiple buildings that share energy service. For building
emissions reports for calendar years 2024 - 2029, emissions for two or more
covered buildings, regardless of whether such buildings are on the same tax
lot, may be included in an aggregated building emissions calculation in a
single building emissions report, provided all such covered buildings share
energy service.
      (5)   New buildings. An owner of a new covered building for which a
Certificate of Occupancy or a Temporary Certificate of Occupancy is issued on
or after January 1, 2023, must begin reporting for such building for the first
full calendar year following the year that such Certificate of Occupancy or
Temporary Certificate of Occupancy is issued.
      (6)   Buildings with change in ownership. Notwithstanding any other
provision of this section, for any covered building for which title is
transferred to a new owner during a calendar year, such new owner is not
required to submit a building emissions report for such building for such
calendar year, provided the new owner is a subsequent bona fide purchaser of
the covered building pursuant to Department rules.
      (7)   Full demolition of a covered building. An owner of a covered
building for which a full demolition permit has been issued is not required to
submit a building emissions report for the calendar year during which
demolition work has commenced, provided that, no later than May 1 of the
following year, the owner submits a written certification by a registered
design professional that one or more energy-related systems within such
building have been compromised and legal occupancy is not possible prior to
January 1 of such following year.
      (8)   Extension for certain income-restricted housing and other covered
buildings. The reporting requirement described in the opening paragraph of
subdivision b of this section is modified for certain covered buildings as
follows:  
         (i)   For a covered building that has at least 1 but fewer than 35% of
dwelling units required by law or by an agreement with a governmental entity to
be regulated in accordance with the emergency tenant protection act of 1974,
the rent stabilization law of 1969, or the local emergency housing rent control
act of 1962, as set forth in § 28-320.3.10.1 of the Administrative Code, the
initial report must be submitted by May 1, 2027;  
         (ii)   For a covered building that is owned by a limited-profit
housing company organized under article 2 of the private housing finance law,
as set forth in § 28-320.3.9 of the Administrative Code, the initial report
must be submitted by May 1, 2036;  
         (iii)   For a covered building that has at least 1 dwelling unit for
which occupancy or initial occupancy is restricted based upon the income of the
occupant or prospective occupant thereof as a condition of a loan, grant, tax
exemption, tax abatement, or conveyance of property from any state or local
governmental agency or instrumentality pursuant to the private housing finance
law, the general municipal law, or section 420-c of the real property tax law,
as set forth in § 28-320.3.9 of the Administrative Code, the initial report
must be submitted by May 1, 2036.  
   (c)   Occupancy groups and emissions factors. For purposes of reporting
annual greenhouse gas emissions pursuant to subdivision (b) of this section,
occupancy groups and emissions factors are to be identified in accordance with
the provisions of this subdivision.
      (1)   For each covered building, the owner must submit the following
information:
         (i)   Each occupancy group or property type within the building during
the calendar year for which building emissions are reported; and
         (ii)   The total floor area of each such occupancy group or property
type in such building.
      (2)   The occupancy group for each space in a covered building must be
determined according to the Energy Star Portfolio Manager (ESPM) property type
as set out in this rule, or any successor ESPM name for such property type,
that most accurately describes the use of such space during the year for which
building emissions are reported, provided that the ESPM property types “Other”
and “Mixed Use” may not be assigned to any portion of a covered building. Such
determination must be made by the registered design professional preparing the
building emissions report.
      (3)   Annual emission factors. For purposes of reporting annual
greenhouse gas emissions pursuant to this section, emissions factors shall be
determined in accordance with this paragraph.
         (i)   Except as provided in subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph, for
the purposes of reporting for calendar years 2024 – 2029, the following
emissions factors apply to the following Energy Star Portfolio Manager (ESPM)
property types:
ESPM Property Type 2024 – 2029 Emissions Factor in tCO2e per sf
ESPM Property Type                  2024 – 2029 Emissions Factor in tCO2e per
                                    sf
Adult Education                     0.00758
Ambulatory Surgical Center          0.01181
Automobile Dealership               0.00675
Bank Branch                         0.00987
Bowling Alley                       0.00574
College / University                0.00987
Convenience Store without Gas       0.00675
Station
Courthouse                          0.00426
Data Center                         0.02381
Distribution Center                 0.00574
Enclosed Mall                       0.01074
Financial Office                    0.00846
Fitness Center / Health Club / Gym  0.00987
Food Sales                          0.01181
Food Service                        0.01181
Hospital (General Medical &         0.02381
Surgical)
Hotel                               0.00987
K-12 School                         0.00675
Laboratory                          0.02381
Library                             0.00675
Lifestyle Center                    0.00846
Mailing Center / Post Office        0.00426
Manufacturing / Industrial Plant    0.00758
Medical Office                      0.01074
Movie Theater                       0.01181
Multifamily Housing                 0.00675
Museum                              0.01181
Non-Refrigerated Warehouse          0.00426
Office                              0.00758
Other - Education                   0.00846
Other - Entertainment / Public      0.00987
Assembly
Other - Lodging / Residential       0.00758
Other - Mall                        0.01074
Other - Public Services             0.00758
Other - Recreation                  0.00987
Other - Restaurant / Bar            0.02381
Other - Services                    0.01074
Other - Specialty Hospital          0.02381
Other - Technology / Science        0.02381
Outpatient Rehabilitation /         0.01181
Physical Therapy
Parking                             0.00426
Performing Arts                     0.00846
Personal Services (Health / Beauty, 0.00574
Dry Cleaning, etc.)
Pre-school / Daycare                0.00675
Refrigerated Warehouse              0.00987
Repair Services (Vehicle, Shoe,     0.00426
Locksmith, etc.)
Residence Hall / Dormitory          0.00758
Residential Care Facility           0.01138
Restaurant                          0.01181
Retail Store                        0.00758
Self-Storage Facility               0.00426
Senior Care Community               0.01138
Social / Meeting Hall               0.00987
Strip Mall                          0.01181
Supermarket / Grocery Store         0.02381
Transportation Terminal / Station   0.00426
Urgent Care / Clinic / Other        0.01181
Outpatient
Vocational School                   0.00574
Wholesale Club / Supercenter        0.01138
Worship Facility                    0.00574
 
         (ii)   For purposes of reporting for calendar years 2024 and 2025, an
owner may utilize a building emissions intensity limit for an occupancy group
set forth in § 28-320.3.1 of the Administrative Code, provided such building
emissions intensity limit is greater than the emissions factor assigned
pursuant to subparagraph (i) for the ESPM property type that most accurately
describes the use of the building or space, as determined in accordance with
paragraph (2) of this subdivision. Building emissions must be calculated in
accordance with either this subparagraph or subparagraph (i) of this paragraph,
and may not be calculated by using a combination of such provisions.
         (iii)   For the purposes of reporting for calendar years 2030 – 2034,
the following emissions factors apply to the following Energy Star Portfolio
Manager property types:
ESPM Property Type 2030 – 2034 Emissions Factor in tCO2e per sf
ESPM Property Type                  2030 – 2034 Emissions Factor in tCO2e per
                                    sf
Adult Education                     0.003565528
Ambulatory Surgical Center          0.008980612
Automobile Dealership               0.002824097
Bank Branch                         0.004036172
Bowling Alley                       0.003103815
College / University                0.002099748
Convenience Store without Gas       0.003540032
Station
Courthouse                          0.001480533
Data Center                         0.014791131
Distribution Center                 0.000991600
Enclosed Mall                       0.003983803
Financial Office                    0.003697004
Fitness Center / Health Club / Gym  0.003946728
Food Sales                          0.005208880
Food Service                        0.007749414
Hospital (General Medical &         0.007335204
Surgical)
Hotel                               0.003850668
K-12 School                         0.002230588
Laboratory                          0.026029868
Library                             0.002218412
Lifestyle Center                    0.004705850
Mailing Center / Post Office        0.001980440
Manufacturing / Industrial Plant    0.001417030
Medical Office                      0.002912778
Movie Theater                       0.005395268
Multifamily Housing                 0.003346640
Museum                              0.005395800
Non-Refrigerated Warehouse          0.000883187
Office                              0.002690852
Other - Education                   0.002934006
Other - Entertainment / Public      0.002956738
Assembly
Other - Lodging / Residential       0.001901982
Other - Mall                        0.001928226
Other - Public Services             0.003808033
Other - Recreation                  0.004479570
Other - Restaurant / Bar            0.008505075
Other - Services                    0.001823381
Other - Specialty Hospital          0.006321819
Other - Technology / Science        0.010446456
Outpatient Rehabilitation /         0.006018323
Physical Therapy
Parking                             0.000214421
Performing Arts                     0.002472539
Personal Services (Health / Beauty, 0.004843037
Dry Cleaning, etc.)
Pre-school / Daycare                0.002362874
Refrigerated Warehouse              0.002852131
Repair Services (Vehicle, Shoe,     0.002210699
Locksmith, etc.)
Residence Hall / Dormitory          0.002464089
Residential Care Facility           0.004893124
Restaurant                          0.004038374
Retail Store                        0.002104490
Self-Storage Facility               0.000611830
Senior Care Community               0.004410123
Social / Meeting Hall               0.003833108
Strip Mall                          0.001361842
Supermarket / Grocery Store         0.006755190
Transportation Terminal / Station   0.000571669
Urgent Care / Clinic / Other        0.005772375
Outpatient
Vocational School                   0.004613122
Wholesale Club / Supercenter        0.004264962
Worship Facility                    0.001230602
 
         (iv)   For the purposes of reporting for calendar years 2035 – 2039,
the following emissions factors apply to the following Energy Star Portfolio
Manager property types:
ESPM Property Type 2035 – 2039 Emissions Factor in tCO2e per sf
ESPM Property Type                  2035 – 2039 Emissions Factor in tCO2e per
                                    sf
Adult Education                     0.002674146
Ambulatory Surgical Center          0.006735459
Automobile Dealership               0.002118072
Bank Branch                         0.003027129
Bowling Alley                       0.002327861
College / University                0.001236322
Convenience Store without Gas       0.002655024
Station
Courthouse                          0.001110400
Data Center                         0.011093348
Distribution Center                 0.000549637
Enclosed Mall                       0.002987852
Financial Office                    0.002772753
Fitness Center / Health Club / Gym  0.002960046
Food Sales                          0.003906660
Food Service                        0.005812060
Hospital (General Medical &         0.004654044
Surgical)
Hotel                               0.002640017
K-12 School                         0.001488109
Laboratory                          0.019522401
Library                             0.001663809
Lifestyle Center                    0.003529387
Mailing Center / Post Office        0.001485330
Manufacturing / Industrial Plant    0.000975993
Medical Office                      0.001683565
Movie Theater                       0.004046451
Multifamily Housing                 0.002692183
Museum                              0.004046850
Non-Refrigerated Warehouse          0.000568051
Office                              0.001652340
Other - Education                   0.001867699
Other - Entertainment / Public      0.002250122
Assembly
Other - Lodging / Residential       0.001329089
Other - Mall                        0.001006426
Other - Public Services             0.002856025
Other - Recreation                  0.003359678
Other - Restaurant / Bar            0.006378806
Other - Services                    0.001367536
Other - Specialty Hospital          0.004741365
Other - Technology / Science        0.007834842
Outpatient Rehabilitation /         0.004513742
Physical Therapy
Parking                             0.000104943
Performing Arts                     0.001399345
Personal Services (Health / Beauty, 0.003632278
Dry Cleaning, etc.)
Pre-school / Daycare                0.001772155
Refrigerated Warehouse              0.002139098
Repair Services (Vehicle, Shoe,     0.001658024
Locksmith, etc.)
Residence Hall / Dormitory          0.001332459
Residential Care Facility           0.004027812
Restaurant                          0.003028780
Retail Store                        0.001216050
Self-Storage Facility               0.000404901
Senior Care Community               0.003336443
Social / Meeting Hall               0.002874831
Strip Mall                          0.000600493
Supermarket / Grocery Store         0.004256103
Transportation Terminal / Station   0.000428752
Urgent Care / Clinic / Other        0.004329281
Outpatient
Vocational School                   0.003459842
Wholesale Club / Supercenter        0.003198721
Worship Facility                    0.000866921
 
         (v)   For the purposes of reporting for calendar years 2040 – 2049,
the following emissions factors apply to the following Energy Star Portfolio
Manager property types:
ESPM Property Type 2040 – 2049 Emissions Factor in tCO2e per sf
ESPM Property Type                  2040 – 2049 Emissions Factor in tCO2e per
                                    sf
Adult Education                     0.001782764
Ambulatory Surgical Center          0.004490306
Automobile Dealership               0.001412048
Bank Branch                         0.002018086
Bowling Alley                       0.001551907
College / University                0.000180818
Convenience Store without Gas       0.001770016
Station
Courthouse                          0.000740266
Data Center                         0.007395565
Distribution Center                 0.000123568
Enclosed Mall                       0.001991901
Financial Office                    0.001848502
Fitness Center / Health Club / Gym  0.001973364
Food Sales                          0.002604440
Food Service                        0.003874707
Hospital (General Medical &         0.002997851
Surgical)
Hotel                               0.001465772
K-12 School                         0.000809607
Laboratory                          0.013014934
Library                             0.001109206
Lifestyle Center                    0.002352925
Mailing Center / Post Office        0.000990220
Manufacturing / Industrial Plant    0.000508346
Medical Office                      0.000407851
Movie Theater                       0.002697634
Multifamily Housing                 0.002052731
Museum                              0.002697900
Non-Refrigerated Warehouse          0.000163152
Office                              0.000581893
Other - Education                   0.000839571
Other - Entertainment / Public      0.001355610
Assembly
Other - Lodging / Residential       0.000762093
Other - Mall                        0.000067983
Other - Public Services             0.001904017
Other - Recreation                  0.002239785
Other - Restaurant / Bar            0.004252537
Other - Services                    0.000911691
Other - Specialty Hospital          0.003160910
Other - Technology / Science        0.005223228
Outpatient Rehabilitation /         0.003009161
Physical Therapy
Parking                             0
Performing Arts                     0
Personal Services (Health / Beauty, 0.002421519
Dry Cleaning, etc.)
Pre-school / Daycare                0.001181437
Refrigerated Warehouse              0.001426066
Repair Services (Vehicle, Shoe,     0.001105349
Locksmith, etc.)
Residence Hall / Dormitory          0.000528616
Residential Care Facility           0.002272629
Restaurant                          0.002019187
Retail Store                        0.000176040
Self-Storage Facility               0.000132282
Senior Care Community               0.002277912
Social / Meeting Hall               0.001916554
Strip Mall                          0.000038512
Supermarket / Grocery Store         0.002030027
Transportation Terminal / Station   0.000285834
Urgent Care / Clinic / Other        0.002886187
Outpatient
Vocational School                   0.002306561
Wholesale Club / Supercenter        0.002132481
Worship Facility                    0.000549306
 
         (vi)   For purposes of reporting for calendar years 2050 or later, an
emissions factor of 0.00 applies to all Energy Star Portfolio Manager property
types.
   (d)   Calculations. An annual building emissions report submitted pursuant
to subdivision (b) of this section must be prepared using the calculation
methodologies set forth in this subdivision.
      (1)   Gross floor area. The owner must calculate and report the gross
floor area of a covered building, and the floor area of each occupancy group or
property type in a covered building. The floor area of each occupancy group or
property type reported must add up to the covered building's gross floor area.
      (2)   Building emissions limits.
         (i)   Buildings with a single occupancy group. The building emissions
limit for a covered building with a single occupancy group or property type
must be calculated as the gross floor area multiplied by the emissions factor
for the building's occupancy group or property type.
         (ii)   Buildings with multiple occupancy groups. The building
emissions limit for a covered building with multiple occupancy groups or
property types must be calculated as the sum of the emissions factor for each
occupancy group or property type multiplied by the floor area of each occupancy
group or property type in the covered building:
B = Σ lk • sk      (Equation 103-14.1)
Where:
   B   =   the total building emissions limit for a covered building with
multiple occupancy groups.
   lk   =   the emissions factor of each given occupancy group or property
type, k, as specified in Article 320 of Chapter 3 of Title 28 of the
Administrative Code or in this rule, in tCO2e per square foot.
   sk   =   the total floor area in square feet of each property type or
occupancy group, k, in a covered building.
      (3)   Greenhouse gas coefficients of energy consumption. Greenhouse gas
coefficients for energy consumption shall be determined in accordance with this
paragraph (3):
         (i)   Greenhouse gas coefficients for certain fuels combusted or
consumed on premises for calendar years 2024 - 2034. For building emissions
reports for calendar years 2024 - 2034, the GHG coefficients for fuel types
combusted or consumed on premises provided in § 28-320.3.1.1 of the
Administrative Code apply, except as provided in this subparagraph (i) or in
subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph.  
            a.   For the following fuel types combusted or consumed on
premises, greenhouse gas emissions must be calculated as generating the
following amounts of tCO2e per kBtu:
Fuel Emissions Coefficient
     (tCO2e per kBtu)
Fuel                      Emissions Coefficient
                          (tCO2e per kBtu)
Butane                    0.00006502
Butylene                  0.00006897
Diesel                    0.00007421
Distillate Fuel Oil No. 1 0.00007350
Ethane                    0.00005985
Ethylene                  0.00006621
Gasoline                  0.00007047
Isobutane                 0.00006519
Isobutylene               0.00006911
Kerosene                  0.00007769
Naphtha (< 401 deg F)     0.00006827
Other Oil (> 401 deg F)   0.00007647
Pentanes Plus             0.00007027
Propane                   0.00006425
Propylene                 0.00006802
Special Naphtha           0.00007259
Coke Oven Gas             0.00004689
Fuel Gas                  0.00005925
 
            b.   Exceptions. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
subparagraph, for building emissions reports for calendar years 2030 – 2034:
               1.   Number two (No. 2) fuel oil combusted on the premises of a
covered building shall be calculated as 0.00007421 tCO2e per kBtu.
               2.   Number four (No. 4) fuel oil combusted on the premises of a
covered building shall be calculated as 0.00007529 tCO2e per kBtu.
            c.   For any fuel type that is combusted or consumed on site, not
listed in this subparagraph or § 28-320.3.1.1 of the Administrative Code and
not prohibited by applicable rule or law, the owner must propose a carbon
coefficient, in tCO2e per kBtu, that serves the public interest of reducing GHG
emissions, to be used for calculating greenhouse gas emissions for such fuel
type. Such proposed coefficient and documentation supporting such proposed
coefficient shall be provided to the Department, in a form and manner
determined by the Department. Such proposed carbon coefficient is subject to
approval by the Department, which may alternatively assign a different
coefficient for such fuel type.
         (ii)   Greenhouse gas coefficients for utility energy consumption for
calendar years 2030 through 2034. For building emissions reports for calendar
years 2030 - 2034, the GHG coefficients for consumption of energy generated by
a utility shall be determined in accordance with this subparagraph (ii).
            a.   Utility electricity consumed on the premises of a covered
building that is delivered to the building via the electric grid shall be
calculated as generating 0.000145 tCO2e per kWh, provided, however that, at the
owner's option, utility electricity may be calculated based on time of use, in
accordance with subparagraph (iii) of this paragraph.
            b.   Natural gas delivered by a utility combusted or consumed on
the premises of a covered building shall be calculated as generating 0.00005311
tCO2e per kBtu.
            c.   District steam delivered by a utility and consumed on the
premises of a covered building shall be calculated as 0.0000432 tCO2e per kBtu.
         (iii)   Greenhouse gas coefficient for utility electricity based on
time of use (TOU). Notwithstanding any other provision of this paragraph, an
owner may elect to calculate emissions generated by utility electricity based
on time of use (TOU) in accordance with this subparagraph (iii).
            a.   Such an owner shall submit to the Department documentation of
hourly consumption of all utility electricity consumed on the premises of the
covered building during the calendar year for which emissions are being
reported. Utility records must be made available to the Department upon
request.
            b.   A TOU coefficient may be utilized to calculate emissions
generated by utility electricity where:
               1.   Hourly utility electricity consumption for the covered
building is separately metered by the utility; or,
               2.   Hourly utility electricity consumption for the covered
building is separately metered or sub-metered by the owner in a manner that
produces data on such hourly consumption for the year being reported.
            c.   Calculations.
               1.   Until such time that hourly TOU electric emissions
coefficients for New York City are published by a source approved by the
Department, TOU coefficient values must be calculated for each hour of each day
in the calendar year being reported, as follows:
TOUn = (HMn - RAMn) + gue      (Equation 103-14.2)
Where:
   TOUn   =   the hourly time of use electricity coefficient in tCO2e per kWh,
for n, a given hour on a given day in the calendar year being reported.
   HMn   =   the hourly marginal emissions coefficient in tCO2e per kWh (see
Equation 103-14.3).
   RAMn   =   the hourly rolling average marginal emissions coefficient in
tCO2e per kWh (see Equation 103-14.6).
   gue   =   the GHG coefficient for utility electricity for the calendar year
being reported, in tCO2e per kWh, as provided pursuant to Article 320 of
Chapter 3 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code or this paragraph.
If TOUn < 0, then TOUn = 0.
               2.   The hourly marginal emissions coefficient must be
calculated as follows:
 
HMn = IHRn ×1kbtu/kWh ×MFn (Equation 103-14.3)
             MMbtu/MWh
 
Where:
   IHRn   =   the implied heat rate in MMBtu per MWh, for n every hour of the
calendar year, see Equation 103-14.4.
   MFn   =   the marginal fuel emissions coefficient, in tCO2e per kBtu, for
the fuel that is the marginal fuel for n during the calendar year being
reported, provided pursuant to Article 320 of Chapter 3 of Title 28 of the
Administrative Code or this paragraph.
               3.   The hourly implied heat rate must be calculated as follows:
 
IHRn = LBMPn - VOM (Equation 103-14.4)
       REn + MSPn
 
Where:
   LBMPn   =   hourly location based marginal price, in dollars per MWh, as
defined in subdivision (a) of this section.
   VOM   =   $3 per MWh (the variable operating and maintenance cost, as
defined in subdivision (a) of this section.
   REn   =   Regional greenhouse gas initiative (RGGI) emissions cost, in
dollars per MMBtu (see Equation 103-14.5).
   MSPn   =   Hourly marginal fuel spot price, in dollars per MMBtu.
If IHRn < 5 MMBtu / MWh for a given hour n, then IHRn = 0 Btu per MWh for that
hour n.
If IHRn > 17 MMBtu / MWh for a given hour n, then IHRn = 17 MMBtu per MWh for
that hour n.
               4.   The RGGI emissions costn must be calculated as follows:
 
REn = RAn ×1.10231 US ton ×gn ×1,000 kBtu (Equation 103-14.5)
            metric ton            MMBtu
 
Where:
   RAn   =   RGGI allowance cost, in dollar per US ton, of CO2e, as published
by RGGI.
   gn   =   Greenhouse gas coefficient for the marginal fuel at a given hour,
in tCO2e per kBtu.
               5.   The hourly rolling average marginal emissions must be
calculated as follows:
 
       [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
RAMn = 1e024518ebfb3921ec38bc2ecfa58f65299ca12d/IMAGES/0-0- (Equation 103-14.6)
       0-17774.gif]
 
Where:
   HMi   =   hourly marginal emissions coefficient, in tCO2e per kWh (see
Equation 103-14.3).
   HLFi   =   the hourly load forecast, which is the day-ahead load projection,
published by the New York State Independent System Operator (NYISO) as the day-
ahead zonal forecast for New York City, in MW.
         (iv)   Greenhouse gas coefficient for campus-style electric systems.
The greenhouse gas coefficient for electricity generated by a campus-style
electric system, where electricity consumed by any covered building served by
such system is generated in whole or in part on the premises of the campus,
must be calculated in accordance with this subparagraph (iv).
            a.   The GHG coefficient for electricity generated by the campus-
style electric system, must be calculated as follows:
 
gce = Σn (mn • g(Equation 103-14.7)
      mce
 
Where:
   gce   =   the on-site campus generated electricity GHG coefficient in tCO2e
per kWh.
   mn   =   the plant input energy for each energy source consumed, n, in kBtu.
   gn   =   the GHG coefficient for each plant input energy source, n, in tCO2e
per kBtu as provided pursuant to Article 320 of Chapter 3 of Title 28 of the
Administrative Code or this paragraph.
   mce   =   the total electricity consumed by buildings and other campus loads
from the campus-style electric system, in kWh, during the year being reported,
including any electricity delivered into the utility grid, provided that such
electricity delivered into the utility grid results in lower GHG emissions than
grid purchased electricity.  
            b.   Where a covered building consumes electricity generated by the
campus-style electric system and also consumes utility electricity, the
combined GHG coefficient for campus electricity must be calculated as follows:
 
ge = (mue • gue) + (mce • g(Equation 103-14.8)
     mue + mce
 
Where:
   ge   =   the GHG coefficient for electricity generated by a campus-style
electric system on-site, in tCO2e per kWh.
   mue   =   the total electricity consumed by buildings and other campus loads
from the utility grid, in kWh.
   gue   =   the GHG coefficient for utility electricity, in tCO2e per kWh,
provided pursuant to Article 320 of Chapter 3 of Title 28 of the Administrative
Code or this paragraph.
   mce   =   the electricity consumed by buildings and other campus loads from
the campus-style electric system, in kWh, excluding any electricity delivered
into the utility grid.
   gce   =   the on-site campus generated electricity GHG coefficient in tCO2e
per kWh (see Equation 103-14.7).
            c.   Where electricity consumed by any covered building on the
campus is generated on the site of the campus, and the owner elects to
calculate emissions from such electricity based on time of use (TOU), the GHG
coefficient shall be calculated as follows:
 
ge = (Σh (meuh • gTOU)h) + (mce • (Equation 103-14.9)
     mue + mce
 
Where:
   ge   =   the GHG coefficient for electricity generated by a campus-style
electric system on-site, in tCO2e per kWh.
   meuh   =   the hourly electricity consumed by buildings and other campus
loads from the utility grid, in kWh.
   gTOU   =   the hourly TOU GHG coefficient, as calculated in accordance with
subparagraph (iii) of this paragraph for the calendar year being reported, in
tCO2e per kWh.  
   mce   =   the electricity consumed by buildings and other campus loads from
the campus- style electric system, in kWh, including any electricity delivered
into the utility grid, provided that such electricity delivered into the
utility grid results in lower GHG emissions than grid purchased electricity,
see Equation 103-14.7.  
   gce   =   the on-site campus generated electricity GHG coefficient in tCO2e
per kWh, see Equation 103-14.7.
   mue   =   the total electricity consumed by buildings and other campus loads
from the utility grid, in kWh, see Equation 103-14.8.
         (v)   Greenhouse gas coefficients for certain campus-style energy
systems. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the GHG
coefficient for energy generated by a campus-style energy system must be
calculated in accordance with this subparagraph (v). Such energy may include
district heating and cooling or other district energy.
            a.   The GHG coefficient for each type of campus energy resource
that is generated by a system or equipment in a campus central plant and
consumed by a covered building shall account for the plant input energy
utilized by such plant to generate and deliver such campus energy resource.
Such systems or equipment in a campus central plant may include, but need not
be limited to, prime generators, such as boilers, chillers, and cooling towers;
ancillary equipment, such as pumps and fans; and associated controls. Any
energy generated by any such system or equipment that serves a single building
shall not be included in the input energy for the campus-style energy system
and shall be considered part of the energy use of the covered building it is
serving. Any plant input energy recovered by the campus-style energy system
from any other plant energy source on campus and included in the calculation of
the emissions coefficient for such other central plant energy source may be
assigned an emissions coefficient of zero for purposes of calculating the GHG
coefficient for a campus energy resource generated by the campus-style energy
system.
            b.   Calculations.
               1.   For each type of campus energy resource generated by the
campus-style energy system, the GHG coefficient shall be calculated as follows:
 
gcx = Σn (mn • (Equation 103-14.10)
      mcx
 
Where:
   gcx   =   the campus-style energy system GHG coefficient, in tCO2e per kBtu,
for the campus energy resource, cx.
   mn   =   the plant input energy consumed by each campus-style energy system
used to generate the campus energy resource, n, in kBtu.
   gn   =   the GHG coefficient for each plant input energy source, n, in tCO2e
per kBtu.
   mcx   =   the total amount, in kBtu, of the campus energy resources, cx,
consumed by all covered buildings served by the campus-style energy system.
               2.   Where, for each type of campus energy resource, a group of
covered buildings consumes energy generated by the campus-style energy system
and consumes energy generated by a utility, a combined GHG coefficient for such
campus energy resource shall be calculated as follows:
 
     (mux • gux) + (mcx • g(Equation 103-14.11)
gx = mux + mcx                  
 
Where:
   gx   =   the combined GHG coefficient, in tCO2e per kBtu, for a campus
energy resource, x.
   mux   =   the amount of the campus energy resource, ux, from the utility
consumed by the covered building or campus, in kBtu.
   gux   =   the applicable GHG coefficient for the campus energy resource, ux,
as supplied by a utility, in tCO2e per kBtu, as provided pursuant to Article
320 of Chapter 3 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code or this paragraph.
   mcx   =   the total amount, in kBtu, of the campus energy resource, cx,
consumed by all covered buildings served by the campus-style energy system.
   gcx   =   the campus-style energy system GHG coefficient, in tCO2e per kBtu,
for the campus energy resource, cx.
         (vi)   GHG coefficients for distributed energy resources. For the
purposes of this subparagraph, all distributed energy resources must be
separately metered or sub-metered in a manner that produces data for the year
being reported. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the GHG
coefficient for the distributed energy resources described in this subparagraph
may be determined as follows:
            a.   GHG coefficient for certain distributed energy resources.
Except as provided in clause b, c, d or e of this subparagraph, the GHG
coefficient for energy generated by distributed energy resources, such as
microturbines, combined heat and power generation, and fuel cells, including
natural gas-powered fuel cells that commenced operation on or after January 19,
2023, shall be determined in accordance with subparagraph (i) or (ii) of this
paragraph, for the energy source used to generate the energy for such
distributed energy resource and the calendar year being reported. Where an
owner chooses to utilize a utility electricity GHG coefficient based on TOU to
account for operation of distributed energy resources, such owner must use a
TOU coefficient for all utility electricity consumption for their reporting.
            b.   Greenhouse gas coefficient for subscription to off-site solar
energy generation.
               1.   The GHG coefficient for electricity generated by an off-
site solar energy system purchased by the owner of a covered building is 0.0
tCO2e per kWh, provided such energy sinks directly into the zone J load zone
and the other requirements of this clause b are satisfied.
               2.   Such coefficient may be applied to the utility electricity
consumption, in kWh, for the covered building in an amount that is no more than
the amount of electricity from the off-site solar energy system, provided that
the exports of such electricity are not also registered or retired as renewable
energy credits claimed by any covered building for purposes of compliance with
§ 28-320.3 of the Administrative Code. Owners must submit documentation of the
amount of solar electricity purchased by the owner to the Department with the
building emissions report, or such information may be submitted by a utility on
behalf of the owner. Where an owner opts to use a coefficient for electricity
based on TOU, electricity generated by an off-site solar energy system must
also be reported pursuant to subparagraph (iii).
            c.   GHG coefficient for energy storage. In reporting annual
building emissions, an owner of a covered building that utilizes an energy
storage system may account for on-site or off-site storage of energy, in
accordance with this subparagraph. A GHG coefficient for electricity
consumption based on TOU may be applied to the electricity consumed during
hours that such energy storage system is charging and discharging, provided
that such a TOU coefficient may only be utilized to calculate electricity
consumption for an off-site energy storage system where the discharged
electricity of such system sinks directly into Zone J.
               1.   An owner of a covered building with behind the meter energy
storage that is using the utility electricity GHG coefficient as provided
pursuant to Article 320 of Chapter 3 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code or
subparagraphs (i) or (ii) of this paragraph for utility electricity consumption
in lieu of TOU may account for such storage as provided by this subparagraph,
provided that such storage must be separately metered or sub-metered and must
be reported using the TOU coefficient methodology pursuant to subparagraph
(iii).
               2.   An owner of a covered building that contracts with an off-
site energy storage provider via subscription may report an equal portion of
their electricity consumption, in kWh, as if it were supplied from an energy
storage system on premises. Such owner shall calculate the carbon savings for
that owner's share of the stored energy using the TOU coefficient methodology
pursuant to subparagraph (iii) and submit such data to the Department in the
building emissions report for the calendar year being reported.
            d.   GHG emissions differential for certain natural gas-powered
fuel cells. In reporting annual building emissions, an owner of a covered
building that utilizes natural gas-powered fuel cells that commenced operation
prior to January 19, 2023 may account for the differential emissions to be
added to their annual building emissions, in accordance with this clause. An
owner of a covered building must submit to the Department documentation of the
natural gas consumed annually by the fuel cell, and the electricity generated
by the natural gas-powered fuel cell annually during the calendar year for
which emissions are being reported. Records for natural gas consumed and
electricity generated by the fuel cell must be made available to the Department
upon request.
The differential emissions shall be calculated as follows for the calendar year
being reported:
FCEM = (FCNG × NGC) - (FCEL × MGC)      (Equation 103-14.12) 
Where:
   FCEM   =   the annual natural gas-powered fuel cell differential emissions
in tCO2e.
   FCNG   =   the annual natural gas consumed by the natural gas-powered fuel
cell, in kBtu.
   NGC   =   the natural gas coefficient per this paragraph in units of tCO2e
per kBtu.
   MGC   =   the annual average marginal grid coefficient per
Table 103-14.1.
   FCEL   =   the annual electricity generated by the natural gas-powered fuel
cell, in kWh.
Table 103-14.1 
 
Year MGC
     (tCO2e/kWh)
2024 0.000247038
2025 0.000237178
2026 0.000191739
2027 0.000167898
2028 0.000129971
2029 0.000113712
 
            e.   GHG coefficients for qualified generation facilities. For the
purposes of reporting emissions, an owner of a qualified generation facility
may utilize the coefficients listed in § 28-320.3.1.1 of the Administrative
Code for electricity and district steam where such owner is able to demonstrate
in a form and manner established by the Department that such co-generation
plant operates as a qualified generation facility. For annual electric output
of the plant, the coefficient for utility electricity may be utilized, and for
annual heat output of the plant, the coefficient for district steam may be
utilized, provide that:
               1.   Average annual efficiency. The average annual efficiency of
the plant, as calculated pursuant to Department guidance based on all
generation units, must be no less than the efficiency of the utility grid
identified by the Department in guidance based on the published Inventory of
New York City Greenhouse Gas Emissions.
                  Exceptions. A co-generation plant may be eligible as a
qualified generation facility without meeting the minimum efficiency
requirement if:
                     (1)   The co-generation plant operates year-round and is
essential to prevent voltage drops serving a critical facility; or
                     (2)   The co-generation plant serves a building in an area
designated by the Department as having limited spare electrical capacity as
verified by the utility.
               2.   Nitrogen oxide (NOx) emissions limit. For each power
generation unit that is part of the co-generation plant, the owner must confirm
that the NOx emissions are below 1.6 lbs-Nox/MWh, or 4.4 lbs-Nox/MWh if the
interconnection application and/or air permit application were accepted on or
before January 1, 2017.
         (vii)   GHG Coefficient for beneficial electrification. For each
building emissions report required pursuant to § 28-320.3.7 of the
Administrative Code, the beneficial electrification coefficient for qualifying
electrical equipment and systems meeting the definition of beneficial
electrification shall be as established herein. Such coefficient may be
modified by the department as necessary.
            a.   Equipment installed and operating between January 1, 2027, and
December 31, 2029, shall be -0.00065 tCO2e/kWh.
            b.   Equipment installed and operating prior to January 1, 2027,
shall be -0.0013 tCO2e/kWh.
      (4)   Annual building emissions. Annual building emissions for a covered
building must be calculated in accordance with this paragraph (4).
         (i)   Calculation. Annual building emissions must be calculated as
follows:
X = Σn mn • gn         (Equation 103-14.13) 
Where:
   X   =   the total building emissions for a covered building, for the
calendar year reported, in tCO2e.
   mn   =   the energy consumed for each energy source or fuel type, n, in kBtu
for the year reported.
   gn   =   the GHG carbon coefficient for the year reported for each energy
source or fuel type, in tCO2e per kBtu.
         (ii)   Energy consumption to be included. All energy consumed by a
covered building, including fuels used for normal testing of emergency or
stand-by power generators, must be included in the calculation of the annual
building emissions for such covered building, provided, however:
            a.   Energy used for unidirectional charging of electric vehicles
may be deducted where separately metered or sub-metered pursuant to guidance
issued by the Department.
            b.   Energy consumed during a local state of emergency declared
pursuant to section 24 of the NYS Executive Law or a state of emergency
declared pursuant to sections 28 of the New York State Executive Law, where
such state of emergency has an impact on building emissions, such as a state of
emergency resulting from severe thunderstorms or flooding.
         (iii)   GHG emissions generated under beneficial electrification. An
owner may utilize the beneficial electrification coefficient in calculating GHG
emissions resulting from the use of qualifying electric equipment as set forth
in subparagraph (vii) of paragraph 3 of this subdivision. The annual electric
energy use for beneficial electrification shall be determined based on either
(a) Metered Electric Use or (b) Deemed Electric Use approach as described in
this subparagraph. GHG emission savings accrued from beneficial electrification
may be banked for future use for the covered building in which the qualifying
equipment was installed as described herein.
            a.   Metered electric use. An owner may calculate electricity
emissions based on the measured annual electricity use of the qualifying
installed electric equipment using the coefficients for beneficial
electrification as established in paragraph (3) of this subdivision. Such owner
must be able to document hourly records, monthly energy consumption, and total
annual electricity consumption for such equipment. Such documentation may be
requested by the Department. Records should be retained for a minimum of six
years. The installation must meet at least one of the following to qualify for
use of a beneficial electrification coefficient for metered electric use:
               i.   must be separately metered by the utility; or
               ii.   must be separately metered or sub-metered by the owner in
a manner that produces auditable data aligned with the reporting year; or
               iii.   must be capable of and configured to produce data that
records the electricity supplied to the equipment over the course of the
reporting year by means of hardware and software integrated with the equipment.
            b.   Deemed Electric Use. For installed electric equipment,
qualifying as beneficial electrification, with a rated heating capacity of less
than 1,200,000 btu/h, an owner may calculate electricity emissions based on the
installed capacity of the equipment and using the coefficients for beneficial
electrification as established in paragraph (3) of this subdivision. Only
equipment that meets the requirements of the test procedures listed in the
definition of beneficial electrification are eligible to calculate using deemed
electric use; other equipment or systems whose test procedures are not listed
in the definition of beneficial electrification shall determine beneficial
electric use based on the requirements for Metered Electric Use. The deemed
electric use shall be calculated based on the following:
 
         HC          1            (Equation 103-14.14)
ASde = ( 3.412 ) ×( 151 ×EFLH )  
 
Where:
   ASde   =   Annual electric energy use associated with beneficial
electrification for an air source heat pump (ASHP) used for space heating in
units of kWh.
   HC   =   Heating capacity of ASHP equipment rated at an outside air
temperature of 5°F, in units of kBtu per hour.
   EFLH   =   Equivalent full loaded hours for the occupancy type served by the
ASHP pursuant to guidance issued by the Department.
WHde = (GPD) × (14.2 × CF)      (Equation 103-14.15) 
Where:
   WHde   =   Annual electric energy use associated with beneficial
electrification for a heat pump water heater (HPWH) used for water heating in
units of kWh.
   GPD   =   Daily hot water usage in gallons per day (GPD) based on heat pump
water heater usage rates pursuant to guidance issued by the Department.
   CF   =   Heating capacity of HPWH as per Equation 103-14.16.
CF = C/PL      (Equation 103-14.16) 
Where:
   CF   =   HPWH Capacity Factor. The ratio of installed HPWH capacity to peak
service hot water load, limited to a maximum value of 1.0.
   C   =   The aggregate capacity of HPWH equipment in units of kBtu/h.
   PL   =   Peak load factor multiplied by the associated occupancy metric
(i.e., 1,000 square feet, number of people, number of dwelling units, number of
students, etc.) from Peak Service Hot Water Load Table
Peak Service Hot Water Load 
Occupancy Peak Load Factor Occupancy Metric
Occupancy                   Peak Load Factor Occupancy Metric
Assembly                    0.310            per 1,000 square feet
Community College           0.084            per person
Dormitory                   0.759            per resident
Elementary School           0.022            per student
Fast Food Restaurant        22.07            per restaurant
Full-Service Restaurant     110.4            per restaurant
Grocery                     0.151            per 1,000 square feet
High School & Middle School 0.084            per person
Hospital                    2.403            per 1,000 square feet
Hotel / Motel               2.010            per 1,000 square feet
Office                      0.049            per person
Multifamily                 2.031            per dwelling unit
Religious                   0.310            per 1,000 square feet
Retail                      0.151            per 1,000 square feet
University                  0.022            per student
Warehouse                   0.041            per 1,000 square feet
Other                       0.216            per 1,000 square feet
 
            c.   Applying and reserving beneficial electrification GHG savings.
Owners who have qualifying equipment that is installed and remains in operation
in the covered building, may apply GHG emissions savings or accrue savings for
future use in reporting emissions for such building, provided that in any
reporting year between 2024 and 2036 in which such covered building’s emissions
are not below the emissions limit set forth in § 28-320.3 of the Administrative
Code, any such savings must be applied. Beneficial electrification savings from
a calendar year may be applied in whole to reporting for that calendar year or
in whole to another future calendar year but may not be combined with accrued
savings from other years. Such savings may be accrued as follows:
 
Year equipment was operated Years eligible for application of the GHG savings
2024 and prior              Any 6 calendar years between 2024 and 2036
2025                        Any 5 years between 2025 - 2035
2026                        Any 4 years between 2026 - 2034
2027                        Any 3 years between 2027 - 2034
2028                        Any 2 years between 2028 - 2034
2029                        Any 1 year between 2029 - 2034
 
            d.   When submitting a building emissions report in which an owner
applies the beneficial electrification coefficient to a portion of their annual
energy consumption, such owner must document installation of the equipment with
the letter of completion for such equipment along with the DOB job number.
   (e)   Deductions from reported annual building emissions. Deductions from
the total annual emissions for a covered building are authorized in accordance
with this subdivision (e).
      (1)   Deductions from reported annual building emissions for Renewable
Energy Credits (RECs). Deductions from reported annual building emissions for
renewable energy credits may be made to annual building emission calculations
as follows:
         (i)   Applicability of renewable energy credits (RECs). Renewable
energy credits may only be deducted from the emissions attributed to
consumption of utility supplied electricity in a covered building.
         (ii)   RECs generated by clean distributed energy resources on the
premises of the covered building. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
section, where an owner elects to register RECs generated by a clean
distributed energy resource located on the premises of the covered building,
the owner may not take an additional deduction for the energy generated by the
clean distributed energy resource pursuant to paragraph (2) of this
subdivision.
      (2)   Deductions from reported annual building emissions for clean
distributed energy resources. A deduction for energy generated by a clean
distributed energy resource located on the premises of a covered building is
authorized in accordance with this paragraph.
         (i)   Deduction for solar electric generation. For calendar years 2024
to 2029, a deduction from emissions resulting from annual electricity
consumption is allowed where electricity is generated by a solar energy system
on the premises of the covered building, in accordance with this subparagraph.
            a.   Where electricity is generated by the solar energy systems, in
front of the meter or behind the meter, and exported to the grid, an owner may
deduct from the total utility electricity consumed by the covered building in
the year being reported, an amount equal to the electricity exported, in kWh.
            b.   Where the greenhouse gas coefficient used to calculate
emissions from electricity is calculated based on the TOU methodology pursuant
to subparagraph (iii) of paragraph (3) of subdivision (d) of this section, such
owner shall submit a record of hourly generation of on-site solar energy during
the calendar year being reported.
         (ii)   Deduction for on-site energy storage system. For calendar years
2024 to 2029, a deduction from annual building emissions is allowed where
energy is stored on the premises of the covered building as electricity, in
accordance with this subparagraph. Such deduction may be calculated as follows:
ESS = CAP • TES • Eff         (Equation 103-14.17) 
Where:
   ESS   =   The amount of GHG emissions that may be deducted from the annual
emissions resulting from electricity consumption in tCO2e.
   CAP   =   The rated capacity of the energy storage system in kWh.
   TES   =   The total emissions spread, as determined by the Department, for
the year preceding the reporting year.
   Eff   =   Roundtrip efficiency, defined as 85% for calendar years 2024-2029.
      (3)   Deductions from reported annual building emissions for offsets.
Deductions from reported annual building emissions for offsets may be made to
annual building emission calculations for each compliance period as follows:
         (i)   Offsets generated by the New York City Affordable Housing
Reinvestment Fund (AHRF) are eligible for compliance with this section.
         (ii)   The AHRF will be administered by the fund administrator.
         (iii)   The fund administrator will receive, encumber, and distribute
funds for qualifying building electrification projects and generate offsets for
such activities pursuant to a methodology developed by HPD, which uses a deemed
savings approach and assumptions vetted by an independent, qualified third-
party to estimate the emissions reductions for such projects.
         (iv)   The AHRF will be used to finance qualifying building
electrification projects at buildings subject to affordable housing regulatory
agreements in New York City. In order to qualify, such projects must
demonstrate the following principles of environmental integrity:
            a.   Additionality: The projects are not otherwise required to be
completed in order to reduce emissions by international, federal or local law;
            b.   Unique: The projects allow for tracking of each offset to
ensure that such offset corresponds to one tCO2e reduced;
            c.   Real and quantifiable: Emissions reductions accomplished
through the project represent genuine impact that is replicable in accordance
with a credible, transparent methodology determined by HPD and vetted by an
independent, qualified third party in consultation with HPD;
            d.   Validation and verification: The project designs are validated
and verified by an independent, qualified third party in consultation with HPD;
            e.   Permanence of greenhouse gas benefits: The projects replace
fossil fuel equipment, thereby resulting in permanent emissions reductions; and
            f.   Robust baselines: The baselines for such projects are verified
by an independent, qualified third party to ensure that only incremental
emissions reductions are counted in order to avoid over-crediting.
         (v)   A building owner may purchase offsets from the fund
administrator as described by the Department in guidance. The fund
administrator shall provide confirmation of a building owner’s offset purchase.
         (vi)   The price for an offset representing one tCO2e will be set by
the fund administrator, in consultation with the Department and HPD, taking
into consideration the cost of compliance with this rule and the cost of the
work associated with the offset projects.
         (vii)   AHRF offsets may be applied to reduce a building’s annual
emissions up to a maximum of 10 percent of a building’s annual building
emissions limit.
         (viii)   The fund administrator will maintain a registry to track each
offset purchase, the assignment of each offset to a specific project, the
retirement of each offset, and the emissions reductions corresponding to each
offset.
   (f)   Adjustments. An adjustment to the annual building emissions limits for
a covered building may be requested by an owner in accordance with Article 320
of Chapter 3 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code and this subdivision.
      (1)   Where an owner has been granted an adjustment to their building
emissions limit pursuant to § 28-320.8 of the Administrative Code for any
calendar year between 2024 – 2029, or has been granted an extension of such an
adjustment, the adjustment expires where the special circumstance justifying
the adjustment no longer exists. The owner must certify that the special
circumstance justifying an adjustment continues, as part of any annual
emissions report in which the adjustment is sought after it is initially
granted.
      (2)   Where an owner has been granted an adjustment to their building
emissions limit pursuant to § 28-320.9 of the Administrative Code for any
calendar year between 2024 – 2034, the adjustment expires on January 1 of the
calendar year following the date on which the building ceases being classified
as a not-for-profit hospital, not-for-profit health center, or a not-for-profit
HIP center.
      (3)   Where an owner has been granted an adjustment to their building
emissions limit pursuant to § 28-320.7(1) of the Administrative Code, the
adjustment expires no later than January 1 of the calendar year three years
following the first year covered by the building’s adjustment.
      (4)   Where an owner has been granted an adjustment to their building
emissions limit pursuant to § 28-320.7(2) of the Administrative Code, the
adjustment expires no later than January 1 of the calendar year following the
year covered by the building’s adjustment.
   (g)   Penalty for failing to file a building emissions report. An owner of a
covered building shall be liable for a civil penalty for failing to file a
building emissions report within 60 days of the reporting deadline or by the
date of any extension deadline granted by the Department pursuant to this rule.
      (1)   Calculation. Such penalty shall be an amount equal to the gross
floor area of such building, multiplied by $0.50, for each month such report is
not submitted within the 12 months following May 1 of each year, including the
60 days following the deadline.
      (2)   Extension of time to file. An owner who is unable to file the
building emissions report by the reporting deadline despite such owner’s good
faith efforts may apply for an extension in accordance with § 28-320.3.7.1 of
the Administrative Code and this paragraph. An application for an extension
must be filed with accompanying documentation no earlier than 30 days before
and no later than 60 days after May 1 of each year. For purposes of this
subdivision, an owner demonstrates good faith efforts for consideration of an
extension where:
         (i)   The registered design professional hired for purposes of
completing the building emissions report could not complete such report by the
reporting deadline. For purposes of this paragraph, acceptable documentation in
support of such extension request includes a contract between the owner and the
registered design professional executed no later than February 1 of the year
such report is required to be filed and an affidavit signed by the owner and
the registered design professional stating that such professional was unable to
complete the report on time and that the report will be completed and filed
within 120 days of the reporting deadline; or
         (ii)   The owner has challenged a determination by the Department of
Finance regarding whether the square footage of the building qualifies such
building as a covered building, provided that such owner must file the building
emissions report within 120 days of the first determination by the Department
of Finance that such building qualifies as a covered building following the
commencement of such challenge. For purposes of this paragraph, acceptable
documentation in support of such extension request includes an attestation
signed by the owner indicating why the square footage of the building does not
qualify such building as a covered building and all correspondence between the
Department of Finance and such building owner related to such dispute.
   (h)   Penalty for exceeding building emissions limits. An owner of a covered
building shall be liable for a civil penalty for exceeding the building
emissions limits established for a calendar year pursuant to Article 320 of
Chapter 3 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code and rules promulgated
thereunder. Such penalty shall be an amount equal to the difference between the
building emissions limit established for a calendar year and the actual
emissions reported for such calendar year in the building emissions report,
multiplied by $268.
   (i)   Mitigating factors during the 2024-2029 compliance period.
Notwithstanding any other provision of the Department’s rules, an owner not in
compliance with such emissions limits may be eligible for a mitigated penalty
based on mitigating factors as specified in this subdivision. Any such
mitigating factors must be filed with the building emissions report and must be
documented in a form and manner established by the Department.
      (1)   Unexpected or unforeseeable event. An owner may demonstrate that an
unexpected or unforeseeable event or condition outside of their control
precluded compliance during a calendar year where a building was damaged as a
result of a disaster, including but not limited to a hurricane, severe
flooding, or fire. Such owner must provide photographs demonstrating the nature
and extent of any such damage, and a description of how such damage precluded
compliance in such calendar year. Demonstration of such an unexpected or
unforeseeable event or condition may result in a penalty of zero dollars for
such calendar year for which such demonstration is claimed.
      (2)   Good faith efforts. An owner may demonstrate they made good faith
efforts to comply with Article 320 of Chapter 3 of Title 28 of the
Administrative Code and rules promulgated thereunder. Demonstration of good
faith efforts may result in a mitigated penalty for the calendar year for which
such demonstration is claimed. An owner may demonstrate good faith efforts by
meeting all of the following criteria:
         (i)   Such owner submits the annual building emissions report for the
previous calendar year pursuant to Article 320 of Chapter 3 of Title 28 of the
Administrative Code and rules promulgated thereunder, and is in compliance with
any adjustment granted in accordance with § 28-320.7, 28-320.8, or 28-320.9 of
the Administrative Code and rules promulgated thereunder; and
         (ii)   Such owner uploads benchmarking information for the previous
calendar year to the benchmarking tool in accordance with § 28-309.4 of Article
309 of Chapter 3 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code and rules promulgated
thereunder as applicable, or the data required by § 28-309.4 of the
Administrative Code for the prior calendar year; and
         (iii)   Such owner submits an attestation in a form and manner
determined by the Department that upgrades have been made to lighting systems
as required by Article 310 of Chapter 3 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code
and rules promulgated thereunder, and electrical sub-meters in tenant spaces
have been installed as required by Article 311 of Chapter 3 of Title 28 of the
Administrative Code and rules promulgated thereunder; and
         (iv)   In addition to the information required by subparagraphs (i)
through (iii) of this paragraph, a demonstration of good faith efforts includes
one or more of the following:
            (a)   No later than May 1, 2025, an owner submits a copy of a
decarbonization plan certified by a registered design professional to the
Department that is being implemented at such covered building. Such plan must
include:
               (1)   An energy audit prepared by a qualified energy auditor no
earlier than four years prior to the date of submission to the Department; and
               (2)   An inventory of all HVAC equipment, domestic hot water
equipment, electrical equipment, lighting, and conveyance equipment serving the
building, including the date of installation of such equipment and, where
applicable, whether such equipment serves multiple buildings; and
               (3)   A description of any work that received a certificate of
completion or temporary certification of occupancy on January 1, 2013 or later,
that resulted in no less than a 10% emissions reduction for the building as
compared to the emissions measured the year prior to the completion of such
work; and
               (4)   A list of alterations and changes to operations and
maintenance that will result in the building achieving emissions reductions
required by Article 320 of Chapter 3 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code and
rules promulgated thereunder and resulting in net zero carbon emissions in
2050, including energy conservation measures to be undertaken during the
current and future compliance periods, and the complete schedule for retrofit
strategies necessary to reach net zero carbon emissions. Compliance strategies
may not include the removal of a tenant. Each item on the list of alterations
and changes must include:
                  i.   A timeline for each alteration or change to operations
that demonstrates when the work will be completed in order to achieve the
necessary emissions reductions required for timely compliance with each
compliance period;
                  ii.   A capital plan for such work, including financing and
incentives; and
                  iii.   The corresponding emissions reductions estimated to
result from each alteration or change to operations; and
               (5)   An owner who files a decarbonization plan in accordance
with this clause must additionally demonstrate all of the following:
                  i.   Within 24 months of the submission of such plan,
demonstrate that the work necessary to bring the building into compliance with
such building’s emissions limit for calendar year 2024 is completed; and
                  ii.   By May 1, 2028, provide evidence that a complete
application has been approved by the Department for the work necessary to
comply with such building’s 2030 emissions limit;
               (6)   An owner who files a decarbonization plan in accordance
with this clause may not claim emissions deductions associated with the
purchase of renewable energy credits (RECs) for the 2024-2029 compliance
period.
            (b)   An owner provides evidence that a complete application has
been approved by the Department for the work necessary to comply with the 2024-
2029 emissions limit, a timeline for completion of the project, and the
corresponding emissions reductions estimated to result from the alteration,
provided that where such work does not require an application to the
Department, the owner may submit a copy of a signed contract with a service
provider to perform such work and proof of payment in lieu of evidence that a
complete application has been approved by the Department; or
            (c)   An owner provides evidence that the covered building is
undergoing work to achieve electric readiness by submitting:
               (1)   An approved electrical alteration application to make
upgrades to the building’s electric service for the purposes of future
replacement of fossil fuel-based equipment with electric equipment; and
               (2)   Certification that the electric utility has received the
contractor work request and/or has approved a load letter for service increase;
and
               (3)   An anticipated timeline for completion of the work; or
            (d)   An owner previously submitted an annual building emissions
report during the 2024-2029 compliance period that demonstrated such building
was under the established emissions limits for the calendar year that such
report was submitted; or
            (e)   An owner of a critical facility provides a description with
documentation, in a form and manner determined by the Department, of how
payment of a penalty would impact the operations of such facility; or
            (f)   An owner attests in a form and manner determined by the
Department that such owner has applied for or been granted an adjustment by the
Department in accordance with § 28-320.7 of the Administrative Code and rules
promulgated thereunder.
   (j)   Enforcement. Notwithstanding any other provision of the Department’s
rules, an owner not in compliance with the requirements of Article 320 of
Chapter 3 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code and rules promulgated
thereunder will be liable for a penalty calculated as described herein that may
be recovered in a proceeding before the Office of Administrative Trials and
Hearings (OATH) governed by OATH's rules of practice and procedure pursuant to
Title 48 of the Rules of the City of New York.
      (1)   Notice. The Department shall issue administrative summonses
pursuant to this subdivision which shall contain at minimum the following
information:
         (i)   A description of the nature of the violation sufficient to
inform the respondent of the prohibited conduct, including a citation to the
rule or section of the Administrative Code alleged to have been violated; and
         (ii)   The maximum penalty amount calculated by the Department; and
         (iii)   Instructions to the Respondent for how to pay such penalty;
and
         (iv)   The date, time, and location of the scheduled adjudication on
such penalty, or instructions to the Respondent for how to schedule an
adjudication.
      (2)   Resolving the administrative summons prior to adjudication. A
Respondent may resolve the summons prior to adjudication by:
         (i)   Paying the penalty amount calculated by the Department; or
         (ii)   Submitting proof to the Department that the condition has been
corrected prior to the scheduled adjudication.
      (3)   Mediated resolution. 
         (i)   The Department may offer a mediated resolution to an owner not
in compliance with the annual building emissions limits, provided that the
Department shall offer such resolution only where (i) such owner has filed a
report pursuant to § 28-320.3.7 of the Administrative Code; (ii) such owner has
demonstrated good faith efforts to meet such emissions limits, including but
not limited to the criteria set forth in paragraph 2 of subdivision i of this
section or other demonstrated effort to meet such limits; and (iii) such
resolution would facilitate the building meeting such building’s annual
emissions limit.
         (ii)   A mediated resolution is an agreement between the owner and the
Department not to bring an enforcement proceeding and may provide for terms and
conditions determined by the Department, including but not limited to a plan to
achieve compliance with the building emissions limit set forth in § 28-320.3.1
of the Administrative Code. The terms of such agreement may contain such
provisions as may be agreed upon by the Department and the owner. The
Department shall provide guidance with respect to such plan, including examples
of appropriate compliance plans.
         (iii)   Such agreement shall provide that an enforcement proceeding
will be commenced and civil penalties may be imposed for the violation of
Article 320 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code where the owner fails to
comply with the terms of such mediated resolution. Where such agreement covers
more than one year, the owner may be subject to an enforcement proceeding and
civil penalty pursuant to subdivision (h) of this section for each calendar
year that such owner is not in compliance with the annual building emissions
limit during that time period.
         (iv)   A mediated resolution entered into between the department and
the owner of a building may be transferred to a subsequent owner of such
building who consents to such transfer. Failure to comply with the terms of
such mediated resolution by a subsequent owner who consents to such transfer
will result in an enforcement proceeding as set forth in subparagraph (iii) of
this paragraph.
(Added City Record 12/20/2022, eff. 1/19/2023; Am. City Record 12/21/2023, eff.
1/20/2024; amended City Record 12/20/2024, eff. 1/19/2025)
§ 103-15 Periodic Observation of Building Parapets.
   (a)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms
have the following meanings.
      Appurtenance. Any structure attached to or supported by a parapet.
      Cornice. A projecting horizontal member or assembly that crowns a wall.
      Fronting. Running parallel or near parallel to a public right-of-way.
      Gooseneck. A curved section of a handrail which terminates at the top of
a roof or parapet.
      Observation. A visual examination of a parapet, cornice and other parapet
appurtenances conducted to determine their stability and identify any
potentially hazardous conditions.
      Parapet. The part of any wall entirely above the roof line.
      Public right-of-way. A public street, avenue, sidewalk, roadway or any
other public place or public way.
   (b)   Observations. Starting on January 1, 2024, in accordance with the
requirements of §  28-301.1.1 of the Administrative Code, every building owner
must have an observation performed in accordance with this subdivision. This
requirement applies to all buildings with parapets fronting the public right-
of-way, regardless of height, except for detached 1- or 2-family homes or
buildings with a fence or other barrier preventing access to the exterior wall.
      (1)   The observation must be performed annually by a person competent to
inspect parapets. For the purposes of this subdivision, this includes, but is
not limited to, a bricklayer, building superintendent, handyman, mason or a
person in a similar construction-related trade, architect, engineer, an
inspector working for a New York State-authorized insurance company, a New York
State-authorized building inspector or any other individual capable of
identifying hazards on the parapet.
      (2)   The observation must include close-up inspections of the entire
parapet. The close-up inspection may be conducted from a fire escape or roof.
      (3)   The observation must include, but not be limited to:
         (i)   A determination that the parapet is plumb by a horizontal
distance within one-eighth of its cross-sectional thickness in any location.
         (ii)   A determination of whether there is excessive deterioration,
including, but not limited to, displacement, horizontal or diagonal cracks,
missing or loose bricks or coping stones, deteriorated mortar joints, spalling,
or rot.
         (iii)   A determination that appurtenances such as telecommunications
equipment, railings, roof access rails, gooseneck ladders and handrail
attachments for fire escapes, and signs, have been installed and maintained in
a stable condition.
      (4)   If the parapet exhibits a hazardous or unsafe condition:
         (i)   The person performing the observation must immediately notify
the Department of Buildings; and
         (ii)   The owner must immediately install public protection, such as
erecting sidewalk sheds, fences, and safety netting, as may be required to
secure the safety of the public, and have the unsafe condition remedied. All
unsafe conditions must be corrected within ninety (90) days from the
notification to the Department. The public protection must remain in place
until the unsafe condition is remedied.
   (c)   Report Requirements. A report must be prepared by the person
performing the observation or by the owner in consultation with the person
performing the observation.
      (1)   The report must include, but not be limited to:
         (i)   The address and any other associated addresses for the building;
         (ii)   The name, mailing address and telephone number of the owner of
the building, or, if the owner is not an individual, the name, mailing address,
telephone number, and position/title of a principal of the owner;
         (iii)   The name of the person performing the observation. If other
than the owner, their mailing address, telephone number, affiliation with the
building or owner, and business name, if applicable;
         (iv)   The date(s) of the observation;
         (v)   The location plan of the parapet(s) observed;
         (vi)   The construction of the parapet, including but not limited to
material, height, and thickness;
         (vii)   General conditions noted, whether any unsafe conditions were
found, and actions taken to remedy the unsafe conditions;
         (viii)   Any repairs made to the parapet since the previous report;
and
         (ix)   Dated photos documenting the conditions at the time of
observation.
      (2)   Owners must maintain the observation reports for at least six (6)
years and must make such reports available to the Department upon request.
(Added City Record 8/29/2023, eff. 9/28/2023)
§ 103-16 Initial Observation of Parking Structures.
   (a)   Prior to the first required condition assessment of a parking
structure required by Article 323 of Chapter 3 of Title 28 of the
Administrative Code and 1 RCNY §
103-13, the owner of the building in which a parking structure is located and
whose condition assessment report is due as set forth in item (B) or (C) of
subparagraph (v) of paragraph (4) of subdivision (c) of 1 RCNY §
103-13, must have a one-time initial observation of the parking structure
performed by or under the direct supervision of a qualified parking structure
inspector (“QPSI”), as defined in 1 RCNY §
101-07. The results of such initial observation must be filed with the
Department by August 1, 2024 on a form provided by the Department.
   Exception: Owners whose report is due as set forth in item (B) as previously
referenced in this paragraph and who file an acceptable report by August 1,
2024 need not have this initial observation performed.
   (b)   The QPSI must apply a professional standard of care to assess the
parking structure’s condition and the individual building systems that comprise
the parking structure including, but not limited to, the building’s structural
components, waterproofing systems, fire proofing and fire stopping systems, and
wearing surfaces. The QPSI’s observation must be based on the considerations of
the type of construction of the parking structure, age of the material
components, the parking structure’s specific exposure to environmental
conditions and the presence of specific details and appurtenances. The QPSI’s
observation must also take into account the structure’s history of maintenance
and repairs.
   (c)   The methods used to evaluate the parking structure in question must
permit a complete examination of the parking structure.
   (d)   The QPSI must identify the most deleterious locations and perform
examinations at those locations. If the QPSI finds any deficiencies, he/she
must ascertain the cause of these and any other possible building defects
detected and immediately notify the Department and the owner of the building in
which the parking structure is located of any unsafe conditions.
   (e)   The results of this initial observation must be filed with the
Department in a form and manner acceptable to the commissioner.
(Added City Record 10/24/2023, eff. 11/23/2023)
§ 103-17 Energy Conservation Measure Requirements for Certain Buildings.
   (a)   Definitions. Terms defined in Article 321 of Title 28 of the
Administrative Code of the City of New York have the same meanings in this
section. For the purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Energy service. Energy service is the delivery of energy from the energy
supply or energy distribution system to or throughout a building, including any
equipment used for such delivery. Two or more buildings may share energy
service. Two or more buildings share energy service if such buildings share a
meter or other point of connection to the energy supply or energy distribution
system.
      Qualified retro-commissioning (RCx) agent. A qualified RCx agent is a
retro-commissioning agent who is not on the staff of the building being
inspected and who holds one of the following credentials in good standing:
         (1)   Certified Commissioning Professional certified by the Building
Commissioning Association;
         (2)   Certified Building Commissioning Professional certified by the
Association of Energy Engineers (AEE);
         (3)   Existing Building Commissioning Professional as certified by the
AEE;
         (4)   Commissioning Process Management Professional certified by
American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers
(ASHRAE);
         (5)   Accredited Commissioning Process Authority Professional approved
by the University of Wisconsin;
         (6)   Certified Commissioning Authority certified by the Associated
Air Balance Council Commissioning Group;
         (7)   Building Commissioning Professional certified by ASHRAE;
         (8)   Commissioning Process Professional certified by National
Environmental Balancing Bureau (NEBB);
         (9)   Technical Retro-Commissioning Certified Professional certified
by NEBB;
         (10)   Building Systems Commissioning Professional certified by NEBB;
or
         (11)   Registered Design Professional.
   (b)   Required report for certain buildings. No later than May 1, 2025, the
owner of a covered building must submit a report, in a form and manner
determined by the Department, in accordance with § 28-321.3 of the
Administrative Code, demonstrating compliance with either paragraph (1) or
paragraph (2) of this subdivision. Where an owner has multiple covered
buildings on a lot, such owner may choose to provide a separate report for each
such covered building on the lot, or a single report pursuant to either § 28-
321.3.1 or § 28-321.3.2 of the Administrative Code for all such covered
buildings on the lot. Where buildings share an energy system, such buildings
must be reported in a single report pursuant to the same section of the
Administrative Code. Two or more covered buildings located on adjacent but
separate tax lots may be included in a single report pursuant to the same
section of the Administrative Code, provided all such covered buildings share
energy service.
      (1)   Energy compliant buildings report. To demonstrate compliance with
this subdivision the owner of a covered building may submit a building
emissions report, certified by a registered design professional, in accordance
with § 28-321.3.1 of the Administrative Code, this paragraph, and 1 RCNY §
103-14, that for calendar year 2024 such covered building was in compliance
with the applicable building emissions limit established pursuant to § 28-
320.3.2 of the Administrative Code. The report must include:
         (i)   Building address(es);
         (ii)   Building owner and contact information;
         (iii)   Name of the registered design professional certifying the
report; and
         (iv)   Energy use and emissions information for such covered building
calculated as if such building were a covered building as defined in Article
320 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code and 1 RCNY §
103-14.
      (2)   Prescriptive energy conservation measures (PECMs) report. To
demonstrate compliance with this subdivision the owner of a covered building
may submit a report, certified by a qualified RCx agent, in accordance with
this section and § 28-321.3.2 of the Administrative Code, demonstrating that
each applicable PECM identified in § 28-321.2.2 of the Administrative Code was
fully implemented at the covered building prior to January 1, 2025. The RCx
agent must maintain all documentation and information used in preparing such
report, including records of inspections conducted, for a minimum of 6 years.
Such documentation and information must be submitted to the Department upon
request. The report required by this paragraph must include:
         (i)   Building address(es);
         (ii)   Building owner and contact information;
         (iii)   Name, affiliation, contact information, experience, and
relevant certifications for the qualified RCx agent and supervised staff
performing the PECM inspections;
         (iv)   Name, affiliation, and contact information for the facility
manager for the building;
         (v)   For each building, an inventory of all HVAC equipment, domestic
hot water equipment, electrical equipment, lighting, and conveyance equipment
serving the building, including the date of installation of such equipment.
Where applicable, the report must indicate where equipment serves multiple
buildings; and
         (vi)   For each PECM, documentation as required in subdivision (c) of
this section.
   (c)   Inspection and documentation for prescriptive energy conservation
measures. PECMs must be inspected and documented by the RCx agent in accordance
with this subdivision. Documentation of such inspection required by this
subdivision must be included with the PECM report required by subdivision (b)
of this section.
      (1)   Temperature set points. 
         (i)   Inspection: The RCx agent must examine the temperature set
points for heat and hot water systems in the building. All systems serving
multifamily dwelling units must be set to the requirements of the Housing
Maintenance Code.
         (ii)   Documentation: An attestation by the RCx agent certifying
completion of such PECM.
      (2)   Repair heating system leaks. 
         (i)   Inspection: The RCx agent must conduct a visual inspection of
all heating equipment for water, steam, oil, refrigerant, and air leaks in
systems. Leaks identified must be repaired by January 1, 2025. Exception:
Inspection of forced-air and electric-resistance heating systems is not
required.
         (ii)   Documentation: An attestation by the RCx agent certifying
completion of such PECM.
      (3)   Heating system function. 
         (i)   Inspection: The RCx agent must confirm that each heating system
in the covered building is functioning in good working order.
         (ii)   Documentation: An attestation to the Department certifying
completion of such PECM.
      (4)   Temperature controls or enclosures for radiators. 
         (i)   Inspection: The RCx agent must confirm that each dwelling unit
has at least one thermostat to control the heating system or that each radiator
is installed with an individual temperature control or an insulated radiator
enclosure with temperature controls, where applicable. Proper inspection for a
thermostatic radiator valve (TRV) or a radiator enclosure survey must include
radiators in the covered building that have over- or underheating issues, as
reported by testing, facility manager or occupant. Such inspections must be
conducted as follows:
            (A)   Two-pipe steam systems. For two-pipe steam distribution
systems, the RCx agent must confirm that either a TRV or an insulated radiator
enclosure with temperature controls has been installed at each radiator and is
in good working order.
            (B)   Hydronic systems. For hydronic distribution systems, the RCx
agent must confirm that temperature controls are functioning on radiators where
present. If controls are found to not be functioning properly, such controls
must be repaired or replaced.
            (C)   Electric-resistance systems. For buildings served by electric
resistance radiators, the RCx agent must confirm that each dwelling unit has at
least one thermostat to control the radiators in the unit.
         (ii)   Documentation: For each covered building in a report, the RCx
agent must provide one of the following completed on or after November 15,
2019:
            (A)   Proof of a completed utility TRV or orifice plate incentive
program; or
            (B)   The results of a TRV/radiator enclosure or other temperature
control survey by a qualified RCx agent as described herein.
      (5)   Piping insulation. 
         (i)   Inspection: The RCx agent must verify that all exposed and
readily accessible piping that is part of the heating and service hot water
system supply is insulated to the extent possible in accordance with section
C403.11.3 of the New York City Energy Conservation Code. Where existing
insulation is degraded, such insulation must be replaced.
         (ii)   Documentation: An attestation to the Department certifying
completion of such PECM.
      (6)   Steam and hot water tank insulation. 
         (i)   Inspection: The RCx agent must inspect hot water tanks to
confirm that they are insulated. Exception: Vacuum units are not required to be
inspected.
         (ii)   Documentation: An attestation to the Department certifying
completion of such PECM.
      (7)   Indoor/outdoor temperature sensors. 
         (i)   Inspection: The RCx agent must inspect and confirm the presence
of indoor/outdoor temperature systems in accordance with section C403.4.1.5 of
the New York City Energy Conservation Code. Where such sensors or controls are
not present, they must be installed. For steam distribution systems, this
requirement may be satisfied by the use of wireless temperature sensors that
provide feedback to the boiler or heating system control, provided that such
sensors have been installed in a minimum of 25% of dwelling units and are in
good working order.
         (ii)   Documentation:
            (A)   A screenshot or other output from a digital control system
showing that sensors are connected and in good working order and showing
sufficient information to identify the covered building; or,
            (B)   Proof of completion of a utility program to install such
indoor/outdoor temperature sensors and/or controls; or,
            (C)   The location of such temperature sensors and controls,
attestation that they were in good working order at the time of inspection, and
the date of completion of the inspection.
      (8)   Functioning steam traps. 
         (i)   Inspection: The RCx agent must inspect radiators to confirm that
each has a steam trap or orifice plate in good working order no earlier than
January 1, 2022, and no later than December 31, 2024. Proper inspection of
steam traps must include the RCx agent surveying the supply equipment and
distribution lines for each heating system serving a covered building and
confirming the presence of properly functioning steam traps, in accordance with
the following requirements for each distribution system type:
            (A)   Two-pipe steam systems. For two-pipe steam distribution
systems, all steam traps must be inspected, or tested to identify areas where
the system is not functioning properly. The Department shall provide guidance
with respect to such testing. All steam traps found to be functioning
improperly must be replaced, repaired, or rebuilt. Steam traps are not required
on radiators where functioning TRVs are installed with orifice plates and both
are found to be in good working order.
            (B)   High-pressure steam systems. For high-pressure steam
distribution systems, all high-pressure steam traps operating above 15 PSI of
pressure must be tested using ultrasonic leak detection to verify proper
operations. All steam traps found to be functioning improperly must be
replaced, repaired, or rebuilt.
         (ii)   Documentation: For each covered building in a report, the RCx
agent must provide one of the following:
            (A)   Proof of a completed utility orifice plate and/or steam trap
incentive program; or
            (B)   Results of a steam trap survey by a qualified RCx agent as
described herein.
      (9)   Steam system venting. 
         (i)   Inspection: For one-pipe steam systems and for atmospheric (non-
vacuum) two-pipe steam systems, the RCx agent must confirm that master venting
is installed at the ends of mains, at large horizontal pipe runs, at the tops
of all risers, and at vertical pipes branching off a main where appropriate.
Testing, pursuant to guidance issued by the Department, may be employed to
identify loops that are not functioning properly.
         (ii)   Documentation:
            (A)   Proof of a completed utility program that included
installation, repair, or replacement of master venting; or
            (B)   Schematic diagrams of the steam loops in the covered building
identifying the installed vents with a schedule indicating the date of testing
of each loop found to be in compliance with this subparagraph or the inspection
date of each vent indicating whether the vent was in good working order,
repaired, replaced, or rebuilt.
      (10)   Upgrade lighting. 
         (i)   Inspection: Lighting and lighting controls installed after July
1, 2010 must be compliant with the New York City Energy Conservation Code in
effect at the time of installation. Lighting and lighting controls installed
prior to July 1, 2010 must be compliant with the New York City Energy
Conservation Code in effect on July 1, 2010 or must be replaced. Compliance
must be confirmed through examination of installation records or visual
inspection.
         (ii)   Documentation: Documentation of this requirement must be
submitted to the Department in accordance with Article 310 of Chapter 3 of
Title 28 of the Administrative Code and the Department’s rules.
      (11)   Building envelope. 
         (i)   Inspection: The RCx agent must perform a visual inspection of
the envelope to confirm that required air barriers at fenestration, doors, and
other penetrations are in good working order. Where major sources of leakage
are identified, these seals must be repaired or replaced.
         (ii)   Documentation: An attestation to the Department certifying
completion of such PECM.
      (12)   Exhaust fan timers. 
         (i)   Inspection: The RCx agent must inspect exhaust fans intended for
intermittent operation to confirm that timers or other controls automatically
turn the fan off are installed and are in good working order. The RCx agent
must confirm that fans intended for continuous use are in good working order.
         (ii)   Documentation: An attestation to the Department certifying
completion of such PECM.
      (13)   Radiant barriers. 
         (i)   Inspection: The RCx agent must inspect radiators to confirm that
foil-faced radiant barriers or radiator reflectors are installed where
applicable prescriptive measures include the installation or replacement of
TRVs or installation of thermostatic radiator covers.
         (ii)   Documentation: An attestation to the Department certifying
completion of such PECM.
   (d)   Penalty for failure to file a report. An owner of a covered building
shall be liable for a civil penalty for failing to file a report in accordance
with § 28-321.3 of the Administrative Code and subdivision (b) of this section
within 60 days of the reporting deadline or by any extension deadline granted
by the Department.
      (1)   Penalty amount. An owner who fails to file such report shall be
liable for a civil penalty of $10,000 per covered building.
      (2)   Extension of time to file. An owner who is unable to file such
report by the reporting deadline may apply for an extension in accordance with
this paragraph. Such extension application must be filed with accompanying
documentation no sooner than 30 days before and no later than 60 days after the
reporting deadline. For purposes of this provision, an owner may receive an
extension where:
         (i)   The registered design professional or qualified RCx agent, as
applicable, hired for purposes of completing such report could not finish
completing such report by the reporting deadline. For purposes of this
paragraph, acceptable documentation in support of such extension request
includes a contract executed no later than February 1, 2025 and an affidavit
signed by the owner and the registered design professional or qualified RCx
agent stating that such professional or agent was unable to complete such
report on time and that such report will be completed and filed within 120 days
of the reporting deadline; or
         (ii)   Such owner has challenged a determination by the Department of
Finance regarding whether the square footage of the building qualifies such
building as a covered building, or a determination by the Department regarding
whether the building qualifies as a covered building under Article 320 or
Article 321, provided that such owner must file the report within 120 days of
the first determination by either Department that such building qualifies as a
covered building under this rule following such a dispute. For purposes of this
paragraph, acceptable documentation in support of such extension request is an
attestation signed by the owner indicating why the building does not qualify as
a covered building and all correspondence between the applicable agency and the
building owner related to such dispute.
   (e)   Penalty for failure to demonstrate energy conservation measures as
required in § 28-321.2 of the Administrative Code. An owner of a covered
building shall be liable for a civil penalty of $10,000 per covered building
for failing to demonstrate either:
      (1)   Pursuant to § 28-321.2.1 of the Administrative Code, for calendar
year 2024, the annual building emissions of such covered building did not
exceed what the applicable annual building emissions limit would be in 2030
pursuant to Article 320 of Chapter 3 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code and
rules promulgated thereunder if such building were a covered building as
defined in such Article 320; or
      (2)   Pursuant to § 28-321.2.2 of the Administrative Code, the
prescriptive energy conservation measures, as applicable, were fully
implemented by December 31, 2024.
   (f)   Mitigated penalties. An owner not in compliance with this section may
be eligible for a mitigated penalty as specified in 1 RCNY §
102-01 and this subdivision.
      (1)   Unexpected or unforeseeable event. An owner may demonstrate that an
unexpected or unforeseeable event or condition outside of their control
precluded compliance where a building was damaged as a result of a disaster,
including but not limited to a hurricane, severe flooding, or fire. Such owner
must provide photographs demonstrating the nature and extent of any such
damage, and a description of how such damage precluded compliance.
Demonstration of such an unexpected or unforeseeable event or condition may
result in zero penalty.
      (2)   Eligible energy conservation alteration projects. An owner may
demonstrate no later than May 1, 2025, in accordance with guidance issued by
the Department, that such building received a commitment from a state or local
agency or instrumentality no earlier than November 15, 2019 to receive
governmental assistance to engage in an eligible energy conservation alteration
project with a state or local agency or instrumentality that achieves
compliance with the annual building emissions limit described in § 28-321.2.1
of the Administrative Code or the energy conservation measures identified in §
28-321.2.2 of such Code. Such owner must provide a letter from such agency or
instrumentality detailing such project and demonstrating that the building will
meet the applicable compliance requirements. Demonstration of such eligible
energy conservation alteration project may result in zero penalty.
   (g)   Mediated resolution. 
      (1)   The Department may offer a mediated resolution to an owner not in
compliance with § 28-321.2.1 or § 28-321.2.2 of the Administrative Code,
provided that the Department will offer such resolution only where such owner
has applied for or been granted an adjustment by the Department in accordance
with § 28-320.7(2) of the Administrative Code and clause c of subparagraph iii
of paragraph 3 of subdivision c of 1 RCNY §
103-12, or the following criteria are met by May 1, 2025:
         (i)   Such owner submits an attestation in a form and manner
determined by the Department that such owner is not in compliance with § 28-
321.2.1 or § 28-321.2.2 of the Administrative Code; and
         (ii)   Such owner submits benchmarking information for the previous
calendar year to the benchmarking tool in accordance with Article 309 of
Chapter 3 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code and rules promulgated
thereunder as applicable, or the data required by § 28-309.4 of the
Administrative Code for the prior calendar year; and
         (iii)   Such resolution would facilitate the building owner achieving
compliance with Article 321 of Chapter 3 of Title 28 of the Administrative
Code.
      (2)   A mediated resolution is an agreement between the owner and the
Department not to bring an enforcement proceeding and may provide for terms and
conditions determined by the Department, including but not limited to requiring
the owner to submit a plan for compliance with § 28-321.2 of the Administrative
Code. The Department shall provide guidance with respect to such plans,
including examples of appropriate compliance plans.
      (3)   Such mediated resolution shall provide that an enforcement
proceeding will be commenced and civil penalties may be imposed for the
violation of Article 321 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code of the City of
New York where the owner fails to comply with the terms of such agreement,
pursuant to subdivision d and subdivision e of this section.
(Added City Record 12/21/2023, eff. 1/20/2024; amended City Record 12/20/2024,
eff. 1/19/2025)
§ 103-18 Upgrades of Lighting Systems and Installation of Electrical Sub-meters
in Tenant Spaces.
   (a)   Definitions. Terms defined in Article 310 and 311 of Title 28 of the
Administrative Code have the same meanings in this section.
   (b)   Report for required upgrades of lighting systems. No later than May 1,
2025, the owner of a covered building must submit a report, in a form and
manner determined by the Department, in accordance with § 28-310.3 of the
Administrative Code. Such report must include an attestation by a registered
design professional, a licensed master electrician, or a licensed special
electrician certifying that the lighting system of the entire building has been
inspected and upgrades have been implemented, pursuant to lighting power
allowances and controls requirements for each of the spaces, in compliance with
the New York City Energy Conservation Code that was in effect at the time of
such implementation, provided that the lighting system must comply with a
version of the New York City Energy Conservation Code in effect on or after
July 1, 2010.
   (c)   Penalty for failure to file a lighting upgrade report. An owner of a
covered building shall be liable for a civil penalty in the amount of $1,500
for failing to file a report in accordance with § 28-310.3 of the
Administrative Code and subdivision (b) of this section. Such penalty will be
assessed annually until the compliance report is filed.
   (d)   Report for required installation of electrical sub-meters in tenant
spaces. No later than May 1, 2025, the owner of a covered building must submit
a report, in a form and manner determined by the Department, in accordance with
§ 28-311.5 of the Administrative Code. Such report must include:
      (1)   A list of all covered tenant spaces in such covered building; and
      (2)   An attestation by a registered design professional, a licensed
master electrician, or a licensed special electrician certifying that sub-
meters have been installed for all covered tenant spaces in accordance with
Article 311 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code; and
      (3)   A sample monthly statement in accordance with § 28-311.4 of the
Administrative Code.
   (e)   Penalty for failure to demonstrate installation of electrical sub-
meters in tenant spaces. 
      (1)   An owner of a covered building shall be liable for a civil penalty
in the amount of $1,500 for failing to file a report in accordance with § 28-
311.5 of the Administrative Code and subdivision (d) of this section. Such
penalty will be assessed annually until the compliance report is filed.
      (2)   Failing to install a sub-meter in a covered tenant space in
accordance with § 28-311.3 of the Administrative Code and subdivision (d) of
this section shall be classified as a lesser violation. An owner of a covered
building shall be liable for a civil penalty for such violation. Such penalty
will be in the amount of $500 for each covered tenant space where a sub-meter
has not been installed as required and will be assessed annually until all
required sub-meters are installed.
   (f)   Procedures for penalties imposed under this section. 
      (1)   Where a civil penalty is imposed for failure to file a report
required by subdivision (b) or (d) of this section, the owner may request
review of such determination by the department. A request for such review shall
be submitted in writing within 30 days in a form and manner determined by the
Department. The Department shall review such request and provide a response
within 60 days.
      (2)   A civil penalty imposed for failing to install a sub-meter pursuant
to paragraph (2) of subdivision (e) of this section will be processed in
accordance with 1 RCNY §
102-01.
(Added City Record 12/21/2023, eff. 1/20/2024)
Subchapter D: Licensing and Registration of Businesses, Trades and Occupations
Engaged in Building Work
§ 104-01 License Qualifications and Other Requirements.
   (a)   Applicability. This subchapter shall apply to all licenses issued by
the Department, except where otherwise specified.
   (b)   Definitions. 
      (1)   For purposes of this subchapter, the terms "City," "Commissioner"
and "Department" shall have the same meanings as set forth in § 28-101.5 of the
Administrative Code.
      (2)   For purposes of this subchapter, the term "license" shall include
any license as defined in § 28-401.3 of the Administrative Code, except that
the term shall include "certificate of competence" whenever such a certificate
is required by Chapter 4 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code, and any Master
Electrician's License and Special Electrician's License as defined in § 27-3004
of the Administrative Code.
   (c)   Examinations. 
      (1)   Applicability. This subdivision shall apply to Department-sponsored
examinations administered for the following licenses:
         (i)   Electrician (Master/Special)
         (ii)   High Pressure Boiler Operating Engineer
         (iii)   Master Fire Suppression Piping Contractor (Classes A, B and C)
         (iv)   Master Plumber
         (v)   Oil Burning Equipment Installer
         (vi)   Elevator Agency Director
         (vii)   Elevator Agency Inspector
         (viii)   Rigger (Master/Special/Tower Crane)
         (ix)   Sign Hanger (Master/Special)
         (x)   Site Safety Manager
      (2)   Examination procedures. 
         (i)   The examination shall consist of a written test, practical test,
or a combination of such tests. The practical test may include oral, reading,
and/or practical components. Admission to a test does not imply that the
applicant possesses the minimum qualifications required. License applicants may
not release or otherwise make public the questions and answers for such tests.
         (ii)   Applicants must apply for any test by submitting an application
on a form prescribed by the Department to the Department's Licensing & Exams
Unit or its designee. The application must be accompanied by the examination
fee and any other required documents as set forth in the Department's rules.
Applicants reapplying to take any test, including after a failure, must do so
in accordance with the requirements in this paragraph.
         (iii)   Where either a written or practical test, but not both, is
required, applicants have six (6) months from submission of the application to
take the test.
         (iv)   Where both written and practical tests are required, applicants
have six (6) months from submission of the application to take the written
test, two (2) months from notification of passing the written test to submit an
application for the practical test, and six (6) months from submission of that
application to take the practical test.
         (v)   If an applicant fails the practical test, the applicant has up
to twenty-four (24) months from the date of notification of passing the written
test to pass the practical test.
         (vi)   Failed written test. 
            (A)   Applicants who fail the written test must wait at least
fourteen (14) days before reapplying to take the test.
            (B)   Each time an applicant wishes to take the written test,
including after a failure, the applicant must reapply to the Department and pay
the required fee as set forth in the Department's rules.
            (C)   Applicants may take the written test no more than three (3)
times within a six (6) month period.
            (D)   Applicants who fail the written test three (3) times within
six (6) months must wait six (6) months from the date of the third failed
written test before reapplying to take the written test.
         (vii)   Failed practical test. 
            (A)   Applicants who fail the practical test must wait at least
ninety (90) days before reapplying to take the test.
            (B)   Each time an applicant wishes to take the practical test,
including after a failure, the applicant must reapply to the Department and pay
the required fee as set forth in the Department's rules.
            (C)   Applicants may take the practical test no more than two (2)
times within a twelve (12) month period.
            (D)   Applicants who fail the practical test two (2) times within
twelve (12) months must wait six (6) months from the date of the second failed
practical test before reapplying to take the practical test.
         (viii)   An applicant who has been notified of failure to pass the
written or practical test may appeal such failure only if the applicant has
failed by not more than five (5) points. Such appeal must be in writing with an
original signature and addressed as the Commissioner may require. The appeal
must state the title of the license examination, the applicant's name, return
address and social security number, the date of the test and a detailed
statement of the grounds for appeal. The appeal must be received not later than
thirty (30) days from the date of notification of failure to pass the test.
         (ix)   Impersonating and cheating. 
            (A)   A person who impersonates another person, allows himself or
herself to be impersonated, or otherwise cheats in a license examination shall
be disqualified from receiving a license issued by the Department.
            (B)   A person disqualified for impersonating or otherwise cheating
may submit a written request to the Commissioner to appeal the
disqualification. The written request must set forth reasons to substantiate
the request and must be received not later than thirty (30) days from the date
of notification of disqualification.
         (x)   An applicant who passes a required examination must commence the
license application process by submitting an application as defined in
subdivision (e) with the department within one year of passing the examination
for licensure. Where both written and practical tests are required, the license
application process must be commenced within one year of passing the practical
test.
      (3)   License examinations administered by other agencies. License
examinations administered by other agencies for licenses regulated by the
Department shall continue to be subject to such other agency's rules and
regulations regarding examinations and investigations until the responsibility
for administering particular licensing examinations is transferred to the
Department, at which point the provisions of this rule shall apply.
   (d)   Education, training and experience. An applicant must possess the
minimum education, training and/or experience required by the Administrative
Code at the time of filing the application. For purposes of this subdivision,
the term "experience" refers to that experience gained in the relevant trade as
the result of fulltime compensated employment, unless otherwise determined by
the Commissioner.
   (e)   Documentation of education, training and experience submitted with the
application. For the purposes of qualification for licensure, "application"
refers to the documents submitted to start the background investigation. An
applicant must verify the claimed experience by submitting documentation with
the application, unless the applicant is required to pass an examination in
which case the documentation must be submitted upon passage of such
examination. Such documentation must include but not be limited to:
      (1)   Notarized affidavits or a notarized form prescribed by the
Department from all past or current employers under whom experience is claimed.
Affidavits or forms from New York City licensees shall be sealed where
applicable. Affidavits or forms must include the following information:
         (i)   Applicant's job title (helper, journeyman, etc.);
         (ii)   A detailed description of applicant's duties;
         (iii)   When applicant worked with the licensee (employment dates
shall be in mm/dd/yyyy format);
         (iv)   Whether employment was on a full or part-time basis, detailing
the average weekly hours; and
         (v)   Where license supervision is required, a statement by the
licensee that he or she directly supervised applicant's work.
      (2)   Social Security History of Earnings for the years applicant is
claiming as experience reflecting wages appropriate for the trade.
      (3)   Where the code requires supervision in the installation of plumbing
systems, the planning or design of plumbing systems, or the performance of fire
suppression piping work, including the planning or design of fire suppression
piping systems, evidence that the supervising licensees performed such work as
demonstrated by permits, completed contracts or such other documentation as the
Department may require.
      (4)   Where the applicant is self-employed, the applicant shall verify
that he or she performed qualifying work by submitting documentation, including
but not limited to personal and business tax returns, route sheets or work logs
from the supervising licensee, contracts with customers, and statements from
customers detailing the work the applicant performed and when that work was
performed.
      (5)   Where the applicant did not receive monetary compensation from his
or her employer as evidenced by payroll records, such as social security
payments, income tax withholding or the disbursement of other funds as required
by law for the benefit of such employee, the Department may consider such
experience if the applicant can provide evidence of an employer-employee
relationship. The applicant must provide a detailed explanation of the nature
of the employer-employee relationship, which may include, but is not limited
to, written agreements between the applicant and the employer, the employer's
workers compensation records, time-keeping records, work logs, or other
contemporaneous documentation as the Department may require.
   (f)   Fitness. 
      (1)   An applicant for a license issued by the Department, other than a
Master, Special or Tower Crane Rigger or Hoisting Machine Operator, must
provide evidence of fitness to perform the work authorized by the license.
      (2)   An applicant for license renewal, other than a license for Master,
Special or Tower Crane Rigger or Hoisting Machine Operator, must provide
evidence of fitness to perform the work authorized to be performed by a holder
of the license held or once held by the applicant. A renewal applicant must
satisfy these requirements at every subsequent renewal.
      (3)   Such evidence of fitness must be on a form prescribed by the
Commissioner and must establish that the applicant has passed a physical
examination.
      (4)   The Department may also require that an applicant take a substance
abuse test and provide evidence of a negative result for such test. Such
evidence must include the name, address and telephone number of the laboratory
that performed the test and consent to the release by such laboratory of the
test results to the Department upon request of the Department.
      (5)   Hoisting Machine Operators and Riggers must comply with the fitness
provisions of 1 RCNY §
104-09 and 1 RCNY §
104-10, respectively.
   (g)   Investigation of applicant. 
      (1)   The Department or its designee shall conduct an investigation of
each applicant to determine the applicant's fitness and qualification for the
license. The burden of proving that an applicant meets the required
qualifications is on the applicant. An applicant's failure to meet the
requirements specified by the Administrative Code or by the Department's rules,
and/or an applicant's refusal to cooperate with an investigation, will result
in denial of the license or certificate of competence.
      (2)   Applicants who refuse to provide all requested documents within six
(6) months of the date of request shall be denied a license or certificate of
competence.
   (h)   Issuance of license after approval. 
      (1)   An applicant who passes an examination required pursuant to this
rule, is found to have met the qualifications of § 28-401.6 of the
Administrative Code, and has been investigated by the Department or its
designee, shall receive a notice of approval from the Department.
      (2)   The applicant must furnish to the Department all requested forms,
documents, and fees within one (1) year of the date of the Department's notice
of approval. Failure to do so within the time specified will result in the
denial of license issuance and will require a re-examination and reapplication.
      (3)   Upon issuance of a license, all applicants must provide proof in a
form prescribed by the Department, that the business the applicant affixes to
such license, is authorized to operate in the State of New York by the New York
State Department of State.
   (i)   Reconsideration. An applicant who has been notified of failure to meet
the fitness and qualification requirements and who has additional relevant
information or documentation for the Department's review may request
reconsideration. Such request for reconsideration must be in writing with a
signature and addressed as the Commissioner may require. The request for
reconsideration must state the title of the license, the applicant's name and
return address, the date of the Department's denial and a detailed statement of
the grounds for reconsideration with any supporting documentation. The
Department must receive the request for reconsideration not later than sixty
(60) days from the date of notification of the denial of the license.
   (j)   Denial of issuance. Failure to pay any outstanding fines, penalties or
fees related to the individual's professional dealings with the City, within a
specified time period, may result in the denial of the issuance of any license
or registration.
   (k)   Change of address. 
      (1)   Applicants must promptly notify the Department in writing of any
address change that occurs after filing the license application.
      (2)   Failure to furnish such notification may result in denial of the
license and the loss of the opportunity to complete subsequent portions of the
license examination, including any tests or investigation.
      (3)   All applicants must have an agent for the acceptance of service of
process or maintain a New York City address. A Post Office Box is not
acceptable for such purposes. The name and address of the agent and any changes
to such name or address must be filed with the Department. Failure to do so
constitutes a waiver of challenge to service of process.
   (l)   Place of business. 
      (1)   Where a licensee has a place of business in New York City, that
location must comply with all applicable provisions of the Zoning Resolution.
      (2)   Pursuant to § 28-401.18 of Chapter 4 of Title 28 of the
Administrative Code, a place of business in New York City is not required for
holders of the following licenses:
         (i)   Concrete Safety Manager.
         (ii)   Construction Superintendent.
         (iii)   Filing Representative.
         (iv)   General Contractor.
         (v)   High-Pressure Boiler Operating Engineer.
         (vi)   Hoisting Machine Operator.
         (vii)   Lift Director.
         (viii)   Safety Registrant.
         (ix)   Site Safety Coordinator.
         (x)   Site Safety Manager.
         (xi)   Welder.
      (3)   A Licensed Master Plumber or Licensed Master Fire Suppression
Piping Contractor must have a place of business within New York City and must
display prominently to the public in the window of the place of business
designated in his or her application or on a sign securely attached to the
premises, the licensee’s full name with the words “Licensed Master Plumber” or
“Licensed Master Fire Suppression Piping Contractor” and the Department-issued
license number immediately thereunder. If the business is conducted under a
trade name, or by a co-partnership or corporation, such trade name or co-
partnership or corporation name must be placed immediately above the full name
or names of the licensee(s) conducting the business as provided by §§ 28-
408.6.2 and 28-410.7.2 of the Administrative Code.
(Amended City Record 2/14/2017, eff. 3/16/2017; amended City Record 3/4/2022,
eff. 4/3/2022; amended City Record 4/29/2024, eff. 5/29/2024)
§ 104-02 Required Insurance.
   (a)   The following categories of licensee are subject to the requirements
set forth in this section:
      (1)   Elevator Agency Director.
      (2)   General Contractor.
      (3)   Master Electrician.
      (4)   Master Fire Suppression Piping Contractor.
      (5)   Master Plumber.
      (6)   Oil Burner Equipment Installer.
      (7)   Rigger (Master/Special/Tower Crane).
      (8)   Safety Registrants.
      (9)   Sign Hanger (Master/Special).
      (10)   Special Electrician (employer's coverage).
   (b)   Commercial general liability insurance.
      (1)   Each applicant for and holder of a license shall, at its expense,
procure and maintain commercial general liability (CGL) insurance covering the
types and scope of work performed under the license, which satisfies the
requirements of this subdivision. All CGL insurance policies shall:
         (i)   Be issued by a company or companies that may lawfully issue the
required policy and has an A.M. Best rating of at least A-VII or a Standard and
Poor's rating of at least A;
         (ii)   Provide coverage at least as broad as set forth in the most
recent edition of Insurance Services Office (ISO) Form CG 0001; and
         (iii)   Provide coverage of at least $1,000,000 (one million dollars)
combined single limit per occurrence.
      (2)   Each applicant for and holder of a license shall provide proof of
CGL insurance by submission of a certificate of insurance in a form
satisfactory to the Department that:
         (i)   satisfies the requirements of subdivision (e) of this section;
         (ii)   identifies the insurance company that issued such insurance
policy, the policy number, limit(s) of insurance, and expiration date; and
         (iii)   is accompanied by a sworn statement in a form prescribed by
the Department from a licensed insurance broker certifying that the insurance
certificate may be relied upon as accurate in all respects and that the
insurance certificate thereon is in force.
      (3)   Any holder of a license who, during the term of the license, is
issued any permit of the types set forth in Administrative Code § 28-105.2
shall cause the City, together with its officials and employees, to be named as
an additional insured on the insurance required under this subdivision with
regard to all work to be performed pursuant to all such permits. The City's
coverage shall be at least as broad as set forth in the most recent edition of
ISO Form CG 2012 or CG 2026.
   (c)   Workers' compensation insurance. Each applicant for and holder of a
license shall, at its own expense, procure and maintain workers' compensation
insurance, or a waiver of such insurance from the New York State Workers'
Compensation Board, and shall submit proof thereof in a form acceptable to the
Department and in compliance with subdivision (e) of this section. ACORD forms
are not acceptable proof of workers' compensation coverage.
   (d)   Disability insurance. Each applicant for and holder of a license
shall, at its own expense, procure and maintain disability insurance, or a
waiver of such insurance from the New York State Workers' Compensation Board,
and shall submit proof thereof in a form acceptable to the Department and in
compliance with subdivision (e) of this section.
   (e)   Proof of insurance. Proof of insurance shall not contain any
handwritten corrections and shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The applicant's or licensee's license, registration or tracking
number(s);
      (2)   With regard to all workers' compensation or disability
certificates, the applicant's or licensee's federal Employer Identification
Number or social security number, and policy expiration date(s);
      (3)   The policy holder's business address (not a post office box)
exactly as it appears on the Department's Buildings Information System ("BIS");
and
      (4)   New York City Department of Buildings, Attn: Licensing Unit, 280
Broadway, 6th Floor, New York, NY 10007 specified as a certificate holder.
   (f)   If, at any time after a license has been issued, any policy of
insurance required by this section expires, is cancelled or otherwise
terminates, the licensee shall notify the Department and procure, at its own
expense, a renewal or replacement policy that fully complies with the
requirements of this section and, prior to the date of such termination, submit
proof thereof in conformity with the requirements of this section.
   (g)   Any applicant for or holder of a license shall provide a copy of any
insurance policy secured in compliance with this section within thirty (30)
days of a request for such policy by the Department or the New York City Law
Department.
   (h)   A failure by the City or the Department to enforce any of the
foregoing requirements shall not constitute a waiver of such requirement or any
other requirement.
(Amended City Record 3/4/2022, eff. 4/3/2022; amended City Record 4/29/2024,
eff. 5/29/2024)
§ 104-03 Term of License. [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 3/4/2022, eff. 4/3/2022; repealed City Record 4/29/2024,
eff. 5/29/2024)
§ 104-04 Renewal.
License renewals shall be governed by the provisions of Administrative Code §
28-401.12.
§ 104-05 Reinstatement of License. [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 4/25/2017, eff. 5/25/2017; repealed City Record 4/29/2024,
eff. 5/29/2024)
§ 104-06 Continuing Education Requirements.
   (a)   Applicability. This section shall be applicable to license holders
seeking renewal of licenses requiring the completion of continuing education
course(s) and to applicants seeking Department approval to provide continuing
education courses for the following license types:
      (1)   Concrete Safety Manager.
      (2)   Construction Superintendent.
      (3)   Electrician (Master/Special).
      (4)   Filing Representative.
      (5)   Hoisting Machine Operator.
      (6)   Lift Director.
      (7)   Master Fire Suppression Piping Contractor.
      (8)   Master Plumber.
      (9)   Rigger (Master/Special/Tower Crane).
      (10)   Site Safety Coordinator.
      (11)   Site Safety Manager.
   (b)   Course requirements for license renewals. The following courses are
required for renewal of the below listed license types:
      (1)   Concrete Safety Manager. During the one (1) year immediately prior
to renewal, the licensee must have successfully completed a Department-approved
course that is at least eight (8) hours in length in concrete operations.
      (2)   Construction Superintendent. During the one (1) year immediately
prior to renewal, the licensee must have successfully completed a Department-
approved course that is at least eight (8) hours in length, covering the site
safety provisions of Chapter 33 of the New York City Building Code and related
rules and regulations, as well as relevant safety precautions.
      (3)   Electrician (Master/Special). During the one (1) year immediately
prior to renewal, the licensee must have successfully completed a Department-
approved course that is at least eight (8) hours in length, covering the New
York City Electrical Code and other requirements pursuant to 1 RCNY §
105-03 of subchapter E of this chapter.
      (4)   Filing Representative. Renewals for class 1 or class 2 filing
representative registration are subject to the requirements set forth in 1 RCNY
§
104-24.
      (5)   Hoisting Machine Operator. During the one (1) year immediately
prior to renewal, the licensee must have successfully completed a Department-
approved course that is at least eight (8) hours in length covering those
provisions of the administrative code and regulations that are unique to New
York City for the operation of a hoisting machine and the unique hazards of
operating a hoisting machine within New York City.
      (6)   Lift Director. During the one (1) year immediately prior to
renewal, the licensee must have successfully completed a Department-approved
course that is at least eight (8) hours in length covering the lift direction
provisions of Chapter 33 of the New York City Building Code and related rules
and regulations, as well as relevant safety precautions.
      (7)   Master Fire Suppression Piping Contractor and Master Plumber.
During the one (1) year immediately prior to renewal, the licensee must have
successfully completed a Department-approved course that is at least seven (7)
hours in length.
      (8)   Master Rigger. During the one (1) year immediately prior to
renewal, the licensee must have successfully completed both:
         (i)   A Department-approved rigging supervisor course that is at least
sixteen (16) hours in length and meets the requirements of Section 3316.9.2 of
the New York city building code; and
         (ii)   A Department-approved lift director course that is at least
eight (8) hours in length covering the lift direction provisions of Chapter 33
of the New York city building code and related rules and regulations, as well
as relevant safety precautions.
      (9)   Special Rigger. During the one (1) year immediately prior to
renewal, the licensee must have successfully completed both:
         (i)   A Department-approved suspended scaffold supervisor course that
is at least eight (8) hours in length and meets the requirements of Section
3314.4.5.3 of the New York city building code; and
         (ii)   A Department-approved course that is at least eight (8) hours
in length covering hoisting equipment, other than suspended scaffolds, utilized
in the special rigger industry.
      (10)   Tower Crane Rigger. During the one (1) year immediately prior to
renewal, the licensee must have successfully completed a Department-approved
tower crane rigging course that is at least eight (8) hours in length and meets
the requirements of Section 3319.10.1 of the New York City Building Code.
      (11)   Site Safety Coordinator. During the one (1) year immediately prior
to renewal, the licensee must have successfully completed a Department-approved
course that is at least eight (8) hours in length covering the site safety
provisions of Chapter 33 of the New York City Building Code and related rules
and regulations, as well as relevant safety precautions.
      (12)   Site Safety Manager. During the one (1) year immediately prior to
renewal, the licensee must have successfully completed a Department-approved
course that is at least eight (8) hours in length covering the site safety
provisions of Chapter 33 of the New York City Building Code and related rules
and regulations, as well as relevant safety precautions.
   (c)   Department-approved courses. The Department will approve continuing
education courses pursuant to the requirements of 1 RCNY §
105-03.
   (d)   Additional powers of the commissioner. The commissioner may, upon a
determination of good cause, extend the dates and deadlines set forth in this
rule.
(Amended City Record 4/25/2017, eff. 5/25/2017; amended City Record 4/29/2024,
eff. 5/29/2024 and 1/1/2025)
§ 104-07 Suspension or Revocation.
   (a)   Hearings concerning disciplinary proceedings pursuant to
Administrative Code § 28-401.19 seeking suspension or revocation, with or
without penalties, against any licensee or holder of a certificate[s] of
competence issued by the Department shall be held before the Office of
Administrative Trials and Hearings pursuant to 1 RCNY §
105-05 and shall be governed by the rules of procedure utilized at that
tribunal.
   (b)   Stop work and suspension of permits. Upon any suspension or revocation
of a license, certificate of competence, approval or authorization, unless
replaced by another licensee, certificate holder, approved agency, special
inspector, or registered design professional within five (5) business days of
such suspension or revocation, all open jobs on which the licensee, certificate
holder, approved agency, special inspector, or registered design professional
is designated shall be stopped and the permits shall be suspended until such
time as another licensee, certificate holder, approved agency, special
inspector, or registered design professional is designated or such permits
expire. Where the Commissioner has summarily suspended a license or certificate
of competence pursuant to Administrative Code § 28-401.19.1, all open jobs on
which the licensee, certificate holder, approved agency, special inspector, or
registered design professional is designated shall be stopped immediately and
the permits shall be suspended immediately for the earlier of the duration of
the suspension or until such time as another licensee, certificate holder,
approved agency, special inspector, or registered design professional is
designated or until such permits expire.
   (c)   Conduct of hearing by office of administrative trials and hearings.
The administrative law judge assigned to hear any matter specified in this rule
shall submit his or her proposed findings of fact and recommended decision to
the Commissioner. Where the Commissioner has summarily suspended a license or
certificate of competence pursuant to Administrative Code § 28-401.19.1, at the
conclusion of the hearing on the first return date, the administrative law
judge may lift the suspension, finally determine the matter, or, if the
administrative law judge finds that the summary suspension was appropriate, but
that further hearings are necessary to make a final determination of the
charges, the administrative law judge may make a finding as to the need for
further hearings and continue the suspension pending such further hearings
without need for issuance of a Commissioner's order.
§ 104-08 Qualifications for Site Safety Manager and Site Safety Coordination
Certificates.
   (a)   Site safety managers. The Department of Buildings shall issue a site
safety manager certificate to an individual who shall have satisfied the
requirements of section 28-402.2 of the Administrative Code.
      (1)   A holder of a site safety manager certificate may not
simultaneously hold an active site safety coordinator certificate.
      (2)   For the purposes of satisfying the requirements of paragraph 3.8 of
§ 28-402.2, an acceptable 18 month on-the-job training program must be
completed within two years prior to application and must meet the following
criteria:
         (i)   The buildings worked on must have been major buildings; and
         (ii)   The work must have been site safety work performed under the
direct supervision of a certified site safety manager. For purposes of this
subdivision, direct supervision shall include daily training at the location
specified in the monthly summaries in the presence of the supervising certified
site safety manager; and
         (iii)   The trainee must have worked on a paid and full-time basis;
and
         (iv)   Dated and notarized summaries must have been completed by the
certified supervising site safety manager at the end of every month. Such
summaries must specify the location and the precise nature of the construction
activity the trainee was engaged in at the location for the month covered; and
         (v)   The program must include at least four months of training in
soil or foundation work, and at least four months of training in structural
erection; and
         (vi)   The supervising certified site safety manager may supervise a
maximum of three trainees simultaneously.
   (b)   Site Safety Coordinators. The Department of Buildings shall issue a
site safety coordinator certificate to an individual who shall have satisfied
the requirements of § 28-403.2 of the Administrative Code.
      (1)   A holder of a site safety coordinator certificate may not
simultaneously hold an active site safety manager certificate.
      (2)   Applicants for a site safety coordinator certificate shall not be
required to take an examination in order to qualify for the certificate.
      (3)   The term of a site safety coordinator certificate issued to a new
or renewal applicant is one (1) year, measured from the date the certificate is
issued.
   (c)   The term "major building" as used in this rule shall have the meaning
given to it in section 202 of the New York City Building Code.
(Amended City Record 7/15/2022, eff. 8/14/2022; amended City Record 4/29/2024,
eff. 5/29/2024)
§ 104-09 Hoisting Machine Operators.
   (a)   Qualifications. In addition to the qualification requirements set
forth in the Administrative Code, an applicant for a Hoisting Machine Operator
license shall satisfy the following requirements:
      (1)   Driver's license. An applicant for a Hoisting Machine Operator
license shall possess a valid driver's license, without conditions or
restrictions which the Department has determined may impact the safe operation
of hoisting machinery, effective for the term of the Hoisting Machine Operator
license sought.
      (2)   Physical fitness. An applicant for a Hoisting Machine Operator
license shall provide evidence on a form prescribed by the Commissioner that he
or she meets the physical qualifications of Section 5-3.1.2(a) of ASME B 30.5-
2021, and has passed a physical exam and a substance abuse test to verify such
physical qualification. Such evidence shall include the name, address and
telephone number of the laboratory that performed the tests and consent to the
release by such laboratory of the test results to the Department upon request
of the Department.
      (3)   Certifications. An applicant for a hoisting machine operator
license must provide copies of certifications required by subdivision (d) of
this section.
      (4)   Experience qualifications. In order to satisfy the experience
qualifications as set forth in § 28-405.3 of the New York City Administrative
Code, the experience must have been obtained in accordance with the following:
         (i)   Class A license applicants. An applicant for a Class A Hoisting
Machine Operator license must provide proof demonstrating that the three (3)
years of experience required by § 28-405.3 of the New York City Administrative
Code was acquired operating hoisting machines in New York City City in the
presence of and under the direct supervision of a licensed Class A or Class B
Hoisting Machine Operator in accordance with 1 RCNY §
104-23. The experience must have been obtained on hoisting machines of a type,
size, and capacity authorized to be operated by a Class A licensed hoisting
machine operator. At least two (2) years of the required three (3) years of
experience must have been in the operation of mobile cranes with a
manufacturer's rated capacity in excess of 50 tons (45.36 t) or in the
operation of tower cranes, other than self-erecting tower cranes. The remaining
year of experience can be on any type of mobile or tower crane, derrick, or
rotating telehandler authorized to be operated by a Class A HMO licensee; this
includes but is not limited to cranes with a capacity under 50 tons (45.36 t).
         (ii)   Class C and limited hoisting machine operator license
applicants. An applicant for a Class C or a Limited Hoisting Machine Operator
license must provide proof demonstrating:
            (A)   That at least one (1) year of the two (2) years of experience
required by § 28-405.3 of the New York City Administrative Code was acquired in
New York City in the operation of hoisting machines as specified for each
license in Table 1, and that such operation was in connection with building or
infrastructure construction, alteration, or demolition work, or the
installation or removal of temporary structures or temporary construction
installations, or the delivery or retrieval of materials, equipment, or other
items to or from a building; but excluding work in industrial or commercial
plants or yards;
            (B)   That all experience obtained in New York City was acquired
operating mobile or tower cranes or rotating telehandlers in the presence of
and under the direct supervision of a New York City licensed Hoisting Machine
Operator in accordance with 1 RCNY §
104-23; and
            (C)   That experience obtained outside of New York City was
acquired in the United States operating mobile or tower cranes or rotating
telehandlers in the presence of and under the direct supervision of a hoisting
machine operator licensed, registered, or certified in good standing to operate
such equipment within the relevant jurisdiction. Applicants who are duly
licensed, registered, or certified in good standing to operate the equipment in
the relevant jurisdiction for which the experience is being credited may credit
self-supervision toward this requirement.
            Exceptions: 
               1.   Where the applicant already possesses a New York City
Limited Hoisting Machine Operator license, such possession is deemed to satisfy
one (1) year of the required two (2) years of experience. Such applicants need
only comply with clauses (A) and (B) of this subparagraph.
               2.   Applicants for a Limited Hoisting Machine Operator license
for the equipment for which such license is sought and obtained may credit
experience earned in New York City operating an articulating boom crane, mini
crane, or rotating telehandler neither in the presence nor under the direct
supervision of a New York City licensed Hoisting Machine Operator, provided,
however, that such experience was earned prior to November 7, 2024 and no more
than three (3) years prior to the date of application for licensure, and
provided further that such operation was performed in connection with building
or infrastructure construction, alteration, or demolition work, or the
installation or removal of temporary structures or temporary construction
installations, or the delivery or retrieval of materials, equipment, or other
items to or from a building, but excluding work in industrial or commercial
plants or yards. Such experience will be credited as satisfying the provisions
of clause (A) of this subparagraph at a rate of 125 hours of operator
experience equaling one month of experience. Where the operator has in excess
of 1,500 hours of qualifying experience, the remainder of the experience will
be credited towards satisfying the second year of experience required by § 28-
405.3 of the New York City Administrative Code at a rate of 125 hours of
operator experience equaling one month of experience. Proof of such experience
shall be documented in the form of an affidavit provided by the department and
signed by the applicant and the applicant’s employer or union. However, the
department may decline to credit such experience to any individual who
defaulted on or has been found liable for unsafe operation of a crane or
telehandler after proceedings before the environmental control board or in an
adjudication in criminal court, if such default or judgment occurred within the
five (5) years preceding such application. The department may also delay a
determination under this exception for any applicant against whom there is an
open violation for the unsafe operation of a crane or telehandler issued within
the five (5) years preceding such application. Applicants subject to this
exception may be asked by the department to submit proof, in addition to the
affidavit described above, in support of their operating record.
Table 1: Specific experience requirements for HMO C and limited license
applicants 
 
License Type Required one (1) year of experience in NYC
             Wheel mounted cranes, other than telehandlers, with a telescoping boom,
Class C      including jibs and any other extensions to the boom, not exceeding 200 feet
license      (60.96 m) in length and with a manufacturer’s rated capacity in excess of 3 tons
             (2.72 t).
Limited      An articulating boom crane, including jibs and any other extensions to the boom,
license for  not exceeding 200 feet (60.96 m) in length and with a manufacturer’s rated
articulating capacity in excess of 1 ton (0.91 t) attached to a commercial truck chassis.
boom cranes
Limited      Boom trucks with a telescoping boom, including jibs and any other extensions to
license for  the boom, not exceeding 200 feet (60.96 m) in length and with a manufacturer’s
boom trucks  rated capacity in excess of 3 tons (2.72 t).
Limited      Mobile cranes, other than boom trucks or telehandlers, with a telescoping boom,
license for  including jibs and any other extensions to the boom, not exceeding 50 feet
mini cranes  (15.240 m) in length and with a manufacturer’s rated capacity of 3 tons (2.72 t)
             or less.
Limited      Boom trucks with a telescoping boom, including jibs and any other extensions to
license for  the boom, not exceeding 135 feet (41.148 m) in length and with a manufacturer’s
sign hanging rated capacity of 3 tons (2.72 t) or less, used exclusively for the erection,
cranes       maintenance, or removal of signs.
Limited      Wheel mounted rotating telehandlers with a telescoping boom, including jibs and
license for  any other extensions to the boom, not exceeding 200 feet (60.96 m) in length and
telehandlers with a manufacturer’s rated capacity in excess of 3 tons (2.72 t).
 
         (iii)   Limited license alternate pathway. Individuals who submit an
application for a Limited Hoisting Machine Operator license for articulating
boom cranes, mini cranes, or telehandlers on or before November 6, 2024, may,
in lieu of the requirements set forth in subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph,
provide proof in the form of an affidavit provided by the department and signed
by the applicant and the applicant’s employer or union, attesting that the
applicant:
            (A)   for a limited license for articulating boom cranes has
obtained 1,500 hours of experience on or after January 1, 2019, operating, in
New York City, articulating boom cranes attached to a commercial truck chassis,
with the operation performed in connection with building or infrastructure
construction, alteration, or demolition work, or the installation or removal of
temporary structures or temporary construction installations, or the delivery
or retrieval of materials, equipment, or other items to or from a building; but
excluding work in industrial or commercial plants or yards;
            (B)   for a limited license for mini cranes, has obtained 1,500
hours of experience on or after January 1, 2019, operating, in New York City,
mobile cranes, other than boom trucks or telehandlers, with a telescoping boom,
including jibs and any other extensions to the boom, not exceeding 50 feet
(15.24 m) in length with a manufacturer’s rated capacity of 3 tons (2.72 t) or
less, with the operation performed in connection with building or
infrastructure construction, alteration, or demolition work, or the
installation or removal of temporary structures or temporary construction
installations, or the delivery or retrieval of materials, equipment, or other
items to or from a building; but excluding work in industrial or commercial
plants or yards; or
            (C)   for a limited license for a telehandler, has obtained 1,500
hours of experience on or after January 1, 2019, operating, in New York City,
rotating telehandlers, with the operation performed in connection with building
or infrastructure construction, alteration, or demolition work, or the
installation or removal of temporary structures or temporary construction
installations, or the delivery or retrieval of materials, equipment, or other
items to or from a building; but excluding work in industrial or commercial
plants or yards.
         Exception: The department may decline to issue a Limited Hoisting
Machine Operator pursuant to this subparagraph to any individual who defaulted
on or has been found liable for unsafe operation of a crane or telehandler
after proceedings before the environmental control board or in an adjudication
in criminal court, if such default or judgment occurred within the five (5)
years preceding such application. The department may also delay a determination
under this subparagraph for any applicant against whom there is an open
violation for the unsafe operation of a crane or telehandler issued within the
five (5) years preceding such application. Applicants subject to this exception
may be asked by the department to submit proof, in addition to the affidavit
described above, in support of their operating record.
      (5)   Outrigger setup. For a Class A, Class C, or Limited Hoisting
Machine Operator license, the qualifying experience as specified in
subparagraphs (i) and (ii) of paragraph (4) of this subdivision shall include
outrigger placement incorporating at least one hundred (100) crane set-ups. In
no case shall qualifying set-ups be obtained on a crane that has a boom,
including jibs and any other extensions to the boom, exceeding 200 feet (60.96
m) in length, unless the boom and all its attachments are fully retracted or
stowed according to the manufacturer’s specifications. Such set-ups must occur
at a jobsite, crane yard, training center, or other location acceptable to the
commissioner, and must be witnessed by a New York City licensed Hoisting
Machine Operator. However, the witnessing licensee may only witness outrigger
placement on equipment which their New York City license authorizes them to
operate.
         (i)   Class A license applicants. For a Class A Hoisting Machine
Operator license, at least 25 of the set-ups must have occurred on mobile
cranes with a manufacturer’s rated capacity in excess of 50 tons (45.36 t).
Where an applicant for a Class A Hoisting Machine Operator license already
possesses a Class C Hoisting Machine Operator license, the requirement for the
remaining 75 set-ups is waived.
         (ii)   Class C license applicants. For a Class C Hoisting Machine
Operator license, at least 25 of the set-ups must have occurred on the type of
machinery specified Table 1 for the Class C license. Where an applicant for a
Class C Hoisting Machine Operator license already possesses a Limited Hoisting
Machine Operator license, the requirement for the remaining 75 set-ups is
waived.
         (iii)   Limited license applicants. For a Limited Hoisting Machine
Operator license, at least 25 of the set-ups must have occurred on the type of
machinery specified Table 1 for the type of limited license sought. Where an
applicant for a Limited Hoisting Machine Operator license already possesses a
different Limited Hoisting Machine Operator license, the requirement for the
remaining 75 set-ups is waived.
      (6)   Additional qualification requirements. In addition to the
qualification requirements set forth in the Administrative Code and in this
subdivision (a), all Hoisting Machine Operator license applicants must, during
the one (1) year immediately prior to application, complete a training course
that is at least forty (40) hours in length, approved by the Department,
covering those provisions of local law and regulation that are unique to New
York City for the operation of a hoisting machine and the unique hazards of
operating a hoisting machine within New York City.
         Exception: Individuals who submit an application for a Limited
Hoisting Machine Operator license for articulating boom cranes, mini cranes, or
telehandlers on or before November 6, 2024, need only complete a training
course that is at least eight (8) hours in length, approved by the Department,
covering those provisions of local law and regulation that are unique to New
York City for the operation of a hoisting machine and the unique hazards of
operating a hoisting machine within New York City. Such course must have been
completed during the two (2) years immediately prior to application.
   (b)   Fitness requirements for renewal. As a condition of license renewal, a
licensed or previously licensed Hoisting Machine Operator shall provide
evidence of fitness to perform the work authorized to be performed by a holder
of the license held or once held by the applicant. Such evidence shall consist
of:
      (1)   Physical fitness. Evidence on a form prescribed by the Commissioner
that the licensee meets the physical qualifications of Section 5-3.1.2(a) of
ASME B 30.5-2021, and has passed a physical exam and a substance abuse test to
verify such physical qualification. Such evidence shall include the name,
address and telephone number of the laboratory that performed the tests and
consent to the release by such laboratory of the test results to the Department
upon request of the Department.
      (2)   Certifications. Copies of certifications as required by subdivision
(d) of this section.
      (3)   Driver's license. A renewal applicant shall possess a valid
driver's license, without conditions or restrictions which the Department has
determined may impact the safe operation of hoisting machinery, effective for
the term of the renewal sought.
      (4)   Renewal. A renewal applicant shall satisfy the requirements of this
rule at every subsequent renewal.
   (c)   Additional limited hosting machine operator licenses. The following
additional Limited Hoisting Machine Operator licenses are hereby established.
      (1)   Limited license for telehandlers. Limited license to operate wheel
mounted telehandlers (non-rotating (“fixed”) or rotating) with a telescoping
boom, including jibs and any other extensions to the boom, not exceeding 200
feet (60.96 m) in length with a manufacturer’s rated capacity of 50 tons (45.36
t) or less.
   (d)   Certifications for a hoisting machine operator license. Where a
certification for the operation of a type of hoisting machine has been
established by Table 2 of this subdivision, no licensed hoisting machine
operator may operate such type of machinery until the licensee possesses a
certification for that type of hoisting machine and such certification has been
listed on the hoisting machine operator's license by the department.
   Exception: The licensee is operating the hoisting machine as a learner in
accordance with 1 RCNY §
104-23.
      (1)   Certifications to be acceptable and accredited. The certification
must be acceptable to the commissioner and be issued by a hoisting machine
operator certification program that is accredited by the National Commission
for Certifying Agencies (NCCA) or the American National Standards Institute
(ANSI) for the specific type of hoisting machine to be operated.
      (2)   Licensee to inform department of changes to certification. The
licensed hoisting machine operator must immediately notify the department if a
certification identified in Table 2 of this subdivision and held by the
licensee is suspended, revoked, not renewed, or otherwise lapses. The licensed
hoisting machine operator must provide a copy of re-certifications and new
certifications identified in Table 2 of this subdivision to the department
within 30 days.
      (3)   Friction cranes or derricks. No person who holds a Class A or Class
C hoisting machine operator license may operate a friction crane or a friction
derrick, or supervise the operation of a learner on a friction crane or a
friction derrick, until the licensee has passed at least one of the practical
certification exams listed in Table 2 on a friction crane, and such
authorization to operate a friction crane or a friction derrick has been listed
on the hoisting machine operator's license by the department. For a Hoisting
Machine Operator Class B applicant, one of the practical certification exams
must, in accordance with the requirements of Table 2 of this subdivision, be on
a friction crane. In addition, no person who holds a Limited Hoisting Machine
Operator License may operate a friction crane or friction derrick, or supervise
the operation of a learner on a friction crane or a friction derrick.
      (4)   Derricks. No licensed hoisting machine operator may operate a
derrick, or supervise the operation of a learner on a derrick, unless the
licensee possesses a tower crane certification, and such certification has been
listed on the hoisting machine operator's license by the department.
Table 2: Certifications by licensing class 1  
Certification Hoisting machine operator licensing class
              A B C
Certification                       Hoisting machine operator licensing class
                                    A          B          C
NCCCO Telescopic Boom Crane - Fixed Required   Required   Required
Cab
NCCCO Telescopic Boom Crane - Swing Required   Required   Required
Cab
NCCCO Lattice Boom Crane 2          Required   Required
NCCCO Tower Crane                   Additional Required
NCCCO Articulating Boom Crane
- or -
NCCCO Boom Crane w/Winch            Additional Additional Additional
- or -
NCCCO Articulating Boom Loader 3
NCCCO Dedicated Pile Driver         Additional Additional Additional
NCCCO Rotating Telehandler 4        Additional Additional Additional
 
Table 2 (cont.): Certifications by licensing class 1  
              Hoisting machine operator licensing class
Certification Limited      Limited boom Limited mini Limited sign Limited
              articulating truck        crane        hanger       telehandler
              boom crane
                Hoisting machine operator licensing class
Certification   Limited      Limited boom Limited mini Limited sign Limited
                articulating truck        crane        hanger       telehandler
                boom crane
NCCCO
Telescopic Boom              Required 5   Required 6   Required 5
Crane - Fixed
Cab
NCCCO
Telescopic Boom
Crane - Swing
Cab
NCCCO Lattice
Boom Crane 2
NCCCO Tower
Crane
NCCCO
Articulating
Boom Crane
- or -
NCCCO Boom      Required     Additional   Additional   Additional
Crane w/Winch
- or -
NCCCO
Articulating
Boom Loader 3
NCCCO Dedicated
Pile Driver
NCCCO Rotating               Additional                             Required
Telehandler 4
 
Legend to Table 2: 
   •   “NCCCO” means “National Commission for the Certification of Crane
Operators.”
   •   "Required" means must possess.
   •   "Additional" means not mandated, but required if licensee intends to
operate listed type of hoisting machinery.
   •   Blank indicates not authorized for the class of license, except where
otherwise indicated by footnote 1.
Footnotes to Table 2: 
   1    Individuals may only operate equipment within the scope of their
license, even if a certification authorizes operation of a broader class of
equipment.
   2    For a Hoisting Machine Operator Class B applicant, the practical
certification exam for the lattice boom crane must be on a friction crane.
   3    Individuals are not permitted to operate machinery exceeding the scope
of their certification, even if such machinery is within the scope of their
license.
   4    Individuals who hold a “Rotating Telehandler” certification are
authorized to operate a non-rotating (“fixed”) telehandler and need not
separately hold a “Fixed Telehandler” certification.    5    Licensees who
prior to the effective date of this subdivision hold a certification for a
“Boom truck” must provide a certification for “NCCCO Telescopic Boom Crane -
Fixed Cab” upon renewal of their license.
   6    For a Limited Hoisting Machine Operator License for a mini crane, a
certification from the National Center for Construction Education and Research
(“NCCER”) that authorizes the operation of a telescopic boom is acceptable in
lieu of a NCCCO certification for a “Telescopic Boom Crane - Fixed Cab”.
   (e)   Additional requirements. The provisions of this rule shall be in
addition to the qualification and renewal requirements prescribed by Articles
401 and 405 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code.
   (f)   Obligation to keep documents. In addition to any other documents
required to be maintained on site by a licensed Hoisting Machine Operator, such
Operator shall have on site at all times the following documents:
      (1)   The certification(s) issued to him or her by the certifying entity;
and
      (2)   The hoisting machine operator license issued to him or her by the
Department.
   (g)   Additional powers of the commissioner. The commissioner may, upon a
determination of good cause, extend the dates and deadlines set forth in this
rule.
   (h)   Ratings for class B licensed hoisting machine operators. In addition
to satisfying the requirements as set forth in subdivisions (a) through (g) of
this section, Class B Licensed Hoisting Machine Operators must possess one or
more ratings when required by § 28-405.2 of the Administrative Code.
      (1)   Prerequisites to obtain rating. To apply for a rating the Class B
Licensed Hoisting Machine Operator must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
Commissioner that he or she has successfully completed, during the one (1) year
immediately prior to the application to add such rating, for the make and model
of hoisting machine for which the rating is sought, the following, for the make
and model of hoisting machine for which the rating is sought, the following:
         (i)   A course of at least 8 hours in length that meets the following
requirements:
            (A)   The course must be conducted by the manufacturer of the
hoisting machine, an entity authorized by the manufacturer of the hoisting
machine, a registered New York State Department of Labor apprenticeship
training program, an educational institution or school chartered by the New
York State Department of Education, or an entity acceptable to the
Commissioner.
            (B)   The course must be presented by an instructor who has been
trained by the manufacturer of the hoisting machine.
            (C)   The course must, at a minimum, include instruction on the
following topics:
               1.   The controls of the hoisting machine, including differences
in controls based on operation mode;
               2.   The computer systems of the hoisting machine, including
setup of the computer to match the configuration of the hoisting machine;
               3.   Operational aids and safety devices of the hoisting
machine;
               4.   Wind and weather restrictions for the hoisting machine,
including differences based on configuration, with emphasis on requirements
when set up in configurations with a boom or boom/jib combination greater than
300 feet (91.44 m) in length; and
               5.   The procedures to boom-up, jackknife, and laydown the boom
or boom/jib combination of the hoisting machine, including differences based on
configuration, with emphasis on requirements when set up in configurations with
a boom or boom/jib combination greater than 300 feet (91.44 m) in length.
            (D)   Instruction on makes and models of hoisting machines deemed
by the Commissioner to be substantially equivalent may be included in the
course.
         (ii)   A practical exam that meets the following requirements:
            (A)   The practical exam must be witnessed by a Class B Licensed
Hoisting Machine Operator who must attest to the department that the hoisting
machine operator who took the exam successfully passed the exam.
            (B)   The practical exam must be visually recorded. The record must
be made available to the department upon request and must be maintained for a
period of three (3) years by the entity that conducted the course required by
subparagraph (i) of this paragraph, or, where such entity does not conduct the
exam, by the Class B Licensed Hoisting Machine Operator who witnessed the exam.
            (C)   The exam must be conducted on one of the following:
               1.   On the hoisting machine configured with a boom or boom/jib
combination greater than 300 feet (91.44 m) in length, and with the hoisting
machine set back from all areas accessible to the public; or
               2.   On a simulator acceptable to the Commissioner. At a
minimum, the simulator must be capable of recreating the controls and operating
characteristics of the hoisting machine. During the exam, the simulator must
recreate the hoisting machine in a configuration with a boom or boom/jib
combination greater than 300 feet (91.44 m) in length.
            (D)   The practical exam must assess the candidate on the
following:
               1.   Knowledge of the hoisting machine's controls, including
operational modes where the controls may be reversed; and
               2.   For a crane with a luffing jib, ability to raise,
jackknife, and laydown the boom with the luffing jib attached; or
               3.   For a crane with a telescoping boom, ability to extend or
retract the boom with an attached jib.
      (2)   Substantially equivalent hoisting machines. A hoisting machine
operator who already possesses a rating may, in lieu of satisfying the
requirements of paragraph (1) of this subdivision, receive additional ratings
if the commissioner deems the additional makes and models of hoisting machines
to be substantially equivalent to a hoisting machine for which the hoisting
machine operator already possesses a rating. For a hoisting machine to be
deemed substantially equivalent, it must, at a minimum, be manufactured by the
same manufacturer and possess the same carrier type.
      (3)   Renewal of ratings. Ratings expire at the same time as the
underlying Class B Hoisting Machine Operator license unless they are renewed at
the same time the underlying license is renewed. A rating will be considered to
be renewed if the licensee demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Commissioner
that he or she has successfully complied, during the preceding term of the
license, with the course and examination requirements of paragraph (1) of this
subdivision, or as applicable, with paragraph (2) of this subdivision.
   (i)   Multiple limited licenses. An individual may possess multiple Limited
Hoisting Machine Operator licenses.
(Amended City Record 1/31/2017, eff. 3/2/2017; amended City Record 12/6/2017,
eff. 1/5/2018; amended City Record 4/4/2018, eff. 5/4/2018 & 10/4/2018; amended
City Record 6/23/2020, eff. 7/23/2020; amended City Record 4/29/2024, eff. 5/
29/2024; amended City Record 6/25/2024, eff. 7/25/2024; amended City Record 8/
21/2025, eff. 9/20/2025)
§ 104-10 Riggers.
   (a)   Qualifications. In addition to the qualification and examination
requirements of the Administrative Code, an applicant for the following types
of rigger licenses shall satisfy the following requirements:
      (1)   Fitness. An applicant for a Master, Special or Climber or Tower
Crane Rigger license shall provide evidence of fitness to perform the work
authorized by the license. Such evidence shall be on a form prescribed by the
Commissioner and shall establish that the applicant has passed a physical exam
that complies with subdivision (c) of this section, and that the applicant has
complied with the substance abuse testing provisions and standards of
subdivision (c) of this section. Such evidence shall include the name, address
and telephone number of the laboratory that performed the tests and consent to
the release by such laboratory of the test results to the Department upon
request of the Department. [
      (2)   Additional requirements. [
         (i)   Where a licensed master rigger chooses to personally supervise
the installation or use of a suspended scaffold, the licensee shall have
completed all additional training required by section 3314.4.5.3 of the New
York City Building Code.
         (ii)   Where a licensed master rigger chooses to personally supervise
the assembly, jump, or disassembly of a climber/tower crane, the licensee shall
have completed all additional training required by section 3319.10 of the New
York City Building Code.
         (iii)   Where a licensed special rigger chooses to personally
supervise the installation or use of a suspended scaffold, the licensee shall
have completed all additional training required by section 3314.4.5.3 of the
New York City Building Code.
   (b)   Fitness requirements for renewal. As a condition of license renewal, a
licensed or previously licensed Master, Special or Tower crane rigger shall
provide evidence of fitness to perform the work authorized to be performed by a
holder of the license held or once held by the applicant. Evidence shall be on
a form prescribed by the Commissioner and shall establish that the applicant
has passed a physical exam that complies with subdivision (c) of this section,
and that the applicant has received a negative result for a substance abuse
test as required in subdivision (c) of this section. Such evidence shall
include the name, address and telephone number of the laboratory that performed
the tests and consent to the release by such laboratory of the test results to
the Department upon request of the Department. A renewal applicant shall
satisfy the requirements of this rule at every subsequent renewal. [
   (c)   Physical exam. Applicants for a Master, Special or Tower Crane Rigger
license shall meet the following physical qualifications, unless it can be
shown that failure to meet the qualifications will not affect the ability to
perform the work authorized to be performed by a holder of the license sought.
In such cases, specialized clinical or medical judgments and tests may be
required. The following physical qualifications shall be met at all times
throughout the term of the license. [
      (1)   Vision of at least 20/30 Snellen in one eye and 20/50 in the other,
with or without corrective lenses.
      (2)   Ability to distinguish colors, regardless of position, if color
differentiation is required to perform the work authorized to be performed by
the license.
      (3)   Adequate hearing to meet operational demands, with or without
hearing aid.
      (4)   Sufficient strength, endurance, agility, coordination, and speed of
reaction to meet job demands.
      (5)   Normal depth perception, field of vision, reaction time, manual
dexterity, coordination, and no tendencies to dizziness or similar undesirable
characteristics.
      (6)   A negative result for a substance abuse test.
      (7)   No evidence of having physical defects or emotional instability
that could create a hazard for the rigger or others, or that in the opinion of
the examiner could interfere with the rigger's performance.
      (8)   No evidence of being subject to seizures or loss of physical
control.
   (d)   Certifications for master riggers. Individuals who, on or after
November 7, 2022, apply for a new master rigger license, or apply to renew a
master rigger license whose initial application for licensure was filed on or
after November 7, 2022, must provide copies of certifications required by
Table 1. [
      (1)   Required certifications must be maintained throughout the duration
of the term of the license; [
      (2)   The licensee must immediately notify the department if a
certification identified in
Table 1 of this subdivision and held by the licensee is suspended, revoked, not
renewed, or otherwise lapses; and [
      (3)   The licensee must provide a copy of re-certifications and new
certifications identified in
Table 1 of this subdivision to the department within 30 days. [
Table 1: Certifications for Master Riggers [
 
Certification                       Requirement
NCCCO Rigger Level II               Required
NCCCO Lift Director - Mobile Cranes Required
NCCCO Lift Director - Tower Cranes  Additional
 
Legend to Table 1: [
   •   “NCCCO” means “National Commission for the Certification of Crane
Operators.” [
   •   “Required” means must possess. [
   •   “Additional” means not mandated but required if licensee intends to
serve as a lift director for the type of crane specified. [
(Amended City Record 12/7/2023, eff. 1/6/2024) [
§ 104-11 Welders.
   (a)   Qualifications. An applicant for a welder license shall satisfy the
qualification and examination requirements of the Administrative Code by
complying with the following requirements:
      (1)   Applicants shall furnish to the Department a welder certification
issued by the American Welding Society or the State of New York. The applicant
shall provide to the Department a copy of the certification, a copy of future
re-certifications and documentation of new certifications acquired. The
applicable certification shall be maintained continuously for the duration of
the license term and shall authorize performance of the type of welds the
licensee performs.
      (2)   Applicants shall provide evidence of fitness to perform the work
authorized to be performed by a holder of the license sought. Such evidence
shall consist of documentation on a form prescribed by the Department that the
applicant has passed a visual acuity test effective for the term of the license
sought.
   (b)   Fitness requirements for renewal. As a condition of license renewal, a
licensed or previously licensed welder must provide evidence of fitness to
perform the work authorized to be performed by a holder of the license held or
once held by the licensee. Such evidence shall consist of:
      (1)   A welder certification issued by the American Welding Society or
the State of New York. The licensed or previously licensed welder shall provide
to the Department a copy of the certification, a copy of future re-
certifications and documentation of new certifications acquired. The applicable
certification shall be maintained continuously for the duration of the license
term and shall authorize performance of the type of welds the licensee
performs.
      (2)   Documentation on a form prescribed by the Department that the
licensee has passed a visual acuity test effective for the term of the license
held or once held by the licensee.
      (3)   A renewal applicant shall satisfy the requirements of this
subdivision at every subsequent renewal.
(Amended City Record 4/29/2024, eff. 5/29/2024)
§ 104-12 Gas Work Qualification.
   (a)   Requirement. Beginning January 1, 2020, no person may perform gas
work, as defined in § 28-423.1 of the Administrative Code, unless such person
satisfies one of the following:
      (1)   Is a licensed master plumber; or,
      (2)   Holds a gas work qualification pursuant to this section and is
working under the direct and continuing supervision of a licensed master
plumber; or,
      (3)   Holds a limited gas work qualification pursuant to this section and
is performing such work under the personal and immediate supervision of either
a person who holds a gas work qualification pursuant to this section, or a
licensed master plumber.
      (4)   For purposes of this section, the term "direct and continuing
supervision" shall have the same meaning as set forth in § 28-401.3 of the
Administrative Code.
      (5)   For purposes of this section, the term "personal and immediate
supervision" shall mean responsible continuous control exercised by a licensed
master plumber or a person who holds a gas work qualification, who is present
on site, over a person who holds a limited gas work qualification who is
performing the actual gas work in the direct employ of a licensed master
plumber.
         (i)   Such supervision shall be evidenced by the supervising
individual's signature, and seal where applicable, upon any required
statements, certifications, applications and/or permits and by demonstrating
involvement of the supervising individual in the operations of the business,
including but not limited to hiring of employees, responsibility for financial
matters, and oversight of work performance.
         (ii)   The term "direct employ" shall have the same meaning as set
forth in § 28-401.3 of the Administrative Code.
   (b)   Applications for a gas work qualification. 
      (1)   Application and fee. Applicants must submit to the Department, in a
form and manner determined by the commissioner, an application accompanied by
all required documentation and, if applicable, an application fee as specified
in 1 RCNY §
101-03. No application fee is required for a gas work qualification, provided
that the applicant is, at the time of filing, a registered journeyman plumber
or is concurrently applying for registration as a journeyman plumber pursuant
to Article 409 of Chapter 4 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code.
      (2)   Examination. Applicants must submit to the Department acceptable
documentation establishing satisfactory proof that such applicant has
successfully passed a Department-sponsored gas work qualification examination.
         (i)   Applicants must apply for the examination by submitting an
examination application, in a form and manner determined by the commissioner,
to the Department's Licensing & Exams Unit or its designee. The examination
application must be accompanied by an examination fee as specified in 1 RCNY §
101-03. Applicants reapplying to take such examination, including after a
failure, must do so in accordance with the requirements in this paragraph.
         (ii)   Applicants have six (6) months from the date of submission of
the examination application to take the examination.
         (iii)   Applicants who fail the examination must wait at least
fourteen (14) days before reapplying to take the examination. Each time an
applicant wishes to take the examination, including after a failure, the
applicant must reapply to the Department and pay the required fee as specified
in 1 RCNY §
101-03. Applicants may take the examination no more than three (3) times within
a six (6) month period. Applicants who fail the examination three (3) times
within six (6) months must wait six (6) months from the date of the third
failed examination before reapplying to take such examination.
      (3)   Experience and education. Applicants must submit to the Department
acceptable documentation establishing satisfactory proof of one or more of the
following:
         (i)   Applicant is a registered journeyman plumber pursuant to Article
409 of Chapter 4 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code;
         (ii)   Applicant has successfully completed an apprenticeship in
plumbing program approved by the New York State Department of Labor and has at
least one (1) year of full-time experience performing or supervising plumbing
work under the direct and continuing supervision of a licensed master plumber;
or,
         (iii)   Applicant has at least five (5) years of full-time experience
performing or supervising plumbing work under the direct and continuing
supervision of a licensed master plumber, provided that at least one (1) year
of such experience must have occurred within the City of New York.
   (c)   Applications for a limited gas work qualification. 
      (1)   Application and fee. Applicants must submit to the Department, in a
form and manner determined by the commissioner, an application accompanied by
all required documentation and an application fee as specified in 1 RCNY §
101-03.
      (2)   Experience. Applicants must submit to the Department acceptable
documentation establishing satisfactory proof that such applicant has at least
six (6) months of full-time experience performing plumbing work under the
direct and continuing supervision of a licensed master plumber.
      (3)   Education. Applicants must submit to the Department acceptable
documentation establishing satisfactory proof of one or more of the following:
         (i)   Successful completion of a Department-sponsored gas work
training course of not less than sixteen (16) hours of instructional time; or,
         (ii)   Applicant's status as an apprentice in plumbing registered in
an apprenticeship program approved by the New York State Department of Labor.
   (d)   Documentation of education, training and experience submitted with the
application. Applicants must submit to the Department acceptable documentation
evidencing all claimed education, training and experience required by this
section. For verification of such claimed education, training and experience,
the Department may require additional supporting documentation satisfying the
requirements set forth in Subdivision (e) of 1 RCNY §
104-01.
   (e)   Gas work and limited gas work qualification cards. 
      (1)   Upon issuance of a notice of approval, the Department shall issue a
"Gas Work Qualification Card" to applicants who have satisfied all the
requirements for a gas work qualification pursuant to this section.
         (i)   Demonstration of gas work qualification while engaged in gas
work. The gas work qualification card and a government issued photo
identification card must be carried by the qualified individual at all times
while engaged in any gas work, as defined in § 28-423.1 of the Administrative
Code, and must be presented upon the demand of any authorized enforcement
officer.
      (2)   Upon issuance of a notice of approval, the Department shall issue a
"Limited Gas Work Qualification Card" to applicants who have satisfied all the
requirements for a limited gas work qualification pursuant to this section.
         (i)   Demonstration of limited gas work qualification while engaged in
gas work. The limited gas work qualification card and a government issued photo
identification must be carried by the qualified individual at all times while
engaged in any gas work, as defined in § 28-423.1 of the Administrative Code,
and must be presented upon the demand of any authorized enforcement officer.
   (f)   Expiration and renewal. 
      (1)   Gas work qualification. A gas work qualification will not expire
and does not require renewal.
      (2)   Limited gas work qualification. A limited gas work qualification
will expire five (5) years after the date of issuance and may not be renewed.
(Added City Record 11/7/2019, eff. 12/7/2019)
§ 104-13 Elevator Agency Directors, Elevator Agency Inspectors, Elevator Agency
Technicians and Restricted Elevator Agency Technicians and Elevator Helpers.
   (a)   New York State elevator license required. In addition to the licenses
issued pursuant to Articles 421, 422, 425 and 426 of Title 28 of the
Administrative Code, the applicable license issued by the New York State
Department of Labor pursuant to Article 33 of the state labor law is required
in order to perform elevator work as defined in § 28-401.3 of the
Administrative Code.
   (b)   Permit applications. No application for an elevator work permit shall
be accepted by the Department unless the applicant possesses a valid New York
state license, as described in subdivision (a).
   (c)   Permit expiration. Elevator work permits expire upon the expiration or
revocation of the required state license during the term of the permit.
   (d)   Inspection and test reports. No required elevator inspection or test
reports shall be accepted by the Department unless the elevator agency
inspector possesses a valid New York state license, as described in subdivision
(a).
   (e)   Qualifications. Elevator agency technicians, restricted elevator
agency technicians and elevator helpers must meet all applicable qualifications
and license requirements in Chapter 4 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code.
(Added City Record 3/4/2022, eff. 4/3/2022)
§ 104-20 Supervisory Responsibilities of a Licensed Rigger.
   (a)   Applicability. This section shall apply to all rigging work performed
by or under the direct and continuing supervision of a licensed rigger pursuant
to § 28-404.1 of the Administrative Code.
   (b)   Definitions.
      (1)   For the purposes of this section, the term "critical pick" shall
have the same meaning as set forth in Chapter 2 of the Building Code.
      (2)   For the purposes of this section, the term "direct and continuing
supervision" shall have the same meaning as set forth in § 28-401.3 of the
Administrative Code.
      (3)   For the purposes of this section, the term "registered design
professional" shall have the same meaning as set forth in § 28-101.5 of the
Administrative Code.
      (4)   For the purposes of this section, the term "rigging foreman" shall
mean an individual designated by a licensed rigger in accordance with
subdivision (i) of this section. Such person shall have the qualifications set
forth in subdivision (h) of this section. The term shall also refer to
"suspended scaffold foreman" where such term is used in Chapter 2 of the
Building Code.
   (c)   Planning. Except where the design prepared by a registered design
professional is authorized by Chapter 33 of the Building Code or as otherwise
specifically provided in paragraph (2) of subdivision (g) of this section, the
licensee must personally plan the equipment set-up and operation of all rigging
operations. This responsibility may not be delegated.
   (d)   Supervision of rigging operations other than critical picks and tower
crane erection, jumping, climbing or dismantling. Except as otherwise provided
in subdivision (e) of this section, the licensee need not be personally on site
during rigging operations provided that a rigging foreman designated by the
licensee pursuant to subdivision (i) of this section is continuously on site
and that such rigging foreman performs and/or manages the work under the off-
site supervision of the licensee as follows:
      (1)   the licensee and the rigging foreman at the work site are in
frequent and direct contact with each other during the course of the rigging
operation;
      (2)   for work involving the use of cranes, derricks, work platforms,
suspended scaffolds, or other rigging setup where the safe founding or support
of such equipment is a cause of concern (i.e. placed atop sidewalks, roadways
or yards where vaults or other subsurface structures exist; or where the person
performing a suspended scaffold inspection in accordance with Section
3314.4.3.1 or 3314.4.3.2 of the Building Code has identified a concern, etc.),
the licensee personally visits the work site to inspect and approve the rigging
equipment founding and setup prior to commencement of rigging operations and
each time the founding or support changes;
      (3)   the licensee is readily available to provide on-site supervision
should the need arise; and,
      (4)   the rigging foreman has in his or her possession at the work site
the "Designated Foreman Card" issued by the department pursuant to subdivision
(j) of this section, which shall be presented upon the demand of any authorized
enforcement officer.
   (e)   Supervision of critical picks and tower crane erection, jumping,
climbing, or dismantling. The licensee must be continuously on site during
critical picks and tower crane erection, jumping, climbing, or dismantling, and
must personally perform or personally supervise all such work. Off-site
supervision of such work is not permitted.
   (f)   Rigging Crew. Except as otherwise provided in subdivision (g) of this
section, all members of the rigging crew must be under the direct and
continuing supervision of the licensee.
      (1)   For work conducted by a master rigger, other than the erection,
jumping, or dismantling of a tower crane, the master rigger must provide a
letter, signed and dated by the licensee, attesting that all members of the
rigging crew are under the direct and continuing supervision of the licensee.
The letter must be maintained at the site by the master rigger and made
available to the commissioner upon request. In addition, where the work
requires a certificate of on-site inspection or a permit, including but not
limited to an on-site waiver, the letter must be submitted with the application
for the certificate of on-site inspection or permit, and the plans for the
certificate of on-site inspection or permit must be stamped or otherwise
clearly marked, in a format acceptable to the commissioner, indicating the work
will be performed under the direct and continuing supervision of the master
rigger.
      (2)   For the erection, jumping, or dismantling of a tower crane, the
master or tower crane rigger must provide a letter, signed and dated by the
licensee, attesting that all members of the “jumping” crew are under the direct
and continuing supervision of the licensee. The letter must be submitted as
part of the plan required by Section 3319.8.1 of the New York City Building
Code.
   (g)   Specialty Crew. Notwithstanding the provisions of § 28-401.17 of the
Administrative Code, where rigging work is best handled by or requires crews of
a specialty trade (e.g. handling hazardous materials or chemicals such as
asbestos, or tower crane erection, jumping, climbing, or dismantling) the
licensee and/or a rigging foreman designated by such licensee may perform or
supervise work on behalf of a person, partnership, corporation or business
association engaged in such specialty trade by making an application on a form
provided by the department subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   the department must approve the licensee's application for such
proposed rigging operation;
      (2)   the licensee must either plan the equipment setup and operation or
be an active participant of the planning team;
      (3)   for loads of two thousand pounds or more, for all critical picks,
and for tower crane erection, jumping, climbing, or dismantling, the licensee
must provide continuous on-site personal supervision to the rigging crew;
      (4)   for loads below two thousand pounds and which are not critical
picks, or which are not related to tower crane erection, jumping, climbing, or
dismantling, the licensee need not be on site if a rigging foreman designated
by such licensee is continuously on site. The rigging foreman shall manage the
work under the off-site supervision of the licensee in accordance with the
conditions set forth in subdivision (d) of this section;
      (5)   the licensee and/or his or her designated rigging foreman must have
full authority to examine rigging hardware, to approve rigging setups, to
mandate changes and to stop the job;
      (6)   the licensee is responsible for all aspects of rigging safety on
the job; and
      (7)   the licensee shall confirm that members of the specialty crew are
insured to the minimum requirements specified in § 28-401.9 of the
Administrative Code and are covered by worker's compensation under the
specialty crew's employer.
   (h)   Qualifications for designation as a rigging foreman.
      (1)   An individual designated as a rigging foreman by a licensed special
or master rigger shall:
         (i)   be an employee on the payroll and covered by the worker's
compensation insurance of the licensee or the business association of the
licensee;
         (ii)   be at least 18 years of age;
         (iii)   be able to read and write English;
         (iv)   be able to identify critical picks;
         (v)   be familiar with the relevant sections of Chapter 33 of the
Building Code, OSHA safety standards as contained in 29 C.F.R. Part 1926, and
industry safety practices;
         (vi)   have been trained to react properly to mechanical malfunctions
or adverse weather; and
         (vii)   be able to evaluate the fitness of the rigging crew,
including, where applicable, the issuance of a certificate of fitness pursuant
to subdivision (k) of this section.
      (2)   An individual designated as a rigging foreman by a licensed special
rigger shall, in addition to the qualifications set forth in the first
paragraph of this subdivision, have the following additional qualifications:
         (i)   at least one year's practical experience in the hoisting and
rigging business; and
         (ii)   the knowledge of and ability to explain the risks related to
such business and any particular job for which the individual is designated,
and precautions to be taken in connection therewith.
      (3)   An individual designated as a rigging foreman by a licensed master
rigger shall, in addition to the qualifications set forth in the first
paragraph of this subdivision, have the following additional qualifications:
         (i)   at least five years of practical experience in the hoisting and
rigging business, or at least two years of practical experience in the hoisting
and rigging business and possession of a Level II Rigging certification issued
by the National Commission for the Certification of Crane Operators, or
possession of both a Level II Rigging certification and a Lift Director
certification issued by the National Commission for the Certification of Crane
Operators; and
         (ii)   the knowledge of and ability to explain the risks related to
such business and any particular job for which the individual is designated,
and precautions to be taken in connection therewith, including but not limited
to:
            (A)   rigging operations and precautions to be taken in connection
therewith;
            (B)   safe loads and computation thereof;
            (C)   types and methods of rigging; and
            (D)   pertinent hardware such as ropes, cables, blocks, poles,
derricks, sheerlegs and other tools used in connection with rigging operations.
         (i)   Designation of a Rigging Foreman.
      (1)   The licensed rigger must submit a notification of designation, on a
form provided by the department, which includes the following information:
         (i)   A list of all rigging foremen employed by the licensee or by the
business association of the licensee. Each rigging foreman's full name, home
address, and home phone number shall be included as part of the list.
         (ii)   A photograph of any newly designated rigging foreman.
         (iii)   The notification shall be signed and notarized by the licensee
and shall contain his or her license number.
         (iv)   The notification shall contain a representation by the licensee
that all of the rigging foremen designated by him or her have the
qualifications specified in subdivision (h) of this section.
      (2)   A newly designated rigging foreman cannot perform foreman duties
until such notification is received by the department and the department has
issued a "Designated Foreman Card" pursuant to subdivision (j), below.
      (3)   The list must be updated within one week of the termination of a
designation. When a list is updated, the licensee must file a new notification
listing all rigging foremen designated by the licensee. The new notification
must be filed in a manner required by the department and must contain the
information set forth in subparagraphs (i), (ii), (iii) and (iv) of Paragraph
(1) of this Subdivision. The new list will supersede any earlier filed
notification.
      (4)   The designation of one or more rigging foremen shall not detract
from the licensee's responsibility or liability, individually and/or through
his business, for all aspects of rigging safety. This includes, but is not
limited to, the actions of rigging foremen, rigging crews and specialty crews,
if any.
   (j)   Designated Foreman Card.
      (1)   The department shall issue a "Designated Foreman Card" for each
designated rigging foreman. Such card and a photo identification card
acceptable to the department shall be carried by the rigging foreman at all
times while he or she is engaged in any of the duties requiring such
designation and shall be presented upon the demand of any authorized
enforcement officer.
      (2)   It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to take possession
of the "Designated Foreman Card" when such designation is terminated and return
the card to the department. A designation shall be terminable by the licensee
at any time, including if:
         (i)   the person leaves the employ of the licensee or the business
associated with the license holder under § 28-401.17 of the Administrative
Code;
         (ii)   the licensee finds that the designee is not competently
performing his or her duties; or
         (iii)   the licensee finds that the designee has acted in an unsafe or
irresponsible manner in performing his or her duties.
   (k)   Certificate of Fitness for Scaffold Users. In addition to the training
requirements of section 3314.4 of the Building Code, individuals who use a
suspended scaffold under the direct and continuing supervision of the licensed
rigger shall possess a certificate of fitness.
      (1)   An individual issued a certificate of fitness must:
         (i)   be found capable of performing the scaffold work in a safe and
responsible manner by the issuer at the time of issuance;
         (ii)   be able to communicate without difficulty with the supervising
licensed rigger or rigging foreman; and
         (iii)   have been trained in accordance with section 3314.4 of the
Building Code and possess a valid certificate card from the training provider
evidencing successful completion of the training.
      (2)   Certificates of fitness may be issued by the licensed master or
special rigger and the rigging foreman designated pursuant to this section.
      (3)   It shall be the sole responsibility of the licensee who issues the
certificate of fitness, either personally or through a designated foreman, to
ensure that the individual who receives the certificate meets the requirements
of paragraph one of this subdivision for the particular job. It shall be the
licensee's responsibility to maintain written records and copies relating to
whom and when certificates were issued, as well as each certificate holder's
certificate card. If a person issued a certificate of fitness is later found to
be unqualified or to have failed to use a suspended scaffold in a safe and
workmanlike manner, it shall be the licensee's responsibility to rescind the
certificate of fitness and to remove the individual from the job.
      (4)   The certificate of fitness must be issued in a form acceptable to
the department and include the name of the holder, the date of the issuance,
the name and license number of the licensee, the name, address, and telephone
number of the licensee's company, and the signature of the issuer.
      (5)   Such certificate of fitness, as well as the certificate card issued
pursuant to 3314.4.5.8 of the Building Code, and photo identification of the
certificate holder acceptable to the department, must be available on site for
inspection.
   (l)   Failure to comply with rule. If this rule is not complied with, the
department may order that rigging operations stop, initiate disciplinary action
against the licensee and/or contractor, and/or initiate proceedings for the
impositions of fines or civil penalties.
(Amended City Record 4/25/2017, eff. 5/25/2017; amended City Record 12/7/2023,
eff. 1/6/2024; amended City Record 8/21/2025, eff. 9/20/2025)
§ 104-21 Supervisory Responsibilities of a Licensed Sign Hanger.
   (a)   Applicability. This section shall apply to all sign hanging work
performed by or under the direct and continuing supervision of a licensed sign
hanger pursuant to § 28-415.1 of the Administrative Code.
   (b)   Definitions.
      (1)   For the purposes of this section, the term "critical pick" shall
have the same meaning as set forth in section 3302.1 of the Building Code.
      (2)   For the purposes of this section, the term "direct and continuing
supervision" shall have the same meaning as set forth in § 28-401.3 of the
Administrative Code.
      (3)   For the purposes of this section, the term "registered design
professional" shall have the same meaning as set forth in § 28-101.5 of the
Administrative Code.
      (4)   For the purposes of this section, the term "sign hanging foreman"
shall mean an individual designated by a licensed sign hanger in accordance
with subdivision (h) of this section. Such person shall have the qualifications
set forth in subdivision (g) of this section.
   (c)   Planning. Except where the design prepared by a registered design
professional is authorized by Chapter 33 of the Building Code, the licensee
must personally plan the equipment set-up and operation of all sign hanging
operations. This responsibility may not be delegated.
   (d)   Supervision of sign hanging operations other than critical picks.
Except as otherwise provided in subdivision (e) of this section, the licensee
need not be personally on site during sign hanging operations provided that a
sign hanging foreman designated by the licensee pursuant to subdivision (h) of
this section is continuously on site and that such sign hanging foreman
performs and/or manages the work under the off-site supervision of the licensee
as follows:
      (1)   the licensee and the sign hanging foreman at the work site are in
frequent and direct contact with each other during the course of the sign
hanging operation;
      (2)   for work involving the use of cranes, derricks, work platforms,
suspended scaffolds, or other rigging setup where the safe founding or support
of such equipment is a cause of concern (i.e. over sidewalks, roadways or yards
where vaults or other subsurface structures exist; or where hooks or clamps are
used on parapet walls to support hanging scaffolds, etc.), the licensee
personally visits the work site to inspect and approve the sign hanging
equipment founding and setup prior to commencement of sign hanging operations
and each time the founding or support changes;
      (3)   the licensee is readily available to provide on-site supervision
should the need arise; and
      (4)   the sign hanging foreman has in his or her possession at the work
site the "Designated Foreman Card" issued by the department pursuant to
subdivision (i) of this section, which shall be presented upon the demand of
any authorized enforcement officer.
   (e)   Supervision of critical picks. The licensee must be continuously on
site during critical picks and must personally perform or personally supervise
all critical picks. Off-site supervision of critical picks is not permitted.
   (f)   Sign Hanging Crew. All members of the sign hanging crew must be under
the direct and continuing supervision of the licensee.
   (g)   Qualifications for designation as a sign hanging foreman.
      (1)   An individual designated as a sign hanging foreman by a licensed
special or master sign hanger shall:
         (i)   be an employee on the payroll and covered by the worker's
compensation insurance of the licensee or the business association of the
licensee;
         (ii)   be at least 18 years of age;
         (iii)   be able to read and write English;
         (iv)   be able to identify critical picks;
         (v)   be familiar with the relevant sections of Chapter 33 of the
Building Code, OSHA safety standards as contained in 29 C.F.R. Part 1926, and
industry safety practices;
         (vi)   have been trained to react properly to mechanical malfunctions
or adverse weather;
         (vii)   be able to evaluate the fitness of the sign hanging crew,
including, where applicable, the issuance of a certificate of fitness pursuant
to subdivision (j) of this section;
         (viii)   be able to read plans and specifications relating to sign
construction and erection, including supporting framework and other supports;
         (ix)   have a knowledge of the problems and practices of sign
construction and hanging; and
         (x)   be familiar with the equipment and tools used in sign
installations.
      (2)   An individual designated as a sign hanging foreman by a licensed
special sign hanger shall, in addition to the qualifications set forth in the
first paragraph of this subdivision, have at least three years of practical
experience in sign hanging work.
      (3)   An individual designated as a sign hanging foreman by a licensed
master sign hanger shall, in addition to the qualifications set forth in the
first paragraph of this subdivision, have at least five years of practical
experience in sign hanging work.
   (h)   Designation of a Sign Hanging Foreman.
      (1)   The licensed sign hanger must submit a notification of designation,
on a form provided by the department, which includes the following information:
         (i)   A list of all sign hanging foremen employed by the licensee or
by the business association of the licensee. Each sign hanging foreman's full
name, home address, and home phone number shall be included as part of the
list.
         (ii)   A photograph of any newly designated sign hanging foreman.
         (iii)   The notification shall be signed and notarized by the licensee
and shall contain his or her license number.
         (iv)   The notification shall contain a representation by the licensee
that all of the sign hanging foremen designated by him or her have the
qualifications specified in subdivision (g) of this section.
      (2)   A newly designated sign hanging foreman cannot perform foreman
duties until such notification is received by the department and the department
has issued a "Designated Foreman Card" pursuant to subdivision (i), below.
      (3)   The list must be updated within one week of the termination of a
designation. When a list is updated, the licensee must file a new notification
listing all sign hanging foremen designated by such licensee. The new
notification must be filed in the manner required by the department and must
contain the information set forth in Subparagraphs (i), (ii), (iii) and (iv) of
Paragraph (1) of this subdivision. The new list will supersede any earlier
filed notification.
      (4)   The designation of one or more sign hanging foremen shall not
detract from the licensee's responsibility or liability, individually or
through his licensed business, for all aspects of sign hanging safety. This
includes, but is not limited to, the actions of sign hanging foremen and sign
hanging crews.
   (i)   Designated Foreman Card.
      (1)   The department shall issue a "Designated Foreman Card" for each
designated sign hanging foreman. Such card and a photo identification card
acceptable to the department shall be carried by the sign hanging foreman at
all times while he or she is engaged in any of the duties requiring such
designation and shall be presented upon the demand of any authorized
enforcement officer.
      (2)   It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to take possession
of the "Designated Foreman Card" when such designation is terminated and return
the card to the department. A designation shall be terminable by the licensee
at any time, including if:
         (i)   the person leaves the employ of the licensee or the business
associated with the license holder under § 28-401.17 of the Administrative
Code;
         (ii)   the licensee finds that the designee is not competently
performing his or her duties; or,
         (iii)   the licensee finds that the designee has acted in an unsafe or
irresponsible manner in performing his or her duties.
   (j)   Certificate of Fitness for Scaffold Users. In addition to the training
requirements of section 3314.4 of the Building Code, individuals who use a
suspended scaffold under the direct and continuing supervision of the licensed
sign hanger shall possess a certificate of fitness.
      (1)   An individual issued a certificate of fitness must:
         (i)   be found capable of performing the scaffold work in a safe and
responsible manner by the issuer at the time of issuance;
         (ii)   be able to communicate without difficulty with the supervising
licensed sign hanger or sign hanging foreman; and,
         (iii)   have been trained in accordance with section 3314.4 of the
Building Code and possess a valid certificate card from the training provider
evidencing successful completion of the training.
      (2)   Certificates of fitness may be issued by the licensed master or
special rigger and the sign hanger foreman designated pursuant to this section.
      (3)   It shall be the sole responsibility of the licensee who issues the
certificate of fitness, either personally or through a designated foreman, to
ensure that the individual who receives the certificate meets the requirements
of paragraph one of this subdivision for the particular job. It shall be the
licensee's responsibility to maintain written records and copies relating to
whom and when certificates were issued, as well as each certificate holder's
certificate card. If a person issued a certificate of fitness is later found to
be unqualified or to have failed to use a suspended scaffold in a safe and
workmanlike manner, it shall be the licensee's responsibility to rescind the
certificate of fitness and to remove the individual from the job.
      (4)   The certificate of fitness must be issued in a form acceptable to
the department and include the name of the holder, the date of the issuance,
the name and license number of the licensee, the name, address, and telephone
number of the licensee's company, and the signature of the issuer.
      (5)   Such certificate of fitness, as well as the certificate card issued
pursuant to 3314.4.5.8 of the Building Code and photo identification of the
certificate holder acceptable to the department, must be available on site for
inspection.
   (k)   Failure to comply with rule. If this rule is not complied with, the
department may order that sign hanging operations stop, initiate disciplinary
action against the licensee and/or contractor, and/or initiate proceedings for
the impositions of fines or civil penalties.
(Amended City Record 4/25/2017, eff. 5/25/2017)
§ 104-22 Other Obligations.
   (a)   Licensees shall promptly notify the Department in writing of any
address change within thirty (30) days of the change.
   (b)   Licensees, as part of their obligation to maintain good moral
character, shall notify the Department in writing of any criminal conviction
within ten (10) days of the occurrence.
§ 104-23 Hoisting Machine Operator Learners and Supervision of Learners.
   (a)   Applicability. The operation of hoisting machines by a learner must be
in accordance with the requirements of this section.
   (b)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms
have the following meanings:
      Direct supervision. See § 28-401.3 of the New York City Administrative
Code.
      Hoisting machine. See Section 3302.1 of the New York City Building Code.
      Hoisting machine operator. An individual licensed as a hoisting machine
operator in accordance with Article 405 of Chapter 4 of Title 28 of the New
York City Administrative Code.
      Learner. An individual learning to become a hoisting machine operator.
      Supervising licensee. The hoisting machine operator who is supervising
the learner.
   (c)   Basic requirements for learners. Learners must, at a minimum:
      (1)   Be at least 18 years of age;
      (2)   Hold a valid driver's license;
      (3)   Be able to communicate in the language of the supervising licensee;
      (4)   Be able to read plans and load charts;
      (5)   Be familiar with the controls, operating characteristics, and
emergency procedures of the hoisting machine to be operated; and
      (6)   Meet the physical qualifications of Section 5-3.1.2(a) of ASME B
30.5-2021, as verified by passing a physical exam and a substance abuse test.
   (d)   Supervision by licensee. The learner must be in the presence of and
under the direct supervision of a licensed hoisting machine operator during all
times the learner is operating the hoisting machine, as follows:
      (1)   The supervising licensee and the learner must be in direct
communication with each other, either verbally or by hand signals, at all
times; and
      (2)   For hoisting machines other than tower cranes, the supervising
licensee and the learner must be in the direct line of sight of each other at
all times. For a tower crane, the supervising licensee must be present in or
near the crane cab or operators station.
   (e)   Breaks. The learner may not operate the hoisting machine when the
supervising licensee is on a break. The hoisting operation must stop and the
hoisting machine must be properly secured before the supervising licensee goes
on break.
   (f)   Responsibility of supervising licensee. The supervising licensee must:
      (1)   Ensure the learner safely operates the hoisting machine in
accordance with all department regulations, manufacturer specifications, and
approved permits or certificates; and
      (2)   Perform the frequent inspection and the parking/securing inspection
for the crane or derrick in accordance with subdivision (k) of 1 RCNY §
3319-01 and maintain the log for the crane or derrick in accordance with
subdivision (h) of 1 RCNY §
3319-01.
   (g)   Authority to stop operation. The supervising licensee has the
authority to issue orders to the learner, order the learner to stop operation,
and, if necessary, prohibit the learner from operating the hoisting machine.
   (h)   Attention to monitoring. While supervising the learner, the
supervising licensee may not perform any tasks that detract from his or her
ability to monitor the learner.
   (i)   Tasks within learners ability. The tasks performed by the learner
while operating the hoisting machine must be within the learner's ability.
   (j)   Restrictions on learners operation. The learner may not operate a
hoisting machine in any of the following circumstances:
      (1)   If any part of the hoisting machine, load line, or load (including
rigging and lifting accessories), if operated up to the hoisting machine's
maximum working radius in the work zone as established by clause (A) of
subparagraph (ii) of paragraph (3) of subdivision (s) of 1 RCNY §
3319-01, could get within 20 feet of a power line that is up to 350 kV, or
within 50 feet of a power line that is over 350 kV;
      (2)   If the hoisting machine is used to hoist personnel;
      (3)   In multiple-equipment lifts;
      (4)   If the hoisting machine is used over a shaft, cofferdam, or in a
tank farm;
      (5)   In multiple-lift rigging operations;
      (6)   If the pick is a critical pick as defined in Section 3302.1 of the
New York City Building Code; or
      (7)   If the operation is related to the erection, climbing, jumping, or
dismantling of a tower crane.
   (k)   Type, size, and capacity of hoisting machine supervised is within
scope of license. Licensed hoisting machine operators may only supervise the
operation of a learner on hoisting machinery that is authorized to be operated
by the licensee, and where a certification for the operation of a type of
hoisting machine has been established in rules promulgated by the commissioner,
the licensee possesses the certification for that type of hoisting machine, and
such certification has been listed on the hoisting machine operator's license
by the department.
   (l)   Type, size, and capacity of hoisting machine operated by learner to be
within scope of license sought. The learner may only operate hoisting machinery
that is authorized by the scope of the license sought. Only a person who
possesses a Class A hoisting machine operator license may operate as a learner
on hoisting machinery that is authorized to be operated only by a Class B
hoisting machine operator; except that only individuals who hold a Class B
hoisting machine operator license with the appropriate rating may operate in
New York City hoisting machinery that requires a rating in accordance with §
28-405.2 of the New York City Administrative Code. Nothing in this section
prohibits an individual who began training to obtain a Class C hoisting machine
operator license from pursuing a Class A hoisting machine operator license
instead and from operating Class A machinery as a trainee in accordance with
the provisions of this section. Nothing in this section prohibits an individual
who began training to obtain a limited hoisting machine operator license from
pursuing a Class C or Class A hoisting machine operator license and from
operating Class C or Class A machinery as a trainee in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
   (m)   Employment. A learner for a hoisting machine operator does not need to
be employed by the hoisting machine operator supervising the learner. The
learner and supervisor do not need to be employed by the same entity.
(Added City Record 12/6/2017, eff. 1/5/2018; amended City Record 6/23/2020,
eff. 7/23/2020; amended City Record 6/25/2024, eff. 7/25/2024; amended City
Record 8/21/2025, eff. 9/20/2025)
§ 104-24 Registered Filing Representatives.
This section establishes two types of filing representatives and sets forth the
training, education, and experience requirements necessary at registration for
both classes of representatives.
   (a)   References. See Article 416 of Title 28 of the New York City
Administrative Code and § 28-416.2 of same for a list of persons exempt from
filing representative registration.
   (b)   Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms
mean:
      (1)   Architect. A person licensed and registered to practice the
profession of architecture under the education law of the state of New York.
      (2)   Engineer. A person licensed and registered to practice the
profession of engineering under the education law of the state of New York.
      (3)   Job. An application with an individual job number filed by the
registered design professional of record. This does not include limited
alteration applications, post-approval amendments, electrical applications, or
demolition applications.
      (4)   Registered design professional. An architect or engineer.
      (5)   Registered design professional of record. The registered design
professional who prepared or supervised the preparation of applicable
construction documents filed with the department.
   (c)   Class 1 registered filing representatives. Class 1 filing
representatives may, following registration and issuance of an identification
card, present, submit, furnish or seek approval of applications or construction
documents, and remove documents from the possession of the department. However,
beginning July 1, 2013, such filing representatives cannot appear before or
attend appointments with plan examiners and other department technical staff
including, but not limited to code and zoning specialists, plan examiners,
chief plan examiners, borough commissioners, and deputy borough commissioners,
regarding construction document approvals, including, but not limited to, plan
review, audit review, pre-determinations, and determinations.
   (d)   Class 1 filing representative registration requirements.
      (1)   Beginning May 1, 2013, those seeking class 1 filing representative
status must submit proof of the successful completion of a department-approved,
integrity training at registration.
      (2)   Beginning May 1, 2014, those seeking class 1 filing representative
status must submit the following at registration:
         (i)   Proof of the successful completion of a sixteen- (16) hour
training course, approved by the department, within one (1) year of application
for registration, in the following areas:
            (A)   The New York City Building Code;
            (B)   The New York City Energy Conservation Code;
            (C)   The New York City Zoning Resolution; and
            (D)   Relevant provisions of the New York City Administrative Code
and department practices.
         (ii)   Proof of the successful completion of a department-approved,
integrity training.
   (e)   Class 1 filing representative renewal requirements. Beginning July 1,
2014, during the one (1) year immediately prior to renewal, or beginning July
1, 2017, during the three (3) years immediately prior to renewal, a class 1
registered filing representative must have attended and successfully completed
a Department-administered or Department-approved integrity training and the
sixteen- (16) hour training course required by subdivision (d) of this rule. If
the sixteen- (16) hour training course was successfully completed prior to
registration, it need not be completed again prior to renewal. Proof of
completion of such course(s) must be submitted to the Department at renewal.
   (f)   Class 2 registered filing representatives. Class 2 registered filing
representatives (also referred to as "code and zoning representatives") may,
following registration and issuance of an identification card, perform all of
the activities of a class 1 registered filing representative and may also
appear before and attend appointments with plan examiners and other department
technical staff regarding construction document approvals, including, but not
limited to, plan review, audit review, pre-determinations, and determinations.
However, class 2 registered filing representatives can only appear before, or
attend such appointments at, the NYC Development Hub for New Building
applications, Alteration Type 1 applications, and any and all related
applications, in person or online, if they are employed and supervised by the
registered design professional of record. If not, when appearing before or
attending such appointments at the NYC Development Hub, class 2 registered
filing representatives must be accompanied by the registered design
professional of record or an individual employed and supervised by the
registered design professional of record in the preparation of the construction
documents being discussed.
   (g)   Class 2 filing representative requirements.
      (1)   Beginning May 1, 2013, those seeking class 2 filing representative
status must submit the following:
         (i)   Proof of:
            (A)   A four (4) year degree in Architecture or Engineering from an
accredited college; or
            (B)   A four (4) year degree in another field from an accredited
college, and proof of two (2) years as a registered filing representative with
the department with at least fifty (50) jobs filed within four (4) years of
application for class 2 filing representative status; or
            (C)   Those who do not meet the requirements of paragraphs (i) or
(ii) above may register and submit proof of the following during the limited
time period of May 1, 2013 through June 30, 2013 only: four (4) years as a
registered filing representative with the department with at least one hundred
and twenty-five (125) jobs filed within eight (8) years of application for
class 2 filing representative status.
         (ii)   Proof of the successful completion of a department-approved,
integrity training.
      (2)   Beginning May 1, 2014, those seeking class 2 filing representative
status must submit the following:
         (i)   Proof of:
            (A)   A four (4) year degree in Architecture or Engineering from an
accredited college; or
            (B)   A four (4) year degree in another field from an accredited
college, and proof of two (2) years as a registered filing representative with
the department with at least fifty (50) jobs filed within four (4) years of
application for class 2 filing representative status.
         (ii)   Proof of the successful completion of a thirty-six- (36) hour
training course approved by the department, within one (1) year of application
for class 2 filing representative status, in the following areas:
            (A)   The New York City Building Code;
            (B)   The New York City Energy Conservation Code;
            (C)   The New York City Zoning Resolution; and
            (D)   Relevant provisions of the New York City Administrative Code
and department practices.
         (iii)   Proof of the successful completion of a department-approved,
integrity training.
   (h)   Class 2 filing representative renewal requirements.
      (1)   Beginning July 1, 2014, during the one (1) year immediately prior
to renewal, a class 2 registered filing representative must have attended and
successfully completed a Department-administered or Department-approved
integrity training and the thirty-six- (36) hour training course required by
subdivision (g) of this rule. If the thirty-six- (36) hour training course was
successfully completed prior to registration, it need not be completed again
prior to renewal. Proof of completion of such course(s) must be submitted to
the Department at renewal.
      (2)   Beginning July 1, 2017, during the three (3) years immediately
prior to renewal, a class 2 registered filing representative must have attended
and successfully completed a Department-administered or Department-approved
integrity training and a sixteen- (16) hour, Department-approved, refresher
course. Proof of completion of such course(s) must be submitted to the
Department at renewal.
         (i)   Additional powers of the commissioner. The commissioner may,
upon a determination of good cause, extend the dates and deadlines set forth in
this rule.
   (j)   Suspension or revocation. Filing representative registration may be
suspended or revoked in accordance with § 28-401.19 of the New York City
Administrative Code.
§ 104-25 Requirement of a Seal for Use by Licensed Oil-Burning Equipment
Installers. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 4/29/2024, eff. 5/29/2024)
§ 104-26 Deactivation of License.
   If the holder of a license issued pursuant to § 28-401.10 of the
Administrative Code is no longer engaged in a business or trade licensed by the
department, but does not wish to leave the licensed trade, the license holder
may so notify the department and submit his or her license and seal to the
department for deactivation. If the licensee deactivates such license, the
deactivated license shall no longer represent an authorization to engage in a
particular trade, occupation, or business. While a licensee who chooses to
deactivate his or her license may continue to work in the licensed trade under
the supervision of an active licensee, he or she may not practice in the trade
or business as a licensee or hold him or herself out as a licensee while the
license is deactivated.
   (a)   Applicability. This section applies to Master Plumbers, Master Fire
Suppression Piping Contractors, High Pressure Boiler Operating Engineers,
Welders, Riggers, Sign Hangers, Oil Burners, Site Safety Managers, Hoist
Machine Operators, Elevator Agency Inspectors, Elevator Agency Directors,
Elevator Agency Technicians and Restricted Elevator Agency Technicians.
   (b)   Deactivation. A license can remain deactivated for a maximum of twelve
years after the date of deactivation. If a licensee fails to reactivate a
license after this twelve year period, the deactivated license will lapse. In
order to deactivate a license, at the time of application for deactivation, the
licensee must ensure that:
      (1)   All outstanding fines, penalties, or fees related to the licensee's
professional dealings with the city or any governmental entity are paid, and
      (2)   There are no violations for work performed under such license
pending hearing or in default, and
      (3)   Open applications filed under such license – including permits,
jobs, scaffold notifications, and Limited Alteration Applications (LAAs) that
name the licensee, as well as permits issued to the licensee – have been
scheduled for inspection in accordance with department procedures, re-filed by
another licensee, or withdrawn, and
      (4)   He or she surrenders his or her license card, plate and/ or seal,
if applicable.
   (c)   Deactivation renewal. While the license is deactivated, the licensee
must still submit a renewal application, continue to pay the license renewal
fees required during each deactivation period, take any required continuing
education courses and maintain certifications required by rule. If the licensee
submits the renewal application after the date on which the license would have
otherwise expired, the licensee must comply with the relevant provisions of
Administrative Code § 28-401.13, and any other applicable rules and
regulations. If a license has been deactivated for more than five, but fewer
than twelve, years:
      (1)   At renewal, the commissioner may require the licensee submit an
affidavit and supporting documentation satisfactory to the department stating
that, during each of the last three years, the individual has continuously been
actively and legally engaged in the trade for which the applicant's license was
issued, under the direct supervision of a licensee for their specific trade in
order to prevent the deactivated license from expiring.
      (2)   If the licensee cannot satisfactorily demonstrate active and legal
engagement in the relevant trade, in order to prevent the license from
expiring, the licensee must reactivate the license for at least one license
term. If the license expires, applicants must comply with late renewal
requirements of Administrative Code § 28-401.13, and any other applicable rules
and regulations.
   (d)   Reactivation. To reactivate a license, the licensee must comply with
the license issuance requirements for his or her specific trade, pay all
applicable fees, and submit all forms as prescribed by the commissioner.
      (1)   If the licensee has complied with the deactivation requirements of
this rule, the license may be reactivated up to five years after the date of
deactivation.
      (2)   The department may refuse to reactivate a license on any grounds on
the basis of which it could deny, suspend or revoke such license.
   (e)   Master Plumbers and Master Fire Suppression Piping Contractors must
also comply with the certificate of competence requirements of Chapter 4 of
Title 28 of the Administrative Code.
(Added City Record 9/2/2016, eff. 10/2/2016; amended City Record 3/4/2022, eff.
4/3/2022; amended City Record 4/29/2024, eff. 5/29/2024)
Subchapter E: Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 105-01 Requirements for the Approval of a Property Tax Abatement Application
for the Installation of a Green Roof.
   (a)   Purpose and applicability. This section establishes the procedure for
a property tax abatement application for a green roof as defined in Title 4-
B of Article 4 of the New York State Real Property Tax Law (“Title 4-B”). A
green roof shall not be eligible for a tax abatement pursuant to Title 4-B if
the construction of any of the required elements of the green roof set forth in
Title 4-B § 499-aaa(10), except § 499-aaa(10)(a), was commenced prior to August
5, 2008.
   (b)   Designated agency. For purposes of Title 4-B, the designated agency is
the Department of Buildings (“Department”).
   (c)   Definitions. The terms used in this section have the same meanings as
the terms defined in Title 4-B § 499-aaa. In addition, for purposes of this
section, the following terms have the following meanings:
      (1)   Applicant for property tax abatement. The applicant as defined in
Title 4-B § 499-aaa, including such applicant’s successors-in-interest.
      (2)   Applicant of record. The registered design professional who files
the application for installation with the Department.
      (3)   Application for installation. Construction documents filed with the
Department for the installation of green roof space.
      (4)   Compliance period. The tax year, beginning July 1 and ending the
following June 30, in which the green roof property tax abatement is taken.
      (5)   Green roof space. Such part of the eligible rooftop space that
consists of a green roof.
      (6)   Property tax abatement application. The application, including
certifications and agreements required by Title 4-B and this section, that is
filed with the Department for a green roof property tax abatement in accordance
with Title 4-B.
      (7)   Vegetation layer. The layer of a green roof required by Title 4-B §
499-aaa(10)(g) that, in accordance with generally accepted horticultural
practice and as certified by an architect, engineer, New York State licensed
and registered landscape architect or a horticulturist with a degree or
certificate from an accredited training institute, consists of live plants such
as sedum or equally drought resistant and hardy plant species, native plant
species, and/or agricultural plant species spaced in such a manner that such
plants will cover at least eighty (80) percent of such layer by the end of the
compliance period.
   (d)   Codes. All work relating to the installation of a green roof must
comply with the requirements of the New York City Construction Codes
(“Construction Codes”) contained in Title 28 of the Administrative Code (“Title
28”). All such work must also comply with the requirements of the New York City
Electrical Code, the New York City Fire Code, the New York City Energy
Conservation Code, the New York City Zoning Resolution and other applicable
laws and rules.
   (e)   Application for installation of a green roof. 
      (1)   Filing. All property tax abatement applications must be filed with
an application for installation that includes an acknowledgement by the
applicant of record that the final inspection must be performed by an approved
agency in accordance with Administrative Code § 28-116.2.4.2.
         (i)   At the time of submission of the application for installation,
the applicant of record must indicate on forms furnished by the Department that
such application will be the subject of a property tax abatement application.
         (ii)   The application for installation must include, but not be
limited to, the following construction documents and information:
            (A)   Roof plan showing eligible rooftop space and green roof space
and providing the net square footage of each. The plan must demonstrate that
the green roof does not obstruct access for both firefighting, in accordance
with Section 504 of the New York City Fire Code, and maintenance of all roof
equipment.
            (B)   Proof, including but not limited to drawings, details and
documentation, demonstrating that the green roof meets the definition set forth
in Title 4-B § 499-aaa(10), as well as the requirements in applicable
provisions of the codes listed in subdivision (d) of this section. Proof must
indicate the depth of the growth medium.
            (C)   Design and construction drawings reflecting construction work
necessary to enable the building, its structure, the roof structure with the
green roof, together with any other existing or added rooftop structures and/or
equipment, the roof covering and roof drainage systems to comply with the codes
enumerated in subdivision (d) of this section and other requirements set forth
in this section and/or Title 4-B. The weight of the green roof shall be
considered a superimposed dead load. The design shall consider the green roof
in saturated condition.
            (D)   The construction documents required by clauses (A), (B) and
(C) of this subparagraph shall not be necessary for an application for a green
roof installation of a depth of four inches or less where a structural analysis
of the existing building has been performed establishing that such building
can, without modification, sustain the load of the green roof in a fully
saturated condition in a manner that complies with the codes enumerated in
subdivision (d) of this section, provided the applicant of record certifies
that the construction work reflected in the application for installation
complies with such codes and other requirements set forth in this section and
Title 4-B and that the analyses reflected in the requirements of clauses (A),
(B) and (C) of this subparagraph have been performed. In making such
certifications, the weight of the green roof shall be considered a superimposed
dead load. The design shall consider the green roof in saturated condition.
Where, in accordance with the provisions of this subdivision, construction
documents required by clauses (A), (B) and (C) of this subparagraph are not
submitted to the Department, the applicant of record shall perform the
inspections for the installation required by paragraph (4) of subdivision (e)
and paragraph (1) of subdivision (f) of this section.
      (2)   Document retention. Construction documents required by clauses (A),
(B) and (C) of subparagraph (ii) of paragraph (1) of this subdivision,
including structural analyses and calculations, regardless of whether submitted
to the Department, must be retained for six years by the applicant of record
and must be made available upon request of the Department.
      (3)   Permits and technical reports. All required permits must be
obtained, including any required electrical permits. Technical Report(s)
identifying those responsible for any special, progress and final inspections
required by the Construction Codes must be filed with the Department.
      (4)   Inspections. Inspections shall be performed in accordance with
Article 116 of Title 28 and Title 4-B after the completion and sign-off of any
required electrical work. Final inspection shall be performed in accordance
with Administrative Code § 28-116.2.4.2.
      (5)   Job sign-off. Upon completion of work, the applicant of record must
submit to the Department completed Technical Reports, including final
inspection, and a request for job sign-off pursuant to Administrative Code §
28-116.4. The request must be accompanied by a completed property tax abatement
application. If the property tax abatement application is not submitted
together with and at the same time as the request for job sign-off, the
property tax abatement application shall be denied, and the Department shall
not further review or process the property tax abatement application.
   (f)   Property tax abatement application. 
      (1)   Title 4-B certification. A registered design professional must
inspect the completed green roof and must certify (1) its compliance with the
definitions and requirements of Title 4-B, including but not limited to
Sections 499-aaa(10) and 499-ccc of Title 4-B and the designation of eligible
rooftop space on the drawings, and (2) the square footage of green roof space
eligible for tax abatement pursuant to Title 4-B. In making such certification,
the registered design professional may rely on the report(s) of a New York
State licensed and registered landscape architect or a horticulturist with a
degree or certificate from an accredited training institute with respect to
whether the green roof’s vegetation layer complies with Title 4-B § 499-aaa
(10).
      (2)   Maintenance plan. A registered design professional, New York State
licensed and registered landscape architect or a horticulturist with a degree
or certificate from an accredited training institute must prepare a maintenance
plan for the green roof. Such maintenance plan shall be sufficient to enable
the applicant for property tax abatement to maintain the green roof during the
compliance period and for a minimum of three (3) years thereafter in such a way
that it continuously constitutes a green roof in accordance with Title 4-B and
this section.
         (i)   The maintenance plan must require at least semi-annual
maintenance inspections of the condition of the roof and plants, contingency
plans for irrigation during dry or drought conditions when necessary to ensure
the survival of plants, contingency plans for replanting areas where plants
have died, and any other corrective measures necessary to ensure that the green
roof is maintained in accordance with Title 4-B and this section.
         (ii)   The maintenance plan must include monthly maintenance
inspections to ensure that roof drains remain free of debris and in working
condition.
         (iii)   The maintenance plan must identify any problems that may be
encountered, describe corrective measures for each such problem and identify
when and how often such corrective measures are required in order to maintain
the green roof in continuous compliance.
         (iv)   The individual who prepared the maintenance plan must certify,
either on the property tax abatement application, if such individual is a
registered design professional, or in a report provided to the registered
design professional filing the property tax abatement application, if such
individual is a New York State licensed and registered landscape architect or a
horticulturist with a degree or certificate from an accredited training
institute, that the maintenance plan complies with this section and that he or
she has provided the maintenance plan to the applicant for property tax
abatement. Such maintenance plan must be provided to the Department upon
request.
      (3)   Application process. A registered design professional must complete
the property tax abatement application. Such property tax abatement application
must be accompanied by a Title 4-B certification by the property tax abatement
applicant or such applicant’s representative that no construction of any
required element of the green roof set forth in Title 4-B § 499-aaa(10), except
§ 499-aaa(10)(a), was commenced prior to August 5, 2008.
      (4)   The completed property tax abatement application, together with the
Technical Reports and request for job sign-off, must be filed with the
Department by March 15 in order for the property tax abatement to take effect
on July 1 of the same calendar year. If a property tax abatement application is
filed after March 15, the property tax abatement to which such application
relates shall not take effect until July 1 of the following calendar year.
      (5)   Upon receipt and acceptance of the completed property tax abatement
application and all applicable fees, the Department shall forward any required
documents to the Department of Finance for review and the issuance of the tax
abatement.
      (6)   Filing date. The date of filing of the property tax abatement
application shall be the date of submission of job sign-off documents and the
application for property tax abatement.
   (g)   Compliance period. 
      (1)   The applicant for property tax abatement must allow all registered
design professionals, landscape architects and horticulturists involved in the
installation and maintenance of the green roof and the Department to have
access to the green roof and any related structures and equipment for
inspection thereof at any time during the compliance period upon reasonable
notice.
      (2)   Pursuant to Title 4-B § 499-ddd(1), within the fifteen (15)
calendar days prior to the last day of the compliance period, the applicant of
record, landscape architect or other registered design professional must
inspect the green roof, including without limitation its vegetation layer, to
certify its continuing compliance with Title 4-B, this section and applicable
provisions of law and rules, including but not limited to the codes enumerated
in subdivision (d) of this section. Such inspecting professional must prepare
an inspection report and retain such report for six years. Such report must be
made available to the Department upon request. If the inspecting professional
finds that the green roof is not in compliance with Title 4-B, such inspecting
professional must notify the Department in a form and manner prescribed by the
Department.
   (h)   Revocation.
      (1)   Should the Department have reason to believe at any time during the
compliance period that a condition described in Title 4-B § 499-eee(1) exists,
the Department shall inspect or otherwise investigate the condition. If the
findings of such inspection or investigation indicate that a condition
described in Title 4-B § 499-eee(1) exists, the applicant for property tax
abatement must pay the inspection and investigation expenses of the Department.
The Department shall notify the applicant for property tax abatement of any
findings that indicate that a condition described in Title 4-B § 499-eee(1)
exists and provide such applicant with an opportunity to dispute the findings.
      (2)   No later than the ninetieth day after the last day of the
compliance period, the Department shall notify the Department of Finance of any
findings of noncompliance and shall identify the period of noncompliance.
      (3)   The Department may declare an applicant for property tax abatement
ineligible for future tax abatements in accordance with Title 4-B § 499-eee(4).
   (i)   Notification of the New York State Department of Education. In
accordance with Title 4-B § 499-fff(3), should the Department determine that
any registered design professional or landscape architect involved in the
installation and maintenance of the green roof engaged in professional
misconduct in making certifications required by Title 4-B or this rule, the
Department shall so notify the New York State Department of Education.
(Amended City Record 12/30/2024, eff. 1/29/2025)
§ 105-02 Requirements for the Approval of a Property Tax Abatement Application
for the Installation of a Solar Electric Generating System or for the
Installation of Electric Energy Storage Equipment.
   (a)   Purpose and applicability. This section establishes the procedure for
a property tax abatement application for a solar electric generating system and
electric energy storage equipment as defined in Title 4-C of Article 4 of the
New York State Real Property Tax Law ("Title 4-C").
      (1)   No solar electric generating system expenditures shall be eligible
for a tax abatement pursuant to Title 4-C if such expenditures were: (1)
incurred before August 5, 2008; or (2) incurred in connection with a solar
electric generating system placed in service before August 5, 2008.
      (2)   No electric storage equipment expenditures shall be eligible for a
tax abatement pursuant to Title 4-C if such expenditures were: (1) incurred
before January 1, 2019; or (2) incurred in connection with electric storage
equipment placed in service before January 1, 2019.
      (3)   No building shall be eligible for more than one tax abatement
pursuant to Title 4-C or this rule prior to January 1, 2024.
   (b)   Designated agency. For purposes of Title 4-C, the designated agency
shall be the Department of Buildings ("Department").
   (c)   Definitions. The terms used in this section have the same meanings as
the terms defined in Title 4-C § 499-aaaa. In addition, for purposes of this
section, the following terms have the following meanings:
      (1)   Applicant for property tax abatement. The applicant as defined in
Title 4-C § 499-aaaa, including such applicant's successors-in-interest.
      (2)   Applicant of record. The registered design professional who files
the application for installation with the Department.
      (3)   Application for installation. Construction documents filed for the
installation of solar electric generating system or electric energy storage
equipment.
      (4)   Compliance period. The tax year, beginning July 1 and ending the
following June 30, in which the property tax abatement commences and the three
tax years, each beginning July 1 and ending the following June 30, immediately
thereafter.
      (5)   Placed in service. The latter of:
         (i)   The date of the utility company's (i.e. Con Ed, LIPA, etc.)
final acceptance of interconnection; or
         (ii)   The date of the department's electrical division's sign-off, as
evidenced on the department's website.
      (6)   Property tax abatement application. The application, including
certifications required by Title 4-C and this section, that is filed with the
Department for a solar electric generating system or electric energy storage
equipment property tax abatement in accordance with Title 4-C.
   (d)   Codes. All work relating to the installation of a solar electric
generating system and electric energy storage equipment must comply with the
requirements of the New York City Construction Codes ("Construction Codes")
contained in Title 28 of the Administrative Code of the City of New York
("Title 28"). All such work must also comply with the requirements of the New
York City Electrical Code, the New York City Fire Code, the New York City
Energy Conservation Code, the New York City Zoning Resolution and other
applicable laws and rules.
   (e)   Procedure for application for installation of a solar electric
generating system for the purposes of a tax abatement. 
      (1)   Filing. All property tax abatement applications must be filed with
an application for installation that includes an acknowledgement by the
applicant of record that the final inspection must be performed by an approved
agency in accordance with Administrative Code § 28-116.2.4.2.
         (i)   At the time of submission of the application for installation,
the applicant of record must indicate on forms furnished by the Department that
such application will be the subject of a property tax abatement application.
         (ii)   The application for installation must include, but not be
limited to, the following construction documents and information:
            (A)   Zoning height and setback documents demonstrating that the
solar electric generating system complies with height and setback regulations
as prescribed by the New York City Zoning Resolution.
            (B)   Plot plan showing:
               1.   the metes and bounds and location of the building on the
site,
               2.   the location of the solar electric generating system
elements on the building and/or site,
               3.   the location and description of any trees that, were they
to fall, could come into contact with any part of the solar electric generating
system, and
               4.   the location of and type of city infrastructure services,
utility lines or other potential hazards on the building and/or site.
            (C)   Site plan, floor plan(s), roof plan(s), elevation(s) and/or
other drawings sufficient to show and describe the solar electric generating
array(s), building-integrated solar electric generating panels, solar electric
generating laminate and related elements of the solar electric generating
system on the building and/or site, and their arrangement and operation.
            (D)   Proof including but not limited to drawings, details and
documentation demonstrating that the solar electric generating system meets the
definition set forth in Title 4-C § 499-aaaa (10), as well as the requirements
in applicable provisions of the codes listed in subdivision (d) of this
section.
            (E)   For a roof installation, a roof plan demonstrating that the
solar electric generating system does not obstruct access for both
firefighting, in accordance with Sections 504 and 512 of the New York City Fire
Code, and maintenance of all roof equipment. For an installation in any other
location, the site plan must show access for firefighting and maintenance to
and around buildings on site and the solar electric generating system in
accordance with the New York City Fire Code.
            (F)   Drawings showing the foundation and/or anchorage of the solar
electric generating system. For rooftop installations ballast must be fully
contained and must comply with the requirements in Chapter 15 of the New York
City Building Code. For grade-level installations ballast must be fully
contained and loose aggregate, gravel or crushed stone shall not be used.
            (G)   Design and construction drawings reflecting construction work
necessary to enable the building, its structure, the roof structure, the
structural work related to the solar electric generating system (and, for
rooftop installations, any other rooftop structures and/or equipment), the roof
covering and roof drainage systems to comply with the codes listed in
subdivision (d) of this section and other requirements set forth in this
section and Title 4-C.
            (H)   Proof of compliance with the requirements of Appendix G of
the Building Code, if applicable.
      (2)   Document retention. Construction documents required by clauses (A)
through (H) of subparagraph (ii) of paragraph (1) of this section, including
structural analyses and calculations, must be retained for six years by the
applicant of record and must be made available upon request of the Department.
      (3)   Permits and technical reports. Permits must be obtained for both
the construction work and the electrical work to be performed. Technical Report
(s) identifying those responsible for special, progress and final inspections
required by the Construction Codes must be filed with the Department.
      (4)   Construction inspections. Any construction work performed in
connection with the application for installation, including but not limited to
the solar electric generating system, shall be inspected and have its final
inspection, in accordance with Administrative Code § 28-116.2.4.2. Other
inspections as required by the Construction Codes or this section shall be
performed in accordance therewith.
      (5)   Job sign-off. The applicant of record must submit to the Department
completed Technical Reports and a request for job sign-off pursuant to
Administrative Code § 28-116.4. The request for job sign-off must be
accompanied by utility company acknowledgement that the application for
interconnection is complete or certification by the applicant or such
applicant's representative attesting that the solar electric generating system
will not be interconnected with the electrical grid. The request must also be
accompanied by a completed property tax abatement application. If the property
tax abatement application is not submitted together with and at the same time
as the request for job sign-off, the property tax abatement application shall
be denied, and the Department shall not further review or process the property
tax abatement application.
      (6)   Electrical work. Electrical work associated with applications for
the installation of solar electric generating systems must comply with the
following:
         (i)   Such applications must be filed for electrical plan examination
in accordance with the Department's rules if such work includes but is not
limited to:
            (A)   Any change in an electrical installation with a rating of
1000 KVA or higher, up to and including the second level overcurrent
protection; or
            (B)   any electrical installation above 600 V; or
            (C)   an electrical installation that is itself 1000 KVA or
greater.
         (ii)   Such application must include but not be limited to the
following:
            (A)   One line diagram.
            (B)   Plan view / service equipment room layout.
            (C)   Selective Coordination Study.
         (iii)   Permit. An electrical permit must be obtained prior to
installation and the electrical work must be performed by a New York City
licensed electrician.
            (A)   For all electrical permit applications related to the solar
electric generating system, the applicant must indicate "Sustainable Energy
Install".
            (B)   For installations that require plan examination, the
electrical permit must be obtained following approval of the electrical plan
examination filing of the electrical work to be performed in connection with
the solar electric generating system.
         (iv)   Electrical inspections. The electrical work performed in
connection with the solar electric generating systems must be completed and
inspected in accordance with the New York City Electrical Code.
         (v)   Electrical sign-off. The electrical inspection is deemed signed
off when it passes an inspection performed by the Department's Electrical
Division and all fees have been paid.
   (f)   Procedure for application for installation of electric energy storage
equipment for the purposes of a tax abatement. 
      (1)   Filing. All property tax abatement applications must be filed with
an application for installation that includes an acknowledgement by the
applicant of record that the final inspection must be performed by an approved
agency in accordance with Administrative Code § 28-116.2.4.2.
         (i)   At the time of submission of the application for installation,
the applicant of record must indicate on forms furnished by the Department that
such application will be the subject of a property tax abatement application.
         (ii)   The application for installation must include, but not be
limited to, the following construction documents and information:
            (A)   Zoning analysis demonstrating that the energy storage
equipment complies with all regulations as prescribed by the New York City
Zoning Resolution for that particular Zoning District.
            (B)   Plot plan showing:
               1.   the metes and bounds and location of the building on the
site,
               2.   the location of the energy storage equipment elements on
the building and/or site,
               3.   the location of and description of any trees that, were
they to fall, could come into contact with any part of the energy storage
equipment, and
               4.   the location of and identifying any city infrastructure
services, utility lines or other potential hazards on the building and/or site.
            (C)   Site plan, floor plans(s), roof plan(s), elevation(s) and/or
other drawings sufficient to show and describe the energy storage equipment.
            (D)   Proof that the energy storage equipment meets the definition
set forth in Title 4-C § 499-aaaa(11), as well as the requirements in
applicable provisions of the codes listed in subdivision (d) of this section.
            (E)   For a roof installation, a roof plan demonstrating that the
energy storage system does not obstruct access for both firefighting, in
accordance with Sections 504 and 512 of the New York City Fire Code, and
maintenance of all roof equipment. For a site installation, the site plan must
show access for firefighting and maintenance to and around site buildings and
the energy storage equipment in accordance with the New York City Fire Code.
            (F)   Drawings showing the foundation and/or anchorage of the
energy storage equipment.
            (G)   For an energy storage system located within a structure,
construction details related to the Construction Codes or other codes having
jurisdiction to show compliance for fire rated enclosures, clearances and any
other requirements related to the equipment.
            (H)   Design and construction drawings reflecting construction work
necessary to enable the building, its structure, the roof structure, any
structural work related to the energy storage equipment (and, for rooftop
installations, any other rooftop structures and/or equipment), the roof
covering and roof drainage systems to comply with the codes listed in
subdivision (d) of this section and other requirements set forth in this
section and Title 4-C.
            (I)   Proof of compliance with the requirements of Appendix G of
the Building Code, if applicable.
      (2)   Document retention. Construction documents required by clauses (A)
through (I) of subparagraph (ii) of paragraph (1) of this section, including
structural analyses and calculations, must be retained for six years by the
applicant of record and must be made available upon request of the Department.
      (3)   Permits and technical reports. Permits must be obtained for both
the construction work and the electrical work to be performed. Technical Report
(s) identifying those responsible for special, progress and final inspections
required by the Construction Codes must be filed with the Department.
      (4)   Construction inspections. Any construction work performed in
connection with the application for installation, including but not limited to
the energy storage equipment, shall be inspected and have a final inspection,
in accordance with Administrative Code § 28-116.2.4.2. Other inspections as
required by the Construction Codes or this section must be performed in
accordance therewith.
      (5)   Job sign-off. The applicant of record must submit to the Department
completed Technical Reports and a request for job sign-off pursuant to
Administrative Code § 28-116.4. The request for job sign-off must be
accompanied by utility company acknowledgement that the application for
interconnection is complete or certification by the applicant for property tax
abatement or such applicant's representative attesting that the electric energy
storage equipment will not be interconnected with the electrical grid. The
request must also be accompanied by a completed property tax abatement
application. If the property tax abatement application is not submitted
together with and at the same time as the request for job sign-off, the
property tax abatement application shall be denied and the Department shall not
further review or process the property tax abatement application.
      (6)   Electrical work. Electrical work associated with applications for
the installation of electric energy storage equipment must comply with the
following:
         (i)   Such applications must be filed for electrical plan examination
in accordance with the Department's rules if such work includes but is not
limited to:
            (A)   Any change in an electrical installation with a rating of
1000 KVA or higher, up to and including the second level overcurrent
protection; or
            (B)   any electrical installation above 600V; or
            (C)   an electrical installation that is itself 1000 KVA or
greater.
         (ii)   Such application must include but not be limited to the
following:
            (A)   One line diagram.
            (B)   Plan view / service equipment room layout.
            (C)   Selective Coordination Study.
         (iii)   Permit. An electrical permit must be obtained prior to
installation and the electrical work must be performed by a New York City
licensed electrician.
            (A)   For all electrical permit applications related to the
electric energy storage equipment, the applicant must indicate "Sustainable
Energy Install".
            (B)   For installations that require plan examination, the
electrical permit must be obtained: following approval of the electrical plan
examination filing of the electrical work to be performed in connection with
the electric energy storage equipment.
         (iv)   Electrical inspections. The electrical work performed in
connection with the electric energy storage equipment must be completed and
inspected in accordance with the New York City Electrical Code.
         (v)   Electrical sign-off. The electrical inspection is deemed signed
off when it passes an inspection performed by the Department's Electrical
Division, and all fees have been paid.
      (7)   Filing an Office of Technical Certification and Research (OTCR)
application. 
         (i)   The applicant of record must file a site-specific application
with OTCR to evaluate the electric energy storage equipment pursuant to Article
113 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code and obtain a Final Acceptance
letter.
         (ii)   At the time of submission of the OTCR application, the
applicant of record must indicate on forms furnished by the Department that the
OTCR application will be the subject of a property tax abatement application.
   (g)   Property tax abatement application. 
      (1)   Title 4-C certification. A registered design professional must
inspect the completed solar electric generating system installation and
electric energy storage equipment and must certify its compliance with the
definitions and requirements of Title 4-C, including but not limited to
Sections 499-aaaa(10), 499-aaaa(11) and 499-cccc.
      (2)   Property tax abatement application. A registered design
professional must complete the property tax abatement application.
      (3)   Eligible solar electric generating system and/or electric energy
storage equipment expenditures. 
         (i)   Such property tax abatement form must include a Title 4-
C certification by the property tax abatement applicant or such applicant's
representative of the solar electric generating system or electric energy
storage equipment expenditures for which the tax abatement is sought.
         (ii)   Such expenditures shall not include:
            (A)   any expenditures incurred prior to August 5, 2008 for solar
electric generating systems or January 1, 2019 for electric energy storage
equipment;
            (B)   any interest or other finance charges; or
            (C)   any expenditures incurred using a federal, state or local
grant. A federal, state or local grant shall not include another tax benefit,
including a tax abatement, tax credit, tax exemption or tax rebate.
         (iii)   No expenditures shall be eligible for a tax abatement pursuant
to Title 4-C if such expenditures were incurred in connection with a solar
electric generating system placed in service before August 5, 2008, an electric
energy storage equipment placed in service before January 1, 2019, or more than
one tax abatement prior to January 1, 2024.
      (4)   The completed property tax abatement application, together with the
Technical Reports, OTCR approval, the electrical sign-off and the request for
job sign-off, must be filed with the Department on or before January 1, 2036.
      (5)   Upon receipt and acceptance of the completed property tax abatement
application and all applicable fees, the Department shall forward any required
documents to the Department of Finance for review and the issuance of the tax
abatement.
      (6)   Filing date. The date of filing of the property tax abatement
application shall be the date of submission of job sign-off documents and the
application for property tax abatement.
   (h)   Compliance period. 
      (1)   The applicant for property tax abatement must allow all registered
design professionals involved in the installation and maintenance of the solar
electric generating system and the Department to have access to the solar
electric generating system and any related structures and equipment for
inspection thereof at any time during the compliance period upon reasonable
notice.
      (2)   The applicant for property tax abatement must allow all registered
design professionals involved in the installation and maintenance of the
electric energy storage equipment and the Department access to the electric
energy storage equipment and any related structures and equipment for
inspection thereof at any time during the compliance period upon reasonable
notice.
      (3)   Pursuant to Title 4-C § 499-dddd(1), within fifteen (15) calendar
days prior to the last day of the compliance period, any registered design
professional involved in the installation and maintenance of the solar electric
generating system or electric energy storage equipment must inspect the solar
electric generating system or the electric energy storage equipment to certify
its continuing compliance with Title 4-C, this section and applicable
provisions of law and rules, including but not limited to the codes enumerated
in subdivision (d) of this section. The applicant of record must prepare an
inspection report and retain it for six years. Such report must be made
available to the Department upon request. If the applicant of record finds that
the solar electric generating system or the electric energy storage equipment
is not in compliance with Title 4-C, such applicant must notify the Department
in a form and manner prescribed by the Department.
   (i)   Revocation. 
      (1)   Should the Department have reason to believe at any time during the
compliance period that a condition described in Title 4-C § 499-eeee(1) exists,
the Department shall inspect or otherwise investigate the condition. If the
findings of such inspection or investigation indicate that a condition
described in Title 4-C § 499-eeee(1) exists, the applicant for property tax
abatement must pay the inspection and investigation expenses of the Department.
The Department shall notify the applicant for property tax abatement of any
findings that indicate that a condition described in Title 4-C § 499-eeee(1)
exists and provide such applicant with an opportunity to dispute the findings.
      (2)   No later than the ninetieth day after the last day of the
compliance period, the Department shall notify the Department of Finance of any
findings of noncompliance and shall identify the period of noncompliance.
      (3)   The Department may declare an applicant for property tax abatement
ineligible for future tax abatements in accordance with Title 4-C § 499-eeee
(4).
   (j)   Notification of the New York State Department of Education. In
accordance with Title 4-C § 499-ffff(3), should the Department determine that
any registered design professional involved in the installation and maintenance
of the solar electric generating system or electric energy storage equipment
engaged in professional misconduct in making certifications required by Title
4-C or this rule, the Department shall so notify the New York State Department
of Education.
(Amended City Record 5/17/2016, eff. 6/16/2016; amended City Record 9/6/2017,
eff. 10/6/2017; amended City Record 7/10/2023, eff. 8/9/2023; amended City
Record 5/7/2024, eff. 6/6/2024)
§ 105-03 Course Provider Registration and Department-Approved Courses.
   (a)   Registration. Beginning on July 1, 2025, no course provider may offer
Department-approved courses unless such course provider is registered with the
Department in accordance with this section. Such registration is valid for one
year from the date of registration.
      (1)   Current course providers may continue to offer courses until July
1, 2025, provided they apply for registration between the effective date of
this section and July 1, 2025, in accordance with the provisions of subdivision
(b) of this section. Providers who fail to apply must complete any course
currently being offered and upload the certificates as provided in this section
but may not offer any additional courses.
      (2)   Once the department approves the application, the provider will be
considered registered as of that date.
      (3)   In the event the department denies the application, the applicant
may reapply or may challenge the determination in accordance with the
provisions of § 28-401.21 of the Administrative Code. The provider may continue
to operate until the reapplication or challenge is decided.
   (b)   Course Provider Application and Renewal Process. 
      (1)   The course provider applicant must submit:
         (i)   an application form provided by the Department;
         (ii)   proof that the applicant has met the requirements of paragraph
(2) of subdivision (f) of this section;
         (iii)   a statement attesting that the applicant will ensure that all
instructors comply with the requirements of subdivision(e) of this section and,
if applicable, subdivision(h) of this section; and
         (iv)   a fee as set forth in 1 RCNY §
101-03.
      (2)   Incomplete applications will be rejected.
      (3)   Applications for renewal must be accompanied by the renewal fee and
such additional information as the commissioner may require. Such applications
must be made at least 30 days but not more than 60 days prior to the expiration
of the applicant’s registration.
   (c)   Investigation of Applicant. The Department or its designee will
conduct an investigation of each applicant to determine its qualification to
become a course provider. The burden of proving that an applicant meets the
required qualifications is on the applicant. An applicant’s failure to meet the
requirements specified by the Administrative Code or by the Department’s rules,
and/or an applicant’s refusal to cooperate with an investigation will result in
denial of the application. If an applicant fails to provide all requested
documents within six (6) months of the date of the request the application will
be denied.
   (d)   Approved Courses. Unless otherwise authorized under the Administrative
Code or Department rules, only Department-approved courses may be offered to
fulfill Department course requirements. A listing of registered providers of
approved courses is available on the Department’s website. The course provider
must ensure compliance with the provisions of this subdivision.
      (1)   Course Requirements. 
         (i)   All courses must comply with the Department’s course
requirements published on its website, which lists the relevant citations for
statutory or other requirements listed in this paragraph.
         (ii)   All requirements must include the following information as
applicable to the relevant construction trade:
            (A)   Business practices;
            (B)   Relevant Building Code provisions, rules, and policy and
procedure notices enacted or promulgated by the Department;
            (C)   Administrative Code provisions, rules and policy and
procedure notices enacted or promulgated by any other City agency;
            (D)   Overview of Occupational Safety and Health Standards (“OSHS”)
for the Construction Industry;
            (E)   Relevant Department of Buildings filing and inspection
requirements;
            (F)   Safety / hazardous materials;
            (G)   New technology;
            (H)   Corruption prevention standards; and
            (I)   Other subjects identified by the Commissioner.
         (iii)   All courses must reflect any changes in the Department’s
published course requirements or any applicable laws, rules and regulations
within ninety (90) days.
         (iv)   Class Duration: Live and virtual training sessions may not
exceed 9 1/2 hours in total per day, including time spent covering course
content, lunch/meal and other breaks, and administrative matters such as
attendance and hands on and written assessments.
      (2)   Notification of Approved Courses. The course provider must have its
own website and any course provider who offers Department-approved training to
the general public must publish course schedules on its website, including
dates, times, locations, the cost of the training and whether such cost
includes the cost of issuing the identification card or site safety training
card required by this section, the cost of such card if it is not included in
the training cost, and must submit all course schedules to the Department. The
course provider must also notify the Department of any changes to a scheduled
course at least three (3) business days prior to it being offered. All
information on the course provider’s website, including the location of courses
and the courses taught, must be current.
      (3)   Course Review. At the end of each course, the instructor(s) must
conduct a review of the materials taught. The Department may require that a
hands-on or written performance evaluation be given to attendees.
      (4)   Course Facilities. The course facilities must:
         (i)   Have sufficient room to accommodate all expected attendees and
the equipment needed to perform hands-on exercises where required as part of
the course;
         (ii)   Make provisions for the presentation of training material in
all media types (e.g., computer, projectors, video/DVD players); and
         (iii)   Comply with all applicable laws, rules and regulations
relating to occupancy, zoning, egress, fire detection, fire suppression, light,
ventilation, cleanliness, sanitary facilities, emergency notification and
evacuation procedures.
      (5)   Attendance Record. The course provider must have in place fraud-
resistant procedures for confirming the identity and attendance of individuals
taking any course(s), including logs reflecting those in attendance at
different times during the course, and be able to produce the logs and any
other documentation demonstrating that an attendee attended the course(s). The
logs must include:
         (i)   The student’s full name (printed);
         (ii)   The student’s signature;
         (iii)   The name of the course;
         (iv)   The name of instructor(s);
         (v)   The time the course began;
         (vi)   The time the course ended;
         (vii)   The time of a break (if any), including when the break began
and when the break ended;
         (viii)   The address where the class/course or course was conducted;
         (ix)   The format in which the class was conducted: in-person,
virtual, webinar, hybrid online/in-person training (for hands-on training
courses); and
         (x)   An attestation by each instructor confirming that they taught
the class and verifying the attendance list. Each instructor must print their
name, sign it, and add the date.
      (6)   Course Completion. 
         (i)   The course provider must issue a certificate of completion to
the attendees upon course completion. The course provider must also upload a
photograph of the person and a digital copy of the certificate of completion to
the Department of Buildings’ platform NYC DOB Training Connect, which is only
accessible to registered course providers. The course provider must upload the
certificate within 60 days of course completion. Such certificate must contain
the following information:
            (A)   The name of the course;
            (B)   The name of the person to whom it was issued;
            (C)   The name and address of the issuing organization;
            (D)   The certificate number;
            (E)   The date of issuance and expiration (if any);
            (F)   An indication of the type of course and the number of credit
hours completed;
            (G)   The name and signature of the course provider;
            (H)   The name of the instructor; and
            (I)   The course provider ID number.
         (ii)   For worker certification courses, the course provider must
issue an identification card to attendees upon course completion. Such card
must be issued using the Department of Buildings’ platform NYC DOB Training
Connect, which is only accessible to registered course providers and can found
at https://dob-trainingconnect.cityofnewyork.us/.
         (iii)   The course provider must maintain a record of all the
information required on the identification cards and the certificates of
completion for a minimum period of seven (7) years from the date of completion.
The course provider must make these records available to the Department upon
request.
      (7)   Department Observation and Evaluation. The Department may observe
any Department-approved course without prior notification to the course
provider or instructor. The Department may evaluate courses taught by course
providers through audit or other means at such intervals as it deems necessary
and may require additional information as it deems necessary.
      (8)   Audits. The Department may periodically audit the course provider
to ensure compliance with this section and any rules or other Department
requirements related to such training.
      (9)   Cooperation. The course provider must cooperate with investigations
related to the course provider’s compliance with the requirements of this rule
or other applicable law.
   (e)   Course Instructor(s). Course providers must require that course
instructor(s) demonstrate that they are credentialed or trained in
instructional methods and learning processes. Course providers must also
require that the instructor(s) successfully demonstrate their ability to solve
or resolve problems relating to the subject matter by possession of a
recognized degree, certificate, licensure or professional standing, or by
extensive knowledge, training, and experience, in the subject matter being
taught. To the extent that the course instructor(s) holds, or has held, a trade
license issued by the Department, such license must be in good standing and not
be surrendered to, suspended by or revoked by the Department.
      (1)   For Supported Scaffold, Suspended Scaffold and Mast-Climber
training courses, the instructor(s) must also be authorized by the Occupational
Safety and Health Administration (“OSHA”) as a trainer(s) for its Construction
and Outreach Program.
      (2)   For Hoisting Machine Operator courses, the instructor(s) must also
hold a valid New York City Hoisting Machine Operator’s license or hold a
national certification for crane operation.
      (3)   For Master and Special Electrician courses, the instructor(s) must
demonstrate credentials or training in instructional methods and learning
processes through licensure or certification, including but not limited to,
certification as an electrical course provider in jurisdictions following the
National Electrical Code / NFPA 70.
      (4)   The course instructor(s) must comply with all applicable Federal,
State and local laws, rules and regulations.
      (5)   The course instructor(s) must be in compliance with the
Department’s Industry Code of Conduct.
   (f)   Course Provider Requirements. 
      (1)   The course provider must be a sole proprietorship, a partnership or
a corporation that provides training, an educational institution, a
governmental agency or authority, a trade union, or a trade association,
provided that a governmental agency or authority need not comply with paragraph
(2) of this subdivision.
      (2)   The course provider must provide proof that it is:
         (i)   approved by or licensed as an educational institution by the New
York State Department of Education;
         (ii)   registered as a New York State Department of Labor vocational,
trade or apprenticeship program;
         (iii)   accredited by an accrediting organization recognized by the
United States Department of Education or the Council for Higher Education
Accreditation; or
         (iv)   certified by an organization accredited by the American
National Standards Institute (ANSI) as a Standards Developing Organization with
published standards for continuing education and training.
         For alternative Mast-Climbing work platform training course provider
requirements to those listed in paragraph (2) of subdivision(f), herein, see 1
RCNY §
3314-01(m).
      (3)   Course providers must continuously maintain the qualifications
required by paragraphs (1) and (2) of this subdivision and by subdivision(i),
if applicable, and must provide a copy of such approval, license, accreditation
or certification to the Department upon request. The documentation must reflect
the exact name of the entity registering. The course provider must immediately
notify the Department of any lapse or expiration of its approval, license,
accreditation or certification, including any qualification required by
subdivision(i).
      (4)   The course provider must comply with all applicable Federal, State
and local laws, rules and regulations.
      (5)   The course provider must notify the Department of any changes to
the course provider’s name within fourteen (14) days of such change.
      (6)   Course providers must ensure that all their instructors comply with
all applicable provisions of this section.
      (7)   Course providers must be in compliance with the Department’s
Industry Code of Conduct and Course Provider Program Handbook.
      (8)   Course providers must notify the Department within thirty (30) days
if the course provider makes changes to its business name, its website domain,
or the owner/director of the business by submitting a new application for
provider approval with supporting documentation. The provider may continue to
offer courses under its current name pending approval of the new application.
      (9)   Course providers must collect, process and retain student data
records as set forth herein. Course providers must implement privacy and data
security practices to guard against the unauthorized access, fraud, theft, and
other misuse of such information. Course providers may not use the data
collected pursuant to this rule for any other purpose, including but not
limited for advertisements, without the student’s consent. Course providers
must comply with all applicable City, State, and federal laws relating to
personally identifying information and to privacy, including but not limited to
those included in the New York State General Business Law.
   (g)   Department as Course Provider. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
Department may act as a provider, or the sole provider, of any course offered
to fulfill a Department course requirement.
   (h)   Site Safety Training (SST) Course Instructors. For the purposes of
providing training in accordance with section 3321.1 of the Building Code and
this 1 RCNY §
105-03, a site safety training (SST) provider, as defined in item 1 of the
definition of “Site Safety Training (SST) Provider” in Section 202 of the
Building Code, means a course instructor as used in this 1 RCNY §
105-03. In addition to the foregoing requirements for course instructors, an
SST course instructor must meet one of the following requirements:
      (1)   has successfully completed all applicable OSHA or Department
requirements for conducting OSHA 10-hour classes and OSHA 30-hour classes and
is authorized to conduct such classes, except that such course instructor is
not required to possess a degree, certificate, licensure or demonstrate any
professional standing as required by subdivision(e), beyond what is required in
this paragraph;
      (2)   is providing training through a 100-hour training program; or
      (3)   is approved by the Department to conduct a 40-hour Site Safety
Manager training course in accordance with Article 402 of Chapter 4 of Title 28
of the Administrative Code.
   (i)   Site Safety Training (SST) Course Providers. A site safety training
(SST) provider as defined in item 2 of the definition of “Site Safety Training
(SST) Provider” in Section 202 of the Building Code must comply with the
requirements for course providers in this 1 RCNY §
105-03 as well as with the applicable requirements of this subdivision.
      (1)   If a not-for-profit organization or a governmental agency or
authority is an SST provider, it must meet the standards set forth by the
Department instead of the requirement in paragraph (2) of subdivision (f).
      (2)   An SST provider must certify to the Department that it has a
language access plan that complies with requirements established by another
City agency or office designated by the Mayor, as required by item 2.1 of the
definition of SST provider in Section 202 of the Building Code.
      (3)   Training may be conducted in person or in an actively proctored
online format and must comply with the following:
         (i)   If conducted in person in a classroom setting, the SST provider
must confirm the identification of the individual taking such training and must
ensure that the site of such training is actively observed for the duration of
the training.
         (ii)   If the online training is not performed in person, the SST
provider must confirm the identification of the individual prior to providing
secure access to the online training. The individual must attest that he/she is
the individual who received the online access and will complete the training
without assistance. The online program must have secure access and monitor
participation during the course of training to ensure that the individual
receiving the training is present for the entirety of the training.
      (4)   Upon completion of the SST course, the SST provider must issue an
SST card in accordance with subdivision(j) of this section.
      (5)   If the SST provider is not the provider of the OSHA course that is
required for an SST card, as defined in Section 202 of the Building Code, the
SST provider must ensure that the OSHA course was conducted either in person
or, if online, was actively proctored before issuing an SST card as provided in
subdivision(j) of this section.
      (6)   The SST provider must accept documentation, including
identification cards or certificates of completion, from registered course
providers. Course providers must accept SST course equivalent, as set out on
the Department’s website, and must apply such course hours to satisfy the
training requirements of this section and Section 3321 of the Building Code.
   (j)   SST Cards to be Issued Upon Verification of Course Completion. An SST
provider must issue a temporary SST card, SST card, or SST supervisor card,
only after verifying that the applicant has successfully completed all required
training and in accordance with subdivision (i), this subdivision and Section
202 of the Building Code. The SST provider must issue the appropriate card
using the Department of Buildings’ platform NYC DOB Training Connect, which is
only accessible to registered course providers.
   (k)   Record-Keeping and Verification of SST Cards. The SST course provider
must maintain a record of all temporary SST cards, SST cards, or SST supervisor
cards issued for a minimum of seven years. The SST course provider must make
these records available to the Department or its designee upon request.
   (l)   Advertising. Course providers may only advertise courses/classes that
they are authorized by the Department to deliver.
   (m)   Third Parties. The course provider may not delegate or outsource any
of its duties, responsibilities or functions to any third party that is not
registered with the Department. The course provider must maintain full
accountability for its operations and ensure that all services provided are
conducted in compliance with all applicable Federal, State and local laws,
rules and regulations.
   (n)   Non-traditional Format Courses / Classes. 
      (1)   The course provider may conduct training in a non-traditional
format. A non-traditional format is any format other than the traditional in-
person classroom format. Non-traditional formats may include virtual
classrooms, webinars, on-demand training, or hybrid virtual classroom/in-person
training for hands-on courses.
      (2)   Training conducted in a non-traditional format must comply with the
following:
         (i)   The non-traditional format course must be approved by the
Department.
         (ii)   The provider must confirm the identification of the individual
taking such training by adhering to the actively proctored online format
requirements.
         (iii)   The provider must ensure that participants have their web-
cameras activated and are on-camera for the duration of classes conducted
virtually.
         (iv)   For courses that include hands-on training, providers may
deliver the hands-on portion of the training in-person and the remaining
portion through either a live virtual classroom or live webinar.
         (v)   The provider must notify the Department when the hands-on
portion of the course / class is scheduled.
         (vi)   All students must be scheduled at the same time to receive the
hands-on training.
   (o)   Denial of Registration Renewal. The department may, following notice
and an opportunity to be heard, refuse to renew a registration on any grounds
on the basis of which it could deny, suspend or revoke such registration
pursuant to § 28-401.19 of the Administrative Code.
   (p)   Suspension and Revocation of Registration. 
      (1)   The Department may, in accordance with the provisions of § 28-
401.19.1 of the Administrative Code, take corrective action, including
probation, suspension, or revocation of a course provider’s registration, for
failure to comply with the requirements of this section or with the
requirements of any applicable law, rule, or regulation. However, when the
public safety may be imminently jeopardized, the Commissioner may, pending a
hearing and determination of charges, suspend registration for a period not
exceeding fifteen (15) days.
      (2)   The basis for the suspension or revocation of a course approval may
form the basis for the suspension or revocation of any or all of that course
provider’s approved courses.
      (3)   The Department will post on its website that the approval of a
course or course provider registration has been suspended or revoked.
   (q)   Withdrawal. The course provider must notify the Department and its
students at least 30 days prior to its withdrawal from the course provider
program. The course provider must be in compliance with the record-keeping
provisions of this rule, including uploading certificates of completion into
the Department’s online platform, Training Connect, before its withdrawal.
(Amended City Record 12/20/2019, eff. 1/19/2020; amended City Record 11/10/
2020, eff. 12/10/2020; amended City Record 5/20/2025, eff. 6/19/2025)
§ 105-04 Applications Filed by a Licensed Sign Hanger.
   (a)   Scope. This rule establishes when licensed Master Sign Hangers and
Special Sign Hangers may file applications for permits to install signs and
related structural elements.
   (b)   References. See Administrative Code (AC) § 28-104.6, item 5, and
Administrative Code, Title 28, Article 415.
   (c)   Licensed Sign Hanger. The term Licensed Sign Hanger shall refer to the
holder of a Master Sign Hanger or Special Sign Hanger license.
   (d)   Conditions for Filing Sign Applications. Pursuant to § 28-104.6, item
5, a Licensed Sign Hanger may file applications for permits to install a sign
and any related structural elements, provided he or she complies with all the
following:
      (1)   The sign application must comply with the applicable provisions of
the New York City Building Code and Zoning Resolution.
      (2)   The application must be limited to wall-mounted, accessory signs.
      (3)   The area of the display face of any sign must not exceed one
hundred fifty (150) square feet. The area of the sign includes the entirety of
individual letters, groups of letters, symbols, images, or any portion thereof.
      (4)   The sign, or any portion of it, must not project more than 18
inches beyond the face of a building, regardless of the building's setback.
      (5)   The entire sign must be mounted below the height of the second
story ceiling.
      (6)   The sign must not exceed three hundred (300) pounds in total
weight. The total weight includes all portions of the sign and any related
structural elements, including individual letters, groups of letters, symbols,
images, associated electrical components, structural supports, hardware,
framework, or any portion thereof, even if the sign is erected in stages or
portions over time. If structural work beyond a frame or support used to
provide rigidity is required, a registered design professional must design all
structural plans.
      (7)   Signs must be mounted by means of mechanical anchors installed in
accordance with the table below. Anchors must be fastened 12 inches on center,
with a minimum of four anchors used. The anchors must be able to support an
allowable stress of five times the weight of the sign and any related
structural elements.
Anchors in Concrete and Masonry Walls
Anchor Diameter Embedment Depth
1/4"            1" minimum
5/16"           1" minimum
3/8"            1 1/4" minimum
1/2"            1 1/2" minimum
5/8"            2" minimum
3/4"            2" minimum
Anchors in Wood Walls
Anchor Diameter Embedment Depth
1/4" to 3/4"    2" minimum
 
   (e)   Prohibited filings. Notwithstanding subdivision (d) of this section, a
Licensed Sign Hanger may not file applications for permits to install any of
the following:
      (1)   Any rooftop mounted sign;
      (2)   Any sign projecting more than 18" across a street line;
      (3)   Any marquee;
      (4)   Any digital sign; or
      (5)   Any related structural elements other than those referenced in
subdivision (d) of this section.
A registered design professional must file the applications listed in
subdivision (e).
(Added City Record 3/8/2017, eff. 4/7/2017)
§ 105-05 Adjudications.
   (a)   Hearings concerning the following matters under the jurisdiction of
the Department shall be held before the Office of Administrative Trials and
Hearings and shall be governed by the rules of procedure utilized at that
tribunal:
      (1)   Proceedings pursuant to Administrative Code § 28-104.2.1 and § 28-
104.2.1.3.2 against a registered design professional seeking suspension,
exclusion, or other limitation on such registered design professional's
participation in the Professional Certification Program.
      (2)   Proceedings pursuant to Administrative Code §§ 28-104.2.1, § 28-
114.1 and § 28-115.2 seeking the suspension, revocation, disqualification or
other limitation, with or without penalties, of the authority of any licensee
or holder of a certificates of competence issued by the Department, approved
agency, special inspector, registered design professional or any other person
to conduct inspections of work or tests or to participate in any program
authorizing either less than full examination of documents based on a
registered design professional's professional certification or self-
certification of the results of document preparation or review or an
inspection.
      (3)   Proceedings pursuant to Administrative Code § 28-211.1.2 charging a
person with having knowingly or negligently made a false statement or having
knowingly or negligently falsified or allowed to be falsified any certificate,
form, signed statement, application, report or certification of the correction
of a violation required under the provisions of the code or of any rule of any
agency.
      (4)   Proceedings pursuant to Administrative Code Articles 212 and 214
seeking an order of closure.
      (5)   Disciplinary proceedings pursuant to Administrative Code § 28-
401.19 seeking suspension or revocation, with or without penalties, against any
licensee or holder of a certificates of competence issued by the Department.
      (6)   Hearings pursuant to Administrative Code Article 419 for the return
of seized property, separately or in conjunction with hearings to adjudicate
the violation underlying the seizure.
      (7)   Civil service employee disciplinary matters.
      (8)   Any other administrative adjudicatory hearing not otherwise
committed to the jurisdiction of another agency.
§ 105-06 Petitions for Rulemaking.
   (a)   Definitions. 
      (1)   Person. "Person" means a natural person or a business entity,
including but not limited to a corporation, trust, estate, partnership,
cooperative, association, firm, club or society.
      (2)   Petition. "Petition" means a written request or application for the
Department to adopt a Rule.
      (3)   Petitioner. "Petitioner" means the person who files a Petition.
      (4)   Rule. "Rule" has the meaning set forth in § 1041 of the City
Administrative Procedure Act.
   (b)   Procedures for Submitting Petitions. 
      (1)   Any Person may petition the Department to consider the adoption of
a Rule. The Petition may be denied if it fails to include the following
information:
         (i)   The Rule to be considered, with proposed language for adoption;
         (ii)   Petitioner's arguments in support of adoption of the Rule;
         (iii)   Petitioner's proposal for the time period the Rule should be
in effect, if applicable;
         (iv)   Responses to any questions posed on a form provided by the
Department for such Petitions;
         (v)   The name, address, telephone number, and email address of the
Petitioner or his or her authorized representative;
         (vi)   The signature of Petitioner or his or her representative.
      (2)   Any change in the name, address or telephone number of the
Petitioner or his or her authorized representative must be reported to the
Department.
      (3)   All Petitions should be typewritten, if possible, but handwritten
Petitions will be accepted provided they are legible.
      (4)   Petitions must be submitted via dobrules@buildings.nyc.gov or by
mailing the Petition to the Department of Buildings, Regulatory Matters Unit,
Office of the General Counsel, 280 Broadway, 7th Fl., New York, NY 10007.
   (c)   Procedures for Consideration of and Responses to Petitions. If a
Petition is submitted in proper form, the Department will deny or approve the
Petition within 60 days from the date it was received. The Department will
either deny such Petition in a written statement or state in writing the
Department's intention to initiate rulemaking by a specified date. The
Department is not required to grant the entirety of a Petition and is not bound
by the language proposed by Petitioner but may amend or modify such proposed
language at the Department's discretion.
(Added City Record 12/1/2021, eff. 12/31/2021)
§ 105-08 Ancillary Dwelling Units Outside the Temporary Residence Program
Associated with a Single- or Two-Family Residence.
   (a)   Scope. This rule establishes requirements for the occupancy and use of
all ancillary dwelling units (“ADU”) not enrolled in the Temporary Residence
Program covered in Article 507 of Title 28 of the New York City Administrative
Code (“Administrative Code”) and that are associated with a single- or two-
family residence.
   (b)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms
have the following meanings:
      ADU. An “ancillary dwelling unit” as defined in § 12-10 of the New York
City Zoning Resolution (“Zoning Resolution”).
      Alt-CO. An application for alteration permit pursuant to Article 105 of
Title 28 of the Administrative Code leading to a new or amended certificate of
occupancy issued pursuant to Article 118 of Title 28 of the Administrative
Code.
      Building Code. The New York City Building Code.
      CO. A certificate of occupancy issued pursuant to Article 118 of Title 28
of the Administrative Code.
      TCO. A temporary CO issued pursuant to Article 118 of Title 28 of the
Administrative Code.
   (c)   References. Appendix U of the Building Code, Chapter 10 of the
Building Code and the Zoning Resolution.
   (d)   Eligibility. An ADU must comply with the Zoning Resolution and
paragraphs (1) through (4) of this subdivision.
      (1)   No more than one ADU per single- or two-family residence is
permitted on the same zoning lot.
      (2)   At the time of initial occupancy for an ancillary dwelling unit,
the zoning lot on which the ancillary dwelling unit is located must be the
primary residence of an owner of such zoning lot, in accordance with
subdivision (f) of the definition of ancillary dwelling unit in § 12-10 of the
Zoning Resolution. The department may require submission of the same evidence
of primary residence as required in 19 RCNY §
46-03.
      (3)   In accordance with section U202.3 of the Building Code, no ADUs may
be permitted in a basement or cellar where the portion of the tax lot
containing an ADU constructed in accordance with Appendix U of the Building
Code is located within the special flood hazard area, 10-year rainfall flood
risk area, or costal flood risk area. These prohibited areas are set out as
follows:
         (i)   Special flood hazard area: Defined in section 202 of the
Building Code.
         (ii)   10-year rainfall flood risk area: Set out in the map
established by the New York City Department of Environmental Protection in
accordance with section 24-809 of the Administrative Code and Chapter 66 of
Title 15 of the Rules of the City of New York.
         (iii)   Coastal flood risk area: Set out in the map established by
Department of Environmental Protection in accordance with § 24-809 of the
Administrative Code and 15 RCNY
Chapter 66.
      (4)   An ADU may be permitted to be constructed in the basement or cellar
in conjunction with the erection of a single-family residence, if all of the
following conditions are met:
         (i)   Such ADU is permitted by the Zoning Resolution, and the entire
tax lot is outside the prohibited area set forth in this paragraph (3) of this
subdivision.
         (ii)   The basement or cellar ADU is within the same building as the
primary dwelling unit, in accordance with § 12-10 of the Zoning Resolution and
paragraph (2) of this subdivision.
         (iii)   Occupancy of such ADU in a basement or cellar, as defined by
section 202 of the Building Code, must be in accordance with § 27-2087 of the
Housing Maintenance Code, as applicable.
         (iv)   Both the ADU and the primary dwelling unit must be classified
as Group R-3 occupancy and must comply with all applicable requirements of a
two-family residence and Group R-3 occupancy in the New York City Construction
Codes, New York City Fire Code and Housing Maintenance Code.
         (v)   Such ADU must be indicated as “ADU Apartment U” in the CO.
         (vi)   The application and the comment of the CO must indicate that
the “Ancillary Dwelling Unit is being constructed in accordance with § 12-10 of
the Zoning Resolution and 1 RCNY
105-08(d)(4).
         (vii)   For ADUs located in the cellar, all of the following
requirements apply:
            (A)   Cellar ADUs must be provided with two independent means of
egress in accordance with Chapter 10 of the Building Code.
            (B)   Cellar ADUs must be provided with an automatic sprinkler
system throughout the ADU in accordance with NFPA 13D as modified by Appendix Q
of the Building Code. A building that consists of three stories or more and a
cellar ADU must be sprinklered in its entirety in accordance with section
903.2.8 of the Building Code.
            (C)   Any yards, courts or other open spaces required by the Zoning
Resolution must be no higher than 6 inches below the windowsill of any required
window in any room of such cellar ADU.
            (D)   Applications for the construction of an ADU in a cellar may
not be submitted unless and until § 27-2087 of the Housing Maintenance Code
provides for such occupancy in cellars.
      Except for sections U202.8, U202.9, U202.10 and U202.11, the provisions
of Appendix U of the Building Code do not apply to an ADU constructed pursuant
to this paragraph (4).
   (e)   Application. All ADU applications must be filed under the house number
assigned by the Topographical Bureau of the appropriate Borough President’s
office.
      (1)   The ADU types below that share the same CO with the primary
dwelling must be filed as an Alt-CO application:
         (i)   Attic ADUs constructed in accordance with section U201 of the
Building Code.
         (ii)   Basement or cellar ADUs constructed in an existing building in
accordance with section U202 of the Building Code.
         (iii)   All other above grade ADUs, except for attic ADUs, such as
vertical enlargements, horizontal enlargements, and subdivisions from the bulk
of the existing single-family residence and constructed in accordance with
section U201 of the Building Code.
      (2)   The ADU types below must apply for a new CO and obtain a new
Building Information Number (BIN).
         (i)   Detached ADUs constructed in accordance with section U204 of the
Building Code.
         (ii)   Manufactured homes constructed in accordance with section U205
of the Building Code.
         (iii)   ADUs abutting the primary dwelling and separated from the
primary dwelling with a fire wall in accordance with section U203 of the
Building Code. To obtain a new house number, the address verification
application to the Borough Topographical Bureau must indicate the location of
the fire wall.
      (3)   ADUs converted from an existing detached garage:
         (i)   If the detached garage is recorded on the same CO as the primary
dwelling, one no-work Alt-CO application must be filed for the primary dwelling
and another Alt-CO application must be filed for the ADU.
         (ii)   If the detached garage is recorded on a CO separate from the
primary dwelling or is not recorded on a CO, the ADU must be filed as an Alt-CO
application under a different BIN than the primary dwelling. A new BIN may be
required for the ADU.
   (f)   Technical requirements. 
      (1)   ADU entrance identification. Where the eligible basement or cellar
residence entrance is not apparent from the street, a permanent directional
sign with red letters at minimum of 5 inches tall over white background must be
mounted on the primary dwelling, stating in sentence form: “Basement (or
Cellar) ADU entrance is located on Exposure [#], as viewed from street-facing
side (Exposure 1).” For purposes of this section, building sides shall be
numbered as follows: Exposure 1 is the side facing the street on which the
building’s official address is assigned; Exposure 2 is the side to the left
when standing in the street facing Exposure 1; Exposure 3 is the side opposite
Exposure 1; and Exposure 4 is the side to the right when standing in the street
facing Exposure 1.
      (2)   Water sensors and alarms.
         (i)   Installation. Pursuant to item 1 of section U202.11 of the
Building Code, water sensors and alarms must be installed in every habitable
space, as defined in section 202 of the Building Code, in an ADU located in a
basement or cellar to provide warning to the occupants in the event of a flood
and must be installed in accordance with the requirements of this section.
         (ii)   Water sensor and alarm units. In each habitable room, one water
sensor and alarm with alternating current (AC) power of a type acceptable to
the department must be installed in addition to one water sensor and alarm with
battery power to satisfy the requirements of section U202.11 of the Building
Code. One AC power water sensor and alarm that also has battery backup power
will be deemed compliant with this requirement.
         (iii)   Locations. Water sensors and alarms must be installed in every
habitable space at the following locations:
            (A)   Any interior space or area immediately adjacent to flood
water ingress points, such as windows, doors, and other wall openings. However,
no more than two are required for each habitable room.
            (B)   On the finished floor, or in accordance with the
manufacturer’s instructions.
         (iv)   Visual notification. The water sensors and alarms must have a
visual notification function when requested by the tenant.
         (v)   Average sound pressure. The water sensor and alarm must provide
a minimum sound pressure level of 75 dBA.
         (vi)   Owner’s responsibility. The owner is responsible to inspect all
of the water sensors and alarms and replace the battery as necessary, but at
least once a year, prior to a tenant’s occupancy, and after a flood event.
      (3)   Flood mitigation for ADUs above grade. ADUs that are not backyard
ADUs as defined in the Zoning Resolution and are constructed in accordance with
section U201, U203 or U204 of the Building Code, may be created within
buildings that lawfully existed on or prior to December 5, 2024, provided that
such ADUs are elevated as described below:
         (i)   Where the tax lot is located within the Special Flood Hazard
Area defined in section 202 of the Building Code, the lowest floor of the ADU
must be elevated to the design flood elevation in accordance with Appendix G of
the Building Code. The CO must include all applicable statements in accordance
with Appendix G of the Building Code.
         (ii)   Where the tax lot is located within the costal flood risk area
defined in section U202.2 of the Building Code, to be determined as described
in paragraph (3) of subdivision (d) of this section, but not located in the
Special Flood Hazard Area defined in section 202 of the Building Code, the
lowest floor of the ADU must be elevated to a minimum of 3 feet above the
highest adjacent grade to such ADU.
         (iii)   Where the tax lot is located is within the 10-year rainfall
flood risk area defined in accordance with section U202.2 of the Building Code,
to be determined as described in paragraph (3) of subdivision (d) of this
section, but not located in the Special Flood Hazard Area defined in section
202 of the Building Code, the lowest floor of the ADU must be elevated to a
minimum of 2 feet above the highest adjacent grade to such ADU.
(Added City Record 9/30/2025, eff. 9/30/2025)
Chapter 300: Use and Occupancy Classification
§ 310-01 Student Apartments.
   (a)   Scope. This rule establishes criteria for determining when dwelling
units are classified as student apartments and when the fire safety provisions
of Chapter 9 of the Building Code are applicable to such apartments. Student
apartments shall not include buildings or portions thereof classified or
recorded on a certificate of occupancy or in other records of the Department or
other agencies as a dormitory pursuant to Chapter 3 of the 2008 Building Code
or Subchapter 3 of Chapter 1 of Title 27 of the 1968 Building Code or as an
equivalent classification pursuant to the building code in effect prior to
December 6, 1968.
   (b)   References. See section BC 310.2 (definitions of: apartment;
apartment, student; family); section BC 907.2.9.1; Housing Maintenance Code §
27-2004(a)(4) (definition of family).
   (c)   Classification as student apartments. Student apartment shall mean any
apartment occupied or arranged to be occupied by students enrolled at a single
accredited college or university and maintaining a common household pursuant to
a lease, sublease, or occupancy agreement directly with such college or
university, provided however, that the occupancy by fewer than four such
students maintaining a common household and who are enrolled in a graduate
program, a professional post-graduate program, or a continuing education
program intended for adult learners beyond traditional undergraduate university
or college age shall not be deemed a student apartment.
      (1)   Definition of "family" under the New York City Zoning Resolution.
Where the Zoning Resolution limits the use of a building to either a one-family
or two-family residence, the number of occupants in such residence occupied as
a student apartment shall be limited to four unrelated persons in accordance
with the definition of "family" in § 12-10 of the Zoning Resolution.
   (d)   Applicability of fire safety requirements.
      (1)   Apartments converted to student apartment use on or after July 1,
2009. An apartment first occupied as a student apartment on or after July 1,
2009 shall comply with the following requirements:
         (i)   where required by section BC 907.2.9.1, a fire alarm system
complying with such section shall be installed;
         (ii)   the entire structure in which the dwelling unit is located
shall be fully sprinklered, provided however, that a building previously
approved as fully sprinklered in accordance with the laws in effect prior to
July 1, 2009 shall suffice as fully sprinklered;
         (iii)   such occupancy shall not exceed the maximum occupancy
contained in § 27-2075(a) of the New York City Housing Maintenance Code;
         (iv)   prior to commencement of such occupancy, and on an annual basis
thereafter, such college or university shall submit a fire safety and
evacuation plan for such dwelling units and other student apartments in the
building that contains fire safety and evacuation procedures acceptable to the
Fire Commissioner and is in compliance with any rules promulgated by the Fire
Commissioner; and
         (v)   the dwelling unit shall comply with additional occupancy and
construction requirements as may be established by rule by the Housing
Preservation and Development Commissioner; and
         (vi)   an application for construction document approval shall be
submitted to the Department indicating the dwelling unit numbers to be
converted to student apartments within the job description of such application,
regardless of whether or not any construction activity will occur. A permit
shall be issued and the project signed off prior to use as student apartments.
      (2)   Apartments converted to student apartment use prior to July 1,
2009. The occupancy of an apartment first occupied as student apartment prior
to July 1, 2009 may be continued without triggering the requirements of
paragraph (1) of subdivision (d) of this section, provided that:
         (i)   the occupancy of such apartment is limited to no more than three
students maintaining a common household; and
         (ii)   such apartment is thereafter occupied as a student apartment,
although not necessarily by the same students, provided that such student
apartment is not vacant for a period in excess of 12 months.
      (3)   Summary chart. The chart in Figure 1 summarizes the applicability
of fire safety requirements, but is not intended to supersede the text of
paragraphs (1) and (2) of subdivision (d) of this section.
Figure 1
Summary chart of fire safety requirements
             Pre-2008-code buildings (1968, 1938, etc.)            2008-code buildings 
              Unit converted to student  Units converted to student Units created or converted
             apartment prior to July 1, apartments on or after     to student apartments
              2009                       July 1, 2009
Undergraduate                                                      
1 to 3        Requirements of 1 RCNY §  Requirements of 1 RCNY §  Requirements of 1 RCNY §
students in   310-01 (d)(1) are not      310-01 (d)(1) are          310-01 (d)(1) are
the apartment applicable                 applicable                 applicable
4 to 7        Requirements of 1 RCNY §  Requirements of 1 RCNY §  Requirements of 1 RCNY §
students in   310-01 (d)(1) are          310-01 (d)(1) are          310-01 (d)(1) are
the apartment applicable                 applicable                 applicable
Post-Graduate                                                      
1 to 3        Not deemed a student       Not deemed a student       Not deemed a student
students in   apartment                  apartment                  apartment
the apartment
4 to 7        Requirements of 1 RCNY §  Requirements of 1 RCNY §  Requirements of 1 RCNY §
students in   310-01 (d)(1) are          310-01 (d)(1) are          310-01 (d)(1) are
the apartment applicable                 applicable                 applicable
 
   (e)   Certificate of occupancy. An amended certificate of occupancy need not
be obtained in order to occupy an otherwise lawful apartment for use as a
student apartment.
   (f)   Records. The college or university shall maintain records at the
building that contains any student apartment, identifying the unit numbers of
student apartments, the maximum number of students housed in each such unit,
whether the students are post-graduate or are permitted to be undergraduate,
and where applicable, whether the apartment was first occupied as a student
apartment prior to July 1, 2009. Such records shall be available for inspection
by the Department, the Fire Department, and the Department of Housing
Preservation and Development. The college or university may be required to
produce further records to substantiate compliance with this section.
Chapter 400: Special Detailed Requirements Based on Use and Occupancy
[Repealed]
§ 403-01 Impact Resistant Stair and Elevator Shaft Enclosures. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 12/3/2015, eff. 1/2/2016)
Chapter 900: Fire Protection Systems
§ 907-01 One-Way Emergency Voice Communication Systems. [Repealed]
§ 908-02 Standards for Installation and Location of Natural Gas Alarms.
   (a)   Adoption of National Standard. In accordance with Local Law 157 of
2016, the Department of Buildings adopts the 2023 edition of National Fire
Protection Association (“NFPA”) 715 Standard for the Installation of Fuel Gases
Detection and Warning Equipment as it pertains to the installation and location
of natural gas alarms.
   (b)   Installation required. Natural gas alarms must be installed in private
dwellings, class A multiple dwellings, and class B multiple dwellings as
defined in the Housing Maintenance Code, in accordance with the requirements of
this section and local law 157 of 2016.
      Exception: The requirements of this section do not apply to buildings
that do not have gas piping or gas service.
   (c)   Private dwellings. One or more natural gas alarms must be installed in
each dwelling in accordance with this section on or before May 1, 2025.
   (d)   Class A multiple dwellings. One or more natural gas alarms must be
installed in each dwelling in accordance with this section on or before May 1,
2025.
   (e)   Class B multiple dwellings. On or before May 1, 2025, class B multiple
dwellings must be protected by either:
      (1)   One or more natural gas alarms installed in each dwelling in
accordance with this section; or
      (2)   A line-operated zoned natural gas detecting system, designed in
accordance with NFPA 715-2023 by a registered design professional, and
installed in all public corridors and public spaces.
   (f)   Requirements. Each single- or multiple-station alarm, as defined in
NFPA 715, must meet all of the following requirements:
      (1)   The alarm must be manufactured in accordance with NFPA 715-2023,
Standard for the Installation of Fuel Gases Detection and Warning Equipment;
      (2)   Where a fuel-gas-burning appliance is installed within a dwelling,
the gas alarm must be installed in the same room as the appliance. The alarm
must be located at least 3 feet, but not more than 10 feet from the appliance,
measured horizontally. The gas alarm must be installed on either the ceiling,
or a wall. Where installed on a wall, the alarm must be located not more than
12 inches from the ceiling.
         Exception: Where the existing space does not allow for installation at
least 3 feet from a fuel-gas-burning appliance, or the manufacturer’s
instructions or NFPA 715-2023 require installation in a different location,
alarm installations must be placed in accordance with the manufacturer’s or the
NFPA 715 location requirements.
      (3)   The alarm must be labeled with the name of the manufacturer;
      (4)   The alarm must be listed and labeled with either UL 1484 or UL
2075, as applicable; and
      (5)   The alarm must be kept in good working order.
   (g)   Installer qualifications. Natural gas alarms must be installed by a
New York City Licensed electrical contractor, who obtains all required permits.
      Exception: Natural gas alarms that are powered either by battery or by
plug-in AC receptacle may be installed by other than a licensed electrical
contractor, including but not limited to the building owner, building
maintenance personnel, or the dwelling unit occupant.
(Added City Record 2/14/2024, eff. 3/15/2024)
§ 915-01 Carbon Monoxide Detectors.
   (a)   Scope. Pursuant to section 915.1.2 of the Building Code (BC), listed
carbon monoxide (CO) detectors must be installed in buildings equipped with a
fire alarm system that contain Group A-1, A-2, A-3, B or M occupancies, as
defined in BC Chapter 3. Such listed carbon monoxide detectors must be
connected to the fire alarm system control panel and installed in accordance
with the requirements of this section.
   (b)   Reference. See § 28-315.11 of the New York City Administrative Code
(AC), and BC sections 915.1.2, 915.3, 915.4, and 915.6.
   (c)   Group A-1, A-2, A-3, B or M occupancies. CO detectors with built-in
sounder bases meeting the requirements of BC section 915.6 and subdivision (g)
of this section must be installed in the following locations:
      (1)   Any room containing CO-producing equipment.
      (2)   Any interior space or area immediately adjacent to a CO-producing
source, including the vertical projection of the immediate area of the floor
above the CO-producing source and the immediate area of the floor below the CO-
producing source.
      (3)   Any interior space or area immediately adjacent to an enclosed
parking garage or a loading dock, including the vertical projection of the
immediate area of the floor above the enclosed parking garage or loading dock
and the immediate area of the floor below the enclosed parking garage or
loading dock.
      (4)   Any parking attendant’s office or booth located within an enclosed
parking garage or loading dock.
      (5)   As an alternative to installation as provided in paragraphs (1)
through (4) of this subdivision and subject to the Department’s approval, in
locations determined by a performance-based design that is in accordance with
section 5.8.5.3.2 of reference standard National Fire Protection Association
(“NFPA”) 720 – 2015 edition.
   (d)   Equipment shutdown. Activation of a CO detector located at the source
of CO-producing equipment must shut down that pursuant to BC section 915.3.1.
      Exception: This provision does not apply where the source is a generator.
   (e)   Installation requirements. CO detectors must be installed in
accordance with NFPA 720 – 2015 edition, as modified for New York City by 1
RCNY §
3616-08.
   (f)   Fire alarm control units. CO detectors must be connected and monitored
at the fire alarm control panel or Fire Command Center. Pursuant to the
provisions of section 23.8.2.2 of NFPA 72 – 2016, if there is insufficient
space in the existing fire alarm control panel to monitor the carbon monoxide
detectors, a new separate fire alarm control panel may be installed. However,
the new fire alarm control panel must function as if it were part of the
original building fire alarm system, and such dedicated function fire alarm
control panel must be interconnected with the building’s master fire alarm
control panel or Fire Command Station.
   (g)   Visual Notification Appliance Installation Requirements. In Group A-1,
A-2, A-3, B or M occupancies where CO detection is required, visual
notification appliances required by Section 6.4.1.1 of NFPA 720 – 2015, must be
installed in accordance with this subdivision.
      (1)   Visual notification appliance devices must be installed within 10
feet of any CO detector.
      (2)   Where multiple detectors are within the same zone, circuit
activation is acceptable.
      (3)   A permanently identified lamacoid label or a permanent marking on
the device with the wording “ALERT’, “EMERGENCY” or “CARBON MONOXIDE” must be
either affixed to the device or within the vicinity of the visual appliance
device employed by the fire alarm system.
      (4)   A visual notification appliance device must not have the word
“FIRE”, or any fire symbol, in any form (i.e., stamped, imprinted, etc.) in any
location on the device that is visible to the public. A notification appliance
device with multiple visible elements is permitted to have “FIRE” markings only
on those visible elements used for fire signaling.
      (5)   The lens of the notification appliance device for the carbon
monoxide system must be amber in color.
(Amended City Record 10/10/2019, eff. 11/9/2019; amended City Record 3/2/2021,
eff. 4/1/2021; amended City Record 12/27/2024, eff. 1/26/2025)
Chapter 1000: Means of Egress
§ 1014-01 Masonry Equivalent Exit Enclosures.
   (a)   Scope. This rule provides the construction requirements for masonry
equivalent exit enclosures in Groups R-1, R-2 and B occupancies.
   (b)   References. See sections 1014.2.1 (Two exits and exit access doorways,
Exceptions 3 and 4) and 1019.1 (Enclosures required Exception 10) of the
Building Code.
   (c)   Stud wall construction requirements. A masonry equivalent exit
enclosure constructed as stud and wall board assembly shall satisfy the
following requirements:
      (1)   Prescriptive stud and wall board assembly. A compliant wall
assembly shall be substantially identical to, and shall provide an impact
resistance equivalent to or exceeding, the performance of one (1) of the
following:
         (i)   Materials. Impact resistant wall board sheathed on the interior
surface of the exit enclosure wall assembly shall be tested by an approved
testing agency. The wall board used as the interior face panel shall be listed
by an approved agency to ASTM C 1629-06, Standard Classification for Abuse-
Resistant Nondecorated Interior Gypsum Panel Products and Fiber-Reinforced
Cement Panels, Impact Classification Level 2, and the base layer panel shall be
a minimum 5/8 inch (16 mm) gypsum wall board. Wall board applied to the
interior surface of the exit enclosure wall shall not reduce the clear width of
the exit stairs below that required for means of egress by Chapter 10 of the
Building Code.
         (ii)   Assembly. The wall assembly shall be at least two-hour fire
resistance rated.
         (iii)   Installation shall comply with the following:
            (A)   Studs shall be minimum 3 1/2 inch (89 mm) depth cold-formed
steel framing, at least 33 mils thick (20 gauge).
            (B)   Vertical studs shall be spaced at a maximum distance of 24
inches (610 mm), on center.
            (C)   Runners shall be securely attached at the floor and ceiling
to structural element members and shall comply with the structural requirements
of the Building Code.
            (D)   Wall boards shall be attached with No. 8 self-drilling bugle-
head screws, 12 inches (305 mm), on center maximum, with a minimum depth of 5/
8 inch (16 mm) penetration into the wall cavity.
            (E)   Joints between adjoining sheets of wall board shall be
staggered from base layer with face panel layer.
      (2)   Performance-based requirements. For a wall assembly not classified
in subdivision (1) above, a masonry equivalent wall assembly shall satisfy the
following requirements:
         (i)   Materials. Materials constituting the interior side of the exit
enclosure wall assembly shall be tested by an approved testing agency to ASTM C
1629, Hard Body Impact Classification Level 3.
         (ii)   Assembly. The wall assembly shall have a minimum two-hour fire
resistance rating. The wall assembly shall be tested by an approved testing
agency to ASTM C 1629, Soft Body Impact Classification Level 2.
         (iii)   Installation. Wall assemblies shall be anchored to structural
members and shall comply with the structural requirements of the Building Code.
 
Chapter 1100: Accessibility
§ 1101-01 Bathroom and Powder Room Design Prototypes.
   (a)   Applicable standard with modifications. For alterations in buildings
originally occupied:
      (1)   on or before March 13, 1991, in accordance with Item 2.1 of Section
1101.3.2 of the New York City Building Code ("Building Code"), bathroom and
powder room prototypes contained herein shall be constructed and equipped as
set forth in ANSI A117.1-1986, American National Standard for Buildings and
Facilities Providing Accessibility and Usability for Physically Handicapped
People, subject to modifications provided in this rule.
      (2)   after March 13, 1991, or for bathrooms and powder rooms that do not
fully comply with the prototypes in this section, the provisions of ANSI
A117.1-2009, Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities, and Chapter 11 of
the Building Code apply. If compliance with ANSI A117.1-2009 is a hardship, the
applicant may request a waiver pursuant to the provisions of Section 1101.3.5
of the Building Code.
   (b)   Minimum number of accessible fixtures. In a bathroom complying with
item 2.1 of Section 1101.3.2 of the Building Code, at least one lavatory, one
water closet and either a bathtub or Shower shall comply with ANSI A117.1-1986,
In a powder room complying with item 2.1 of Section 1101.3.2 of the Building
Code that contains only a lavatory and a water closet, such lavatory and water
closet shall comply with ANSI A117.1-1986.
   (c)   Additional fixtures. An additional bathing fixture within such
bathroom, as shown in Figure 1, need not fully comply with ANSI A117.1-1986
provided the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The three basic required fixtures are within an area of 5'-5" by
7'-4" minimum finished dimensions, and
      (2)   Any additional bathing fixture is provided with reinforcements for
the installation of grab bars, and
      (3)   If a door is provided for accessing the additional bathing fixture,
it is 2'-8" clear or as close to that dimension as possible, and
      (4)   The additional bathing fixture contains all other required
features, including, but not limited to, reinforcement for future mounting of
shower seat, shower faucet and control and shower spray unit.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1e024518ebfb3921ec38bc2ecfa58f65299ca12d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-56.png]
 
Figure 1 
   (d)   Prototypes. The prototypes in Figures 2 through 6 are acceptable as-
of-right for bathrooms and powder rooms designed and constructed pursuant to
item 2.1 of Section 1101.3.2 of the Building Code.
   (e)   Design drawing requirements. 
      (1)   The following items shall be indicated on the design drawings for
the bathroom or powder room:
         (i)   Future outward swing of the bathroom door indicated by a dotted
line on the drawings and indications that such outward door swing does not
obstruct a wheelchair user's access from the adjacent space.
         (ii)   Dimensions of grab bar reinforcement at all required locations.
         (iii)   Finished dimensions.
      (2)   General notes. The following notes shall be placed on the drawings:
         (i)   Future outward door swing indicated by dotted line on drawings.
         (ii)   Note on door schedule that the door and frames are provided
with mortised hinge and latch blanks to permit future reversal of the door on
the same frames using common hand tools and without further alterations to the
door and frames.
   (f)   Powder rooms. The prototypes in Figures 2 through 6 can also be
considered acceptable powder room prototypes so long as the finished dimensions
are measured as if there were a wall flush with the front face of the tub or
shower.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1e024518ebfb3921ec38bc2ecfa58f65299ca12d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-58.png]
 
Figure 2 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1e024518ebfb3921ec38bc2ecfa58f65299ca12d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-60.png]
 
Figure 3 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1e024518ebfb3921ec38bc2ecfa58f65299ca12d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-62.png]
 
Figure 4 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1e024518ebfb3921ec38bc2ecfa58f65299ca12d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-64.png]
 
Figure 5 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1e024518ebfb3921ec38bc2ecfa58f65299ca12d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-66.png]
 
Figure 6 
   (g)   Prototype for secondary bathrooms. The prototype of a bathroom with a
stall shower shown in Figures 7 and 8, below, is acceptable as-of-right in
secondary bathrooms designed and constructed pursuant to item 2.1 of Section
1101.3.2 of the Building Code.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1e024518ebfb3921ec38bc2ecfa58f65299ca12d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-68.png]
 
Figure 7 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1e024518ebfb3921ec38bc2ecfa58f65299ca12d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-70.png]
 
Figure 8
(Added City Record 11/30/2015, eff. 12/30/2015)
Chapter 3000: Elevators and Conveying Systems
Subchapter A: Amusement Devices
§ 3005-01 Scope and Application.
 This subchapter adopts all the national standards set forth in 1 RCNY §
3005-11 and is applicable to all amusement devices including, but not limited
to, inflatable amusement devices, portable amusement devices and simulators
operated within the City of New York, whether located on a permanent,
temporary, or mobile foundation. An amusement device that is not in compliance
with this subchapter must not be operated.
§ 3005-02 Definitions.
For the purposes of this subchapter, the following terms are defined as
follows:
   Amusement device or ride. A device or combination of devices or elements
that carry, convey, or direct a person(s) over or through a fixed or restricted
course, or within a defined area, for the primary purpose of amusement or
entertainment.
      Exceptions. For the purposes of this subchapter, the following are not
considered to be amusement devices:
         (a)   Any single passenger, coin-operated amusement device that is
manually, mechanically, or electrically operated, does not normally require the
supervision or services of a device operator, and is customarily placed,
individually or in groups, in a public location.
         (b)   Locomotives weighing more than 7 tons (3178 kg), operating on a
track of any length, the gage of which is 3 feet (914 mm) or greater, and the
weight of which is 60 pounds (927.24 kg) per yard (1006 mm).
   Amusement device operator. Any person or persons actually engaged in or
directly controlling the operations of an amusement device or ride, including
the start, stop or speed of the amusement device.
   Amusement park. A temporary or permanent entertainment complex or park,
offering various forms of entertainment, such as arcade games and amusement
devices as well as food, drink, and souvenirs.
   Amusement park operator. A person who manages or is in charge of the
operations of one or more amusement devices and also one or more device
operators.
   Certificate of competency. A certificate issued by the Department to an
amusement park operator who demonstrates his or her competence in operating an
amusement device.
   Certificate of compliance ("Green card"). A certificate issued by the
Department for an amusement device that passes inspection by the Department.
   Certificate of operation. A certificate issued to a device operator for a
specific amusement device to certify that training on that device was provided
by an amusement park operator who has received his/her certificate of
competency for the same device.
   Child. A person twelve (12) years of age and under.
   Containing device. A strap, belt, bar, gate or other safety device that is
not intended to provide physical support, but is designed to prevent accidental
or unintentional ejection of a passenger from an amusement device.
   Entry area (to amusement device). The area or gate where passengers form a
line and hand in tickets prior to arriving at the loading area to get on the
amusement device or ride.
   Exit area (from amusement device). The area or gate where passengers depart
from the ride area after leaving the unloading area.
   Guardian. Any parent, custodian, supervisory companion, or other person
responsible for the well-being and safety of another amusement device rider
such as a minor, disabled person, or elderly person, while entering, riding,
and exiting the amusement device and/or park.
   Guardian restriction. A requirement placed on an amusement device by the
manufacturer or amusement park operator that a rider must be accompanied by a
guardian.
   Height restriction. A minimum height requirement of passengers permitted to
ride an amusement device.
   Inflatable. An amusement device designed for uses that may include, but are
not limited to, bouncing, climbing, sliding, or interactive play. An inflatable
is made of flexible fabric, is kept inflated by continuous air flow by one or
more blowers, and relies upon air pressure to maintain its shape.
   Kiddie ride. An amusement ride designed primarily for use by children.
   Loading/unloading area (of amusement device). The area(s) immediately next
to the recreational or moving portion of the amusement device where passengers
get on/off the amusement device.
   Lock-out. The placement of a device, such as a lock, on an energy isolating
device so that the energy isolating device and the equipment being controlled
cannot be operated until the device is removed, typically accompanied by tag-
out.
   Manual(s). Information and instructions related to the operation,
maintenance, inspection and test requirements of the amusement device. A manual
is prepared by the amusement device manufacturer or, where the manufacturer's
manual is not available, by a registered design professional.
   Nondestructive test or testing (NDT). A general term used to identify
inspection methods that allow for the evaluation of welds, structural members
and joints without destroying their function.
   Owner. A lessee or a person with legal title to one or more amusement
devices.
   Permanent. Lasting for a period of time exceeding fourteen (14) calendar
days from the date of the issuance of a certificate of compliance.
   Portable. An amusement device that may be relocated by mounting such a
device on a motor vehicle or trailer; or an amusement device, including an
inflatable amusement device, that requires additional assembly or support for
its proper operation at the location where it is to be used.
   Restraining device. A safety belt, harness, chair, bar or other device that
provides actual physical support, retention or restraint to the passenger of an
amusement device.
   Signal person. A person who assists the amusement device operator in
ensuring that all passengers have been loaded/unloaded and/or are secured with
restraining/containing devices and signals the amusement device operator when
the ride is safe to operate via hand or verbal signals.
   Special amusement building. See Building Code Section BC 411.
   Tag-out. The placement of a prominent warning device, such as a tag and
means of attachment, on an energy isolating device to indicate that the energy
isolating device and the equipment being controlled cannot be operated until
the warning device is removed, typically accompanied by lock-out.
   Temporary. Lasting for a period of time equal to or less than 14 calendar
days from the issuance date of a certificate of compliance.
§ 3005-03 Administration.
   (a)   Filing requirements.
      (1)   License applications. All license applications for amusement
devices are filed with the Department of Consumer Affairs ("DCA") pursuant to
the requirements of Title 20 of the Administrative Code.
      (2)   Permanent installations. No permanent amusement device may be
installed, dismantled, removed, relocated, or reassembled unless an
installation application is filed with the Department. The Department's
application form(s), along with all required construction documents, must be
completed and filed by the owner, amusement park operator, or the owner's
representative. Such application must be approved by the Department prior to
the initial use of the amusement device and include:
         (i)   The name, address and signature of the amusement device owner.
         (ii)   Complete application and engineering plans signed and sealed by
a registered design professional including other reports required by 1 RCNY §
3005-10 and the manual. Engineering plans, dimensioned to scale, must identify
parts and components of amusement devices including, but not limited to bars,
cables, chains, ropes, rods, pipes, girders, braces, fittings, fasteners,
trusses, pressure vessels, pressure piping, gears, clutches, speed reducers,
welds, bearings, couplings, shaftings, axles, hangers, pivots, carriers (such
as tubs, cars, chairs, gondolas, or seating and carrying apparatus of any
description) and safety bars, belts, harnesses, chains, gates or other
restraining, containing, or retaining devices.
         (iii)   Foundation support and details signed and sealed by a
registered design professional.
         (iv)   Trade or descriptive name of the amusement device and model
number, if any, together with any identifying numbers.
         (v)   The name and address of the manufacturer.
         (vi)   Passenger capacity of the amusement device.
         (vii)   An electrical permit, if applicable.
         (viii)   Associated estimated cost of the device and installation.
         (ix)   Commercial general liability insurance as required by DCA.
      (3)   Temporary and portable installations. The owner, amusement park
operator, or owner's representative of temporary and portable amusement
devices, including inflatable devices, must file a registration application
with the Department using forms created by the Department. Such registration
information must be approved by the Department prior to the amusement device's
initial use and include:
         (i)   The name, address and signature of the amusement device owner.
         (ii)   Trade or descriptive name of the amusement device and model
number, if any, together with any identifying numbers.
         (iii)   The name and address of the manufacturer.
         (iv)   Manufacturing date of the amusement device.
         (v)   Passenger capacity of the amusement device.
         (vi)   Commercial general liability insurance as required by DCA.
   (b)   Fees. Refer to Table 28-112.2 of the Administrative Code.
   (c)   Alterations and modifications. All alterations and modifications to an
amusement device must be filed with the Department. Refer to 1 RCNY §
3005-04 for design guidelines and 1 RCNY §
3005-06 for device identification requirements.
   (d)   Dismantling and removals. All dismantling and removals of permanent
amusement devices must be filed with the Department. All such filings must be
signed and sealed by a registered design professional attesting that the
dismantling and removal of the amusement device would not leave any remaining
structure associated with the amusement device in an unstable or compromised
condition.
   (e)   Cease use order. In accordance with § 28-207.5 of the Administrative
Code, whenever the commissioner determines that the operation of any amusement
device is or may be dangerous to life, health, or safety, the commissioner may
issue a "cease use"' order requiring such equipment to be shut down, sealed, or
otherwise made inoperable. Upon the issuance of such order, a tag or notice
must be affixed to the amusement device warning that it is unsafe for
operation. It is unlawful to operate such device or to remove or deface such
tag until the cease use order is rescinded by the commissioner per § 28-207.5.1
of the Administrative Code.
   (f)   Adverse weather conditions. An amusement device that is exposed to
strong winds or storm cannot be operated under such dangerous weather
conditions, as provided in such device's operating manual, except for the
purpose of releasing passengers.
   (g)   Record keeping.
      (1)   Manuals. All relevant amusement device manuals must be kept on site
and made available to the commissioner upon request.
      (2)   Records. All inspection and test records of amusement devices and
equipment must be kept on site and made available to the commissioner upon
request. Such records must contain the following:
         (i)   Date and nature of all inspections and tests, whether by the
Department, the owner, or amusement park operator;
         (ii)   Any violation or notice of deficiency issued by New York City
(NYC) and the action taken to fix the problem;
         (iii)   Any repairs and adjustments made to any part of the equipment
to ensure safe operating conditions for the amusement device;
         (iv)   Any parts changed or repaired; and
         (v)   The inspectors' names.
      (3)   Duration. The amusement park operator must retain current
operation, maintenance, inspection, and test records for each amusement device
for the preceding one (1) year in a maintenance log kept on site. Such records
must be kept up-to-date and be made available to the commissioner upon request.
The owner must maintain records for the past seven years and make them
available to the commissioner on request.
   (h)   Certification and revocation.
      (1)   Certificate of competency for amusement park operators. Amusement
park operators of permanent, temporary and portable amusement devices must
obtain a certificate of competency from the Department by demonstrating an
ability to operate an amusement device safely in normal and emergency
situations. Each certificate must list every amusement device that the
applicant will be operating.
      (2)   Certificate of competency for inflatable rides. In order to receive
a certificate of competency for an inflatable ride, the amusement park operator
must bring, set up, and operate such ride at a location and on a date and time
determined by the Department.
      (3)   Duration and renewal. Certificates of operation and competency are
valid for one (1) year from the date of issuance and can be renewed annually.
      (4)   Revocation. Following notice and an opportunity to be heard, the
Department may revoke an amusement park operator's certificate of competency
for failure to comply with the requirements of these rules.
   (i)   Amusement device operator qualifications. All amusement devices must
be operated by a competent individual designated by the owner or amusement park
operator. All amusement device operators must:
      (1)   Be eighteen (18) years of age or older, except for kiddie ride
operators, who can be seventeen (17) years of age or older;
      (2)   Be free from any physical or mental conditions that could affect
the performance of his/her duties;
      (3)   Be able to communicate and understand the English language;
      (4)   Hold a current certificate of operation from the amusement park
operator as provided for in subparagraph (ii) of paragraph (4) of subdivision
(j) of this section; and
      (5)   Be trained in accordance with ASTM F 770, by the amusement park
operator, before being allowed to operate an amusement device.
   (j)   Responsibilities.
      (1)   Owner responsibilities. Refer to general maintenance, device
maintenance, and record keeping requirements set out in this rule.
      (2)   Amusement device operator responsibilities. The amusement device
operator has the following responsibilities:
         (i)   The amusement device operator must maintain full and
uninterrupted attention during the amusement device's operation;
         (ii)   The amusement device operator may not use any personal
telecommunication or listening device during the amusement device's operation;
         (iii)   The amusement device operator may not operate more than one
(1) amusement device at any given time;
         (iv)   The amusement device operator must have knowledge and training
in the use and function of all normal and emergency operating controls of the
amusement device;
         (v)   The amusement device operator must be within reach of the normal
and emergency operating controls during the device's operation. No other person
may be permitted to handle such controls unless the amusement device is
designed to be partially or entirely operated or controlled by a passenger;
         (vi)   The amusement device operator must not operate any amusement
device while under the influence of alcohol or drugs;
         (vii)   The amusement device operator must operate the amusement
device in accordance with the operating manual. An amusement device must not be
operated at an unsafe speed or at a speed beyond that recommended by the
manufacturer. The operating manual must be kept with the amusement device or in
an office on the same location as the amusement device. The manual must be made
available for inspection or use by the Department;
         (viii)   When restoration of electrical power to an amusement device
could create a hazard to anyone during the performance of maintenance, repair,
inspection, or an emergency evacuation of passengers, the amusement device's
electrical disconnect switch must be turned off and the device locked-out and
tagged-out. The amusement device must remain locked-out and tagged-out until
such time that the restoration of power will not create a hazard; and
         (ix)   The amusement device operator must not operate an amusement
device that does not have a current certificate of compliance.
      (3)   Owner, amusement park operator and amusement device operator
responsibilities. The owner, amusement park operator, or amusement device
operator must refuse any member of the public admission to an amusement device
if:
         (i)   The passenger's health, physical condition, or conduct appears
to make it unsafe for him/her to use the amusement device.
         (ii)   The passenger does not meet the amusement device specific
requirements as stipulated by the posted height and guardian restrictions.
Legible signs displaying these restrictions must be posted in an unobstructed
location in full view of individuals seeking admission to the amusement device.
      (4)   Amusement park operator responsibilities. The amusement park
operator has the following responsibilities:
         (i)   Training of device operators. The amusement park operator who
holds a certificate of competency is responsible for training individual device
operators in accordance with ASTM F 770. All training must be documented in a
log which must be kept at the site and made available upon the Department's
request.
         (ii)   Issuing a certificate of operation for amusement device
operators. After training the amusement device operators in accordance with the
provisions of subparagraph (i) of this paragraph, amusement park operators must
issue certificates of operation to the amusement device operators.
         (iii)   Affidavit. The amusement park operator must provide an
affidavit stating that the amusement device operators have been issued
certificates of operation and that each amusement device operator meets the
qualifications as set forth in subdivision (i) of this section. Such affidavit
must include a government-issued photo identification card of each device
operator as well as a list of the amusement devices that he/she has been
trained to operate.
         (iv)   Ensuring compliance. The amusement park operator must ensure
that the amusement device operators comply with the requirements of these
rules. If the requirements are not met, or as directed by the Department, the
amusement park operator must immediately revoke the certificate of operation
and notify the Department in writing of the revocation.
         (v)   Inflatable amusement devices. Prior to an event, the amusement
park operator must provide the Department with the event location, event dates,
and written certification verifying that all of the installed inflatable
amusement rides comply with the manufacturer's manual and bulletins. The
Department may perform an audit of the certificate of competency requirements
at such event location.
§ 3005-04 Design Guidelines.
   (a)   General requirements. All new and altered structures used in
connection with amusement devices must be designed and constructed in
accordance with ASTM F 1159, F 1193, F 2374, F 2375, and F 2291 and relevant
provisions of the Building Code to safely carry all loads to which such
structures may normally be subjected.
      (1)   Stress analysis. All amusement devices must be designed,
constructed, and installed to withstand any normal stresses to which they may
be subjected. Stress analysis must include the effect of forces generated by
acceleration, deceleration, centrifugal action, or by kinetic or other forces
that are constant, reversible, or eccentric. Materials and other data pertinent
to the design, factors of safety, or performance characteristics must be in
accordance with accepted engineering practices, standards and specifications
acceptable to the Department.
      (2)   Stability. Before being used by the public, amusement devices must
be placed or secured with blocking, cribbing, outriggers, guys or other methods
as required by the manual in order to be stable under all operating conditions.
      (3)   Foundations. The manual containing the recommended foundations must
be kept with all permanent and temporary amusement devices. If the manual does
not contain the required foundations, then a plan and design of the footings
prepared by a registered design professional must be prepared and kept with the
amusement device. Such plan must indicate the size and pressure under the
footings and allowable soil bearing capacity.
      (4)   Passenger restraining or containing devices.
         (i)   Passenger restraining or containing devices must be provided and
used by passengers on any amusement device where centrifugal and other forces
or mechanical malfunction could unseat or eject a passenger. Such passenger
restraining or containing devices must be designed, constructed, installed, and
maintained to safely support the passenger.
         (ii)   Amusement devices equipped with a safety bar, cage, or other
mechanically operated restraining device must be equipped with a device
designed so that the safety bar, cage, or other mechanically operated device
cannot be released except at the point of loading or unloading by the device
operator.
         (iii)   Anchorage for the required restraining devices must have a
minimum strength equal to the strength of the restraining device.
         (iv)   Fastenings of the restraining or containing device must be of a
type that cannot be unintentionally released by the passenger.
      (5)   Passenger loading and unloading. Belts, bars, foot rests, and other
equipment necessary for safe entrance and exit, and for support while the
amusement device is in operation, must be provided and maintained in a safe
condition. Such equipment and fastenings must be of sufficient strength to hold
or support the passengers.
      (6)   Electrical work. When setting up amusement devices, the electrical
work must conform to the requirements of the New York City Electrical Code. All
amusement devices powered by electricity must be provided with a main
disconnect switch capable of being locked only in the "off" position.
      (7)   New and modified amusement devices. For any new permanent,
temporary, or portable amusement devices, or whenever any additions or
alterations are made to any amusement device that change its structure,
mechanism, or capacity, a registered design professional must submit signed and
sealed plans of the amusement device to the Department for approval. Such plans
must contain design data, safety factors, materials utilized, stress analysis
and any other relevant data.
      (8)   Air compressors and equipment. Air compressors, air compressor
tanks, and related equipment must be designed, constructed, and maintained to
ensure safe operation at all times. Air compressor tanks and other air
receivers used in connection with air compressors must have the maximum and
minimum allowable working pressures noticeably and clearly marked on the tanks
and receivers.
      (9)   Adequate clearance. There must be sufficient clearance in the path
of travel of an amusement device to ensure that a passenger in the riding
position cannot be injured by contact with any structural component or other
fixed object.
      (10)   Handrails. Handrails for new stairs, stairways, ramps, and
walkways associated with the amusement device must be in accordance with
Section 1009.11 of the Building Code. Handrails must be of sufficient
attachment strength in accordance with Section 1607.7.1 of the Building Code.
Handrails of existing structures must be in compliance with the codes in
existence at the time the structure was originally constructed.
      (11)   Stairways, landings and ramps. Stairways, landings and ramps must
be designed, constructed, and maintained to safely support a minimum live load
of 100 pounds per square foot (488.2 kg/m 2 ).
      (12)   Surfaces. Stairways, landings and ramps must have non-slip
surfaces.
      (13)   Flame resistant fabrics. Fabrics constituting part of an amusement
device must be flame resistant as defined in Section 802 of the New York City
Fire Code.
   (b)   Safety devices. The following safety devices, as listed below, must be
incorporated into the design of the amusement device or ride:
      (1)   Emergency brakes. If cars or other components of an amusement
device are capable of colliding upon failure of normal controls, the device
must be equipped with emergency brakes sufficient to prevent such collisions.
      (2)   Anti-roll back devices. Amusement devices that use inclined tracks
must be equipped with automatic anti-roll back devices to prevent backward
downward movement of the passenger-carrying units.
      (3)   Speed limiting devices. An amusement device capable of exceeding
its maximum safe operating speed must be equipped with an electrical or
mechanical maximum speed-limiting device.
      (4)   Emergency stop switches. The installation or modification of
emergency stop (e-stop) switches must be in accordance with ASTM F 2291, the
manufacturer's manual and/or bulletin, or as directed by the commissioner.
§ 3005-05 Assembly and Disassembly of Amusement Devices.
The assembly and disassembly of an amusement device must be performed by or
under the direct supervision of the owner or amusement park operator in
accordance with the manual.
   (a)   Installation. Parts must be properly aligned and may not be bent,
distorted, cut or otherwise damaged to force a fit. Parts requiring lubrication
must be lubricated in the course of assembly and as required during operation.
Fastening and locking devices, such as bolts, cap screws, cotter pins and lock
washers, must be installed where required for safe operation. Nuts must be
drawn tight, cotter pins must be spread, and lock nuts firmly set. "R" pins
must only be used in locations recommended by the manufacturer or a registered
design professional. Immediate inspection of fastening devices must be
conducted after assembly to make sure that they have been properly installed.
   (b)   Worn or damaged parts. Parts that are excessively worn or that have
been materially damaged may not be used. Close visual inspection of parts must
be conducted during assembly and disassembly to discover such wear or damage.
   (c)   Tools. Anyone engaged in the assembly or disassembly of amusement
devices must use tools of proper size and design to enable the work to be
performed in a proper manner. Broken, damaged and unsuitable tools may not be
used.
§ 3005-06 Information Tags.
   (a)   Identification. Every amusement device must be identified by the name
and address of the manufacturer, a trade or descriptive name of the device, and
any Department issued amusement device identification number. Such
identification information must be permanently attached to the device and
placed in a visible location.
   (b)   Rating plates. A metal plate must be permanently attached to the
amusement device in a location that is clearly visible to inspectors, owners,
amusement park operators, and amusement device operators. If a metal plate is
not possible, an identification tag, acceptable to the Department, may be
substituted, but must still be in a visible location and permanently attached
to the amusement device. The following information must be legibly written on
the plate or identification tag:
      (1)   The name and address of the amusement device manufacturer;
      (2)   The trade or descriptive name of the amusement device;
      (3)   The maximum allowable and safe load and passenger capacity of the
amusement device;
      (4)   The maximum allowable and safe speed of the amusement device; and
      (5)   Weather restrictions. Additional information may be requested by
the Department prior to the issuance of a certificate of compliance. If an
amusement device or its supporting structure is altered, or if there is a
change to any of the rating plate information, the existing rating plate must
be replaced with a new metal plate with the correct information.
   (c)   Certificate of compliance. Every amusement device must have its
certificate of compliance displayed in a location on or near the control
station of the device that is visible to the public.
§ 3005-07 Posted Warnings and Restrictions.
   (a)   General restrictions. When the operation and use of an amusement
device is subject to restrictions imposed by the manufacturer, such
restrictions must be clearly posted next to the amusement device. Additional
restrictions may also be imposed by the commissioner in order to ensure safe
operation of the amusement device.
   (b)   Height and guardian restrictions. The owner or amusement park operator
must post a list of the manufacturer recommended minimum height restrictions
and any guardian restrictions for all amusement devices. The commissioner
reserves the right to modify the height restriction and/or guardian restriction
of any amusement device.
   (c)   Warning signs.
      (1)   Where an amusement device exposes a passenger to high speed,
substantial centrifugal or gravitational force, or when directed by the
commissioner, the owner or amusement park operator must post a prominent
warning sign at the entrance to the amusement device advising the public of the
risks to passengers. The sign must be at least 2 feet by 2 feet (610 mm by 610
mm), with the message displayed in a color that is sharply contrasting to the
background. The sign must read as follows or express an equivalent warning:
 
"THE FOLLOWING PEOPLE SHOULD NOT RIDE THIS AMUSEMENT DEVICE:
People under the influence of alcohol.
People under the influence of drugs or medications that could impair judgment.
People with heart conditions.
Pregnant women.
People with disabilities that may interfere with their safety during the
operation of the amusement device.
People with motion sickness.
People with any physical ailments that could be aggravated by this amusement
device."
 
      (2)   The following additional signs must be installed where applicable
for the amusement device, or as directed by the commissioner:
         (i)   "Passengers must remain seated until the amusement device comes
to a complete stop!"
         (ii)   "No Standing!"
      (3)   The following signs must be installed on all amusement devices:
         (i)   "No Smoking!"
         (ii)   "No Food or Drink!"
         (iii)   "No Cell Phone Use!"
      (4)   Special amusement buildings must also have the following signs
installed:
         (i)   Capacity signs indicating the number of persons who may safely
occupy the space. Where the occupancy of the space is seventy-five (75) or more
persons, the sign must comply with Section 1024.1.2 of the Building Code,
Public Assembly.
         (ii)   Illuminated exit signs. Such signs must comply with Section BC
411 and all other Building Code provisions in effect at the time of
construction of the building or structure.
         (iii)   No smoking or open flame. A sign stating: "NO SMOKING OR OPEN
FLAME," must be prominently posted at all entrances.
§ 3005-08 General Safety and Maintenance.
   (a)   Cleanliness. A suitable number of metal containers for trash must be
provided in and around amusement devices. Excessive trash or refuse must be
promptly removed. All parts of amusement devices, buildings and structures must
be maintained in a clean condition, including the underside of amusement
devices where the buildup of leaves and trash poses a fire hazard.
   (b)   Lighting. While an amusement device is in operation or occupied, all
entry/exit and loading/unloading areas of the amusement device must be provided
with illumination by natural or artificial means of not less than five (5)
foot-candles (fc) measured at grade level.
   (c)   Location of controls. Controls for the starting and stopping of
amusement devices must be properly labeled and in a location that allows the
device operator to have a clear view of the passengers in the loading and
unloading areas. In those cases where the device operator does not have clear
views of the passenger loading and unloading areas from the controls, the
amusement device must be equipped with a signal system in accordance with
subdivision (g) of this section.
   (d)   Overload. An amusement device must not be overcrowded or loaded above
its safe carrying capacity, as stipulated in the manufacturer's operating
manual.
   (e)   Entry and exit areas. Each amusement device, special amusement
building, or dark ride must have safe means of entry and exit as follows:
      (1)   Protection from nearby hazards. Means of entry and exit must be
protected from nearby hazards.
      (2)   Debris and other hazards. Passenger loading and unloading areas and
means of entry and exit must be free from debris, obstructions and projections,
and from slipping, tripping, and other hazards.
      (3)   Head clearance. The head clearance in passageways must not be less
than 7 feet (2134 mm).
      (4)   Stairways and ramps. Means of entry and exit must be comprised of
either stairways or ramps, and connecting landings or platforms with proper
handrails and guards to prevent falls where the public enters or leaves an
amusement device that is above or below grade.
      (5)   Special amusement buildings. All special amusement buildings must
also comply with the means of egress requirements in Section BC 411.
   (f)   Protection against moving parts.
      (1)   Fencing and barricading. An amusement device may not be used or
operated if anyone from the public has access to unsafe areas when the device
is in operation. Such areas must be fenced, barricaded, or otherwise guarded
against public access.
      (2)   Machinery guards and maintenance. Machinery used in or with an
amusement device must be enclosed, barricaded or otherwise guarded in
accordance with the operating and maintenance manual. All guards removed for
maintenance purposes must be replaced before normal operation is resumed.
Maintenance may not be performed while the amusement device is being used by
the public.
      (3)   Passenger protection. Passengers on loading and unloading areas
must be protected from coming in contact with moving parts accidentally.
   (g)   Signal systems. Where the device operator does not have a clear view
of the point at which passengers are loaded or unloaded, signal systems for the
starting and stopping of the amusement device must be in place.
      (1)   Communication system of signals. Both the device operator and
signal person must be familiar with any communication system of signals adopted
for the operation of an amusement device. Anyone, including the amusement
device operator, who may use these signals must be instructed in their use by
the amusement park operator.
      (2)   Position of safety. Signals for movement or operation of an
amusement device may not be given until all of the passengers and other
affected individuals are in safe positions and locations where they are not
endangered by the movement or operation of the device.
   (h)   Electrical wiring and equipment. All electrical wiring and equipment
used for amusement devices or for lighting must be installed, operated and
maintained in accordance with the New York City Electrical Code.
      (1)   Electrical transformer substations. All electrical transformer
substations must be properly enclosed and proper warning signs must be posted.
      (2)   Outdoor wiring and equipment. Electrical wiring and equipment
located outdoors must be protected from exposure to weather that may interfere
with its normal operation.
      (3)   Lightning protection. Amusement rides must be protected from
lightning strikes.
      (4)   Elevated power lines. Elevated power lines crossing access pathways
or other roads within the grounds of an amusement park must be suspended high
enough to provide a vertical clearance of at least 14 feet (4267 mm) from the
road surface or 3 feet (914 mm) above any vehicle used within the grounds of
such amusement park. A horizontal clearance of at least 3 feet (914 mm) must be
provided on each side of the normal passage space of vehicles.
      (5)   Lighting fixtures. All lighting fixtures used for general
illumination must be a minimum of 7 feet (2134 mm) above the normal walking
surface to the bottom of such fixture, including its lamp. If lighting
stringers are used, such stringers must also be suitably hung with fixture or
lamp holders with bulb guards to protect the bulb from accidental contact or
breakage.
      (6)   Protection from electrical shock. No person may be permitted to
remain so close to an electric power circuit that he or she may come into
physical contact with the circuit unless the person is protected against
electrical shock by de-energizing the circuit, grounding it, or guarding it by
effective insulation. If protection is provided by de-energizing the circuit,
the switch controlling the circuit must be locked-out and tagged-out to prevent
any unintentional energizing of the circuit.
      (7)   Emergency lighting. Emergency lighting must be in compliance with
the code provisions in effect at the time of construction of the amusement
device and be operable and in use in conjunction with the automatic fire
detection and alarm/communication systems.
      (8)   Special amusement buildings. All special amusement buildings must
also comply with the emergency voice/alarm communication requirements in
Section BC 411.
   (i)   Fire prevention. For the purposes of this subsection, the term
"listed" has the same definition as established in Section FC 202 of the New
York City Fire Code.
      (1)   Fire extinguishers. The owner or amusement park operator must
provide at least one listed 20-pound (9.07 kg) ABC multi-purpose portable type
fire extinguisher for every amusement ride, in order to secure reasonable and
adequate protection from fire hazards.
      (2)   Flammable items. Flammable waste, such as oily rags and other
flammable materials, must be placed in listed containers with lids that are
listed for such use. Such containers cannot be kept at or near exits or
entrances to any amusement ride or the amusement park.
      (3)   Flammable liquids and gases. Gasoline and other flammable liquids
and flammable gases, when stored, must be kept in reasonably cool and
ventilated places. Such liquids must be stored in listed containers or tanks
that comply with the requirements of Section FC 3404 of the New York City Fire
Code. Smoking and/or the handling of lit cigars, cigarettes, pipes, or any open
flame is prohibited in any area where such liquids or gases are stored or are
transferred from one container to another.
      (4)   Special amusement buildings. The owner or amusement park operator
must provide special amusement buildings with:
         (i)   No fewer than two (2) listed portable fire extinguishers of a
20-pound (9.07 kg) ABC multi-purpose type; and.
         (ii)   Automatic fire detectors and sprinklers in compliance with
Section BC 411.
§ 3005-09 Maintenance of Amusement Devices.
   (a)   Protection of passengers.
      (1)   Passenger-carrying amusement devices, interior and exterior parts.
All interior and exterior parts of passenger carrying amusement devices, with
which a passenger may come in contact, must be smooth and rounded, free from
sharp, rough or splintered edges and corners, and have no protruding studs,
bolts, screws or other projections that might cause injury. Interior parts that
a passenger may be thrown onto by the action of the amusement device must be
sufficiently padded to prevent injury, in accordance with the device's
operating manual.
      (2)   Restraining devices and/or containing devices. Passenger
restraining or containing devices must be inspected daily in accordance with
paragraph (4) of subdivision (f) of 1 RCNY §
3005-10 and maintained as needed to ensure they are fully functional before the
operation of the ride.
      (3)   Self-powered amusement devices. Amusement devices that are self-
powered by the passenger must have the driving mechanism securely guarded to
prevent passengers from gaining access to the mechanism. The driving mechanism
must also be secured in a manner that will prevent passengers with long hair,
clothing, or accessories from becoming tangled in the mechanism.
   (b)   Amusement devices constructed prior to adoption of this rule. All
existing amusement devices must be in compliance with the following safety
standards:
      (1)   Code in effect at the time the amusement device was manufactured;
      (2)   Code in effect at the time of alteration of the device;
      (3)   Manufacturer's manual and bulletin. If no manual exists, then a
registered design professional must create a manual for the device;
      (4)   There must be no pinch or nip points that may cause injury to a
passenger;
      (5)   There must be no exposed electrical wiring creating unsafe
conditions; and
      (6)   The safety of bystanders and passengers must be provided for when
operating and loading/unloading the amusement device.
   (c)   Repairs.
      (1)   Maintenance log and manual. All repairs must be entered into the
maintenance log and performed in accordance with the manufacturer's operation
and maintenance manual and any other specific repair instructions.
      (2)   Life-supporting or suspending parts. A life-supporting or
suspending part such as a pin, axle, or tension strap, that fails inspection
must be removed and a new or repaired part must be used as a replacement in
accordance with the manual's specifications. No amusement device may be placed
into operation until all necessary repairs are made and the repaired parts are
reinspected and retested.
      (3)   Welds. A weld that fails inspection must be noted in the
maintenance log and must be repaired before the device is placed in operation.
Repairs must be completed by a welder licensed in accordance with Article 407
of Title 28 of the Administrative Code. Where the welding work is not performed
in the city, welds must be made by American Welding Society (AWS) qualified
welders.
      (4)   Notification. The owner or amusement park operator must notify the
manufacturer of the amusement device of any defects. Before starting repairs,
owners or amusement park operators must request an official repair procedure
from the manufacturer. Where the manufacturer is no longer in business, the
repairs must be made following a procedure prescribed by a registered design
professional.
   (d)   Out of service individual units. Individual units of an amusement
device, such as cars, seats, or other carriers that may be taken out of service
without jeopardizing the safety of the entire amusement device as outlined in
the operating manual, must be firmly secured with caution tape and clearly
marked with a sign reading "Out of Service".
§ 3005-10 Inspections and Tests.
   (a)   Scope. Every new altered, rebuilt, or modified amusement device,
temporary or permanent, must be inspected and tested in accordance with the
manufacturer's manuals, manufacturer's bulletins, and the requirements of this
subchapter. In the case where such manuals are not available, a registered
design professional must prepare the necessary operation, maintenance,
inspection, and test manual(s) in accordance with ASTM F 853, F 770, F 2374,
and F 2376.
   (b)   Inspection and testing notification. The owner or amusement park
operator of a permanent amusement device must provide notice to the Department
by phone, fax or email that the device is ready to be inspected and tested.
Notice must be provided at least thirty (30) business days prior to the
proposed date of inspection and test.
Exception. Inflatable rides are not tested. Certificates of competency are
issued instead, based on criteria described in paragraph (2) of subdivision (h)
of 1 RCNY §
3005-03.
   (c)   Fees. Refer to § 28-112.8 of the Administrative Code for fees related
to inspections and related required filings.
   (d)   Initial inspection and testing by the Department.
      (1)   Acceptance test required. Upon initial installation, the load
capacity and safety of permanent amusement devices including, but not limited
to all operating protective safety devices, the adequacy of the structural
supports and anchorage to floors, walls, ceilings, and foundations must be
inspected and tested in accordance with the manufacturer's requirements
documented in the operating manual. Inspections and testing must be done by the
person or firm installing, assembling, altering or relocating the amusement
device, and such tests must be witnessed by the Department.
      (2)   Relocated, disassembled and reassembled permanent amusement
devices. Relocated, disassembled and reassembled permanent amusement devices
must be inspected and tested. The inspection and tests must be conducted after
relocation or reassembly and prior to its use and operation, regardless of the
date of the previous inspection and tests. The commissioner may require
inspections or tests to be performed during assembly or disassembly of
amusement devices when such tests are necessary to ensure safety.
      (3)   Portable mechanical amusement devices. Portable mechanical rides
must have an initial Department inspection performed after having registered
with the Department prior to public use. During the initial inspection, the
owner must submit all maintenance and repair logs. In order to pass inspection,
all rides must be in compliance with manufacturer's bulletins, if any. Any
other alteration performed on the amusement device must be supported with
certification from a registered design professional.
      (4)   Temporary devices. In order to obtain a Certificate of Compliance
(green card), every temporary amusement device, except an inflatable and truck
mounted amusement devices, must be inspected each time the amusement device is
set up or a DCA license is issued.
      (5)   Additional tests and inspections. The commissioner may require
additional tests and inspections of amusement devices regardless of the date of
the previous inspection and tests, when such tests are necessary to ensure
safety.
   (e)   Periodic Department inspections and testing.
      (1)   Permanent. Every new and existing permanent amusement device is
subject to periodic inspection and testing as follows:
         (i)   Rides operated seasonally. The Department will perform two (2)
field inspections of all permanent amusement devices. The first inspection will
take place prior to the initial use of the device for the season. The second
inspection will take place no sooner than ninety (90) days and no later than
one hundred and twenty (120) days after the first inspection. However, the
commissioner may extend the periodic inspection and test for an additional two
(2) months for such devices.
         (ii)   Rides operated year round. The Department will perform a
minimum of three inspections on rides operated year round. Each subsequent
inspection will take place no sooner than ninety (90) days and no later than
one hundred and twenty (120) days after the previous inspection.
      (2)   Temporary. Every temporary amusement device must be retested by the
Department upon renewal of the DCA license in order to receive a new
Certificate of Compliance (or "green card"), if applicable.
      (3)   Portable mechanical. Every portable mechanical amusement device
must be inspected and tested every year by the Department upon renewal of the
DCA license in order to receive a new Certificate of Compliance (or "green
card").
      (4)   Additional tests and inspections. The commissioner may require
additional tests and inspections of amusement devices regardless of the date of
the previous inspection and tests, when such tests are necessary to ensure
safety.
   (f)   Daily inspection and test by competent person. An amusement device
must be inspected and tested by a competent person in accordance with the
manual each day before it is used. The inspection and test must be performed by
the amusement park operator and must include, but not be limited to, evaluation
of items such as:
      (1)   Electrical: Operation of control devices, speed-limiting devices,
wiring, lighting, control panel function and indicator lights, and emergency
stop switches;
      (2)   Mechanical: Brakes, proper adjustment of brakes, drive systems,
wheels, rollers, chains, bearings, bushings, gears, pulleys, drive-belts,
clutches, anti-rollback features, listening for any unusual noises, and looking
for unusual movements or actions by the amusement device;
      (3)   Amusement device setup: Blocking, leveling, ground conditions,
fencing clearance, clearance to local hazards, trip hazards, and security
issues;
      (4)   Structural components: Passenger enclosures, welds, cracks, pins,
bolts, nuts, fasteners, harnesses, safety belts, lap-bars, hair guards, and
passenger restraints; and
      (5)   Additional safety items: Checking sharp edges and the condition of
fire extinguishers.
   (g)   Certificate of Compliance. A Certificate of Compliance ("green card")
is issued to all amusement devices, except inflatables, as follows:
      (1)   Permanent. Upon satisfactory completion of an inspection and test
of a permanent amusement device, the Department will issue a Certificate of
Compliance ("green card") for ninety (90) to one hundred and twenty (120) days.
Such certificate must be posted in plain sight next to the amusement device.
The device must be retested to renew the Certificate of Compliance.
      (2)   Temporary. Upon satisfactory completion of the inspection and test
of a temporary amusement device, the Department will issue a Certificate of
Compliance ("green card") for fourteen (14) calendar days. Such certificate
must be posted in plain sight next to the amusement device. Green cards may be
renewed by filing a license renewal application with the DCA and passing a
Department inspection.
      (3)   Portable. Upon satisfactory completion of the inspection and test
of a portable truck mounted amusement device, the Department will issue a
Certificate of Compliance ("green card") for the season. Such certificate must
be posted in plain sight next to the amusement device.
   (h)   Load tests.
      (1)   Annual. Where an annual load test is required by the manual, the
following types of passenger-carrying amusement devices may not be used until
they have passed an annual load test without material failure as witnessed by
the Department:
         (i)   Amusement devices having suspended passenger seats or spaces;
         (ii)   Amusement devices normally operated at speeds or with movements
creating severe gravity, inertial or centrifugal forces;
         (iii)   Amusement devices elevated in such a way that structural
failure is likely to cause passengers to be injured by falling; and
         (iv)   Amusement devices that the Department has ordered to undergo
such a test, when such a test is necessary to ensure safety.
      (2)   Load test procedure. Each passenger seat or space in the amusement
device, other than an amusement device intended only for children, must be
weighted with 170 pounds (77.1 kg) of dead weight. Each seat or space in an
amusement device intended only for children must be weighted with 90 pounds
(40.8 kg). When loaded, the amusement device must be operated at rated speed,
as specified in the manual, to test the full operation of all control devices,
anti-rollback devices, speed limiting devices, brakes, and other safety
equipment. The amusement device must withstand the test without material
failure. Additionally, the soil and foundation must not show any signs of
breaking, cracking, or deterioration.
      (3)   Other jurisdictions. A load test complying with the requirements of
this section and performed in another jurisdiction will be considered
acceptable if the owner or amusement park operator of the amusement device
files a statement with the Department that the amusement device withstood the
test without material failure and that the manufacturer, or an inspector
acceptable to the Department from another jurisdiction, performed the test. The
owner or amusement park operator must submit other relevant information as the
Department and commissioner may require. Until such a statement is filed and
accepted by the Department, the device is presumed to have not withstood the
required test.
      (4)   Load test failure. An amusement device that fails a load test is
unsafe and must not be used until it passes a subsequent load test and an
additional inspection witnessed by the Department.
      (5)   Rebuilt, altered, or modified amusement devices. If an amusement
device is rebuilt, altered, or modified after the load test is performed, or if
the commissioner orders such test, a subsequent load test must be performed.
The rebuilt, altered, or modified amusement device must not be used until it
passes such test and an additional inspection witnessed by the Department is
completed.
      (6)   Air compressor load test. Air compressors, tanks and related
equipment must be inspected and tested annually or more frequently if required
by the manual. Air compressor tanks must be tested to demonstrate their ability
to sustain a hydrostatic pressure specified by the manufacturer for a period of
at least one (1) hour. A record of each inspection and the results of the air
compressor tank test must be kept at the site where the device is used and made
available to the commissioner upon request.
         (i)   Welding work. An inspector certified by the National Association
of Amusement Ride Safety Officials ("NAARSO"), an inspector certified by the
Amusement Industry Manufacturers and Suppliers ("AIMS"), or a registered design
professional, must affirm, in a form acceptable to the Department, that any
welding performed (new, replaced, or inspected) was done by a licensed welder.
Such certified inspector or registered design professional must also affirm
that all necessary weld maintenance, inspections and tests, required by either
the ride manual or manufacturer, were performed within the last twelve (12)
months prior to the amusement device's scheduled inspection by the Department
and are clearly listed in the amusement device's maintenance log. Such an
affirmation must be kept at the site and made available upon request of the
Department.
   (j)   Nondestructive testing ("NDT").
      (1)   Permanent amusement devices. All permanent amusement devices
require nondestructive tests (NDT) in accordance with the manual or pursuant to
the commissioner's request.
         (i)   Personnel performing nondestructive tests. All personnel
performing NDT must be qualified by experience, education, and examination in
accordance with ASNT/SNT-TC-1A-05 for Level II in the presence of a registered
design professional.
         (ii)   Visual inspection. The amusement device must first be inspected
in the disassembled configuration, where possible, to enable inspection of
critical areas that cannot be seen or reached in the assembled configuration.
Once assembled, the entire amusement device and supporting structure must be
visually inspected prior to performing any tests.
         (iii)   Test procedures. The parts of the amusement device and
supporting structure subject to NDT are those recommended for such testing by
the manufacturer. Where the manufacturer's recommendations are not available, a
registered design professional must determine the parts of the amusement device
and supporting structure that must be tested in accordance with applicable ASTM
standards.
         (iv)   Test report. A special inspection report for the NDT performed
must be filed with the Department. The test report must identify the ride by
name, serial number and manufacturer and must include the part(s) tested and
the location of the tested areas. If the manufacturer or the registered design
professional does not recommend NDT for all or part of the device, an affidavit
must be submitted by the owner or amusement park operator with evidence
acceptable to the commissioner that such testing is not required.
      (2)   Temporary amusement devices. The requirements described in
paragraph (1) of this subdivision are applicable to temporary amusement
devices, unless an NDT was performed on such device within one (1) year prior
to use of the amusement device in the city.
      (3)   Steel roller coasters. The requirements described in paragraph (1)
of this subdivision are applicable to all steel roller coasters.
      (4)   Failure of test. An amusement device that fails an NDT is unsafe
and must not be used until it passes a subsequent NDT and an additional
inspection witnessed by the Department.
   (k)   Unsafe conditions. If, during inspection or operation, any amusement
device or part thereof is found to be unsafe or hazardous to life and safety,
the device must be taken out of service immediately by the owner, amusement
park operator, amusement device operator, or inspector. Unsafe conditions must
be corrected before the device is returned to service. Findings of unsafe
conditions and necessary corrective actions taken must be logged and made
available for inspection when requested.
§ 3005-11 Referenced National Standards.
 These standards are adopted in full, except to the extent there is a conflict
with this subchapter, in which case the provisions of this subchapter will
apply.
Standard Name Year
Standard       Name                                                        Year
ASNT/SNT-TC-1A American Society for Nondestructive Testing (ASNT)          2011
               Certification & Qualification Recommended Practice in NDT
ASTM Vol 03.03 Standards for Nondestructive Testing                        2013
ASTM standards:
F 1957         American Standard Test Method (ASTM) for Composite Foam     2011
               Hardness-Durometer Hardness
F 2137         Standard Practice for Measuring the Dynamic Characteristics 2013
               of Amusement Rides and Devices
F 747          Standard Terminology Relating to Amusement Rides and        2006
               Devices
               Standard Practice for Design and Manufacture of Patron
F 1159         Directed, Artificial Climbing Walls, Dry Slide, Coin        2011
               Operated and Purposeful Water Immersion Amusement Rides and
               Devices and Air-Supported Structures
F 1193         Practice for Quality, Manufacture, and Construction of      2006
               Amusement Rides and Devices
F 2291         Standard Practice for Design of Amusement Rides and Devices 2013
               Standard Practice for Design, Manufacture, Installation and
F 2375         Testing of Climbing Nets and Netting/Mesh used in Amusement 2009
               Rides, Devices, Play Areas and Attractions
F 853          Standard Practice for Maintenance Procedures for Amusement  2005
               Rides and Devices
F 2974         Standard Guide for Auditing Amusement Rides and Devices     2013
F 770          Standard Practice for Ownership, Operation, Maintenance,    2013
               and Inspection of Amusement Rides and Devices
F 2374         Standard Practice for Design, Manufacture, Operation, and   2010
               Maintenance of Inflatable Amusement Devices
F 2460         Standard Practice for Special Requirements for Bumper Boats 2011
F 2959         Standard Practice for Special Requirements for Aerial       2012
               Adventure Courses
F 2376         Standard Practice for Classification, Design, Manufacture,  2008
               Construction, and Operation of Water Slide Systems
F 2461         Standard Practice for Manufacture, Construction, Operation, 2009
               and Maintenance of Aquatic Play Equipment.
 
[Subchapter B: Fire Protection]
§ 3007-01 Fire Service Annunciators.
   (a)   Applicability of NFPA 72. The provisions of National Fire Protection
Association ("NFPA") standard 72 Section 21.5 as amended and adopted by 1 RCNY
§
3616-04 shall apply to the design and installation requirements for fire
service annunciators associated with fire service access elevators ("FSAE")
installed as required by sections 403.6.1 and 3007.7 of the Building Code.
These provisions shall not apply to existing buildings lawfully erected in
accordance with a Building code prior to the 2014 Building code that did not
require the installation of an FSAE, unless an alteration to such building
triggers the requirement to newly install an FSAE. The provisions of this rule
shall not apply to FSAE annunciator installations approved by the New York City
Fire Department prior to the effective date of this rule.
   (b)   Temporary and final certificates of occupancy. Buildings with an
occupied floor more than 120 feet above the lowest level of fire department
access that have received a temporary certificate of occupancy prior to the
effective date of this rule may be issued a certificate of occupancy before the
installation of a fire service annunciator. Such buildings, and buildings with
an occupied floor more than 120 feet above the lowest level of fire department
access that have been issued a certificate of occupancy without such fire
service annunciator, must comply with the design and installation requirements
identified in subdivision a of this section by no later than three years from
the effective date of this rule.
   (c)   Construction sign-off. Buildings with an occupied floor more than 120
feet above the lowest level of fire department access that have received
construction sign-off prior to the effective date of this rule may be issued a
certificate of occupancy before the installation of a fire service annunciator.
Such buildings must comply with the design and installation requirements
identified in subdivision a of this section by no later than three years from
the effective date of this rule.
(Added City Record 1/20/2023, eff. 2/19/2023)
§ 3007-02 Fire Service Access Elevator (FSAE) Hoistway Lighting.
Where hoistway lighting is required to be provided in accordance with Building
Code section 3007.5.2, the following lighting control requirements shall apply:
   (a)   A two-position ON-AUTO switch shall be provided for FSAE hoistway
lighting controls.
   (b)   One switch for each hoistway containing FSAE shall be provided.
   (c)   Each switch's label descriptor shall include a reference to the FSAE
car designation (e.g. A-1).
(Added City Record 1/20/2023, eff. 2/19/2023)
Chapter 3300: Safeguards During Construction and Demolition
§ 3301-01 Construction Site Signs.
   (a)   References. See Sections 3307 and 3301.9 of the New York City Building
Code (BC).
   (b)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms
mean:
      (1)   Best construction site management program. A plan designed to help
reduce construction impact on the surrounding community by monitoring certain
activities at construction sites. This program must be developed and
implemented by a party who is independent of the contractor.
      (2)   Contractor. A general contractor or, for a demolition site, the
demolition contractor.
      (3)   Department's acceptance logo. A logo provided by the Department
that indicates the Department has accepted the best construction site
management program and that may be displayed on the sidewalk shed parapet panel
along with the program name or logo at a site utilizing an accepted best
construction site management program.
      (4)   Designated responsible party. The person in charge of implementing
the best construction site management program and authorized to receive notices
from the Department. This party must be designated by the person, corporation
or other legal entity operating the program.
      (5)   Project information panel. A project information panel required to
be posted on a construction fence as set forth in BC Section 3301.9.1.
      (6)   Sidewalk shed parapet panel. A sidewalk shed parapet panel required
to be posted on a sidewalk shed as set forth in BC Section 3301.9.2.
      (7)   Site. A construction or demolition site.
   (c)   Project information panels at government-owned sites and at sites with
government funding. Project information panels at government-owned sites and at
sites with government funding must conform to all requirements set forth in BC
Section 3301.9 except as provided in this section.
      (1)   Content of project information panels at government-owned sites and
at sites with government funding. Project information panels at government-
owned sites and at sites with government funding must include the following
information (see Figures 1, 2, and 3):
         (i)   A rendering, elevation drawing, site plan, or zoning diagram of
the building exterior that does not contain logos or commercially recognizable
symbols; Exception: A rendering, elevation drawing, site plan or zoning diagram
of the building exterior is not required for demolition projects.
         (ii)   A title line stating "Work in Progress:" and specifying the
nature of the project;
         (iii)   Anticipated project completion date;
         (iv)   The name of the government entity owning the site and/or
funding the project;
         (v)   Website address to contact for project information;
         (vi)   The corporate name and telephone number of the contractor;
         (vii)   The statement, in both English and Spanish, "TO ANONYMOUSLY
REPORT UNSAFE CONDITIONS AT THIS WORK SITE, CALL 311" and
         (viii)   A copy of the primary project permit, with accompanying text
"To see other permits issued on this property, visit: www.nyc.gov/buildings."
The permit must be laminated or encased in a plastic covering to protect it
from the elements or shall be printed directly onto the project information
panel. In addition to the above requirements, the name(s) of government
official(s) may be incorporated into the panel in accordance with Figures 1, 2
and 3.
      (2)   Specifications for project information panels at government-owned
sites and at sites with government funding. Project information panels must be
6 feet (1829 mm) wide and 4 feet (1219 mm) high, with the content required by
paragraph (1) of this subdivision arranged in accordance with Figures 1, 2 and
3, as applicable. The content required by subparagraphs (ii) through (vii) of
paragraph (1) of this subdivision must be written in the Calibri font or
similar sans serif font style, with letters a minimum of 1 inch (25 mm) high,
as measured by the upper case character. Such letters must be white, on a blue
background, with such blue color of a shade matching Pantone 296, or RGB 15,
43, 84, or CMYK 100, 88, 38, 35.
      Exceptions: 
         (i)   The dimensions for a project information panel posted in
conjunction with a demolition project must be 2 feet 4 inches (711 mm) wide and
4 feet (1219 mm) high, in accordance with Figure 1.
         (ii)   For construction sites with a street frontage less than 60 feet
(18 288 mm), the dimensions for a project information panel, other than that
posted in conjunction with a demolition project, must be 55 inches (1397 mm)
wide and 36.5 inches (927 mm) high, in accordance with Figure 3.
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/1e024518ebfb3921ec38bc2ecfa58f65299ca12d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-72.jpg]
Figure 1
Fence Project Information Panel Text Detail
 
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/1e024518ebfb3921ec38bc2ecfa58f65299ca12d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-74.jpg]
 
Figure 2
Fence Project Information Panel Layout
 
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/1e024518ebfb3921ec38bc2ecfa58f65299ca12d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-76.jpg]
Figure 3
Fence Project Information Panel Layout for Small Lots
 
   (d)   Best construction site management program.
      (1)   Scope. This section outlines the requirements for Department-
accepted best construction site management programs and the duties of the
designated responsible party. Unless otherwise authorized under the
Administrative Code or Department rules, only Department-accepted best
construction site management programs may be identified on a sidewalk shed
parapet panel.
      (2)   Application and acceptance. 
         (i)   Application for acceptance must be made on forms to be furnished
by the Department and must contain such information as the Department
prescribes, including, but not limited to, the name, address and contact
information of the person, corporation or other legal entity operating the
program and the name, address and contact information for the designated
responsible party.
         (ii)   The Department may accept a best construction site management
program if it receives a completed application that includes a detailed plan
that demonstrates that the program is designed to ensure that its participating
work sites are well-managed, clean and responsive to community concerns. The
plan must include, at a minimum, the duties listed in paragraph (4) of this
subdivision.
         (iii)   Applications must include a certification by the program's
designated responsible party that the plan will be implemented at all times at
each of the program's participating sites.
      (3)   Duties of the designated responsible party. 
         (i)   The designated responsible party must monitor the contractor and
the site to ensure the maintenance of publicly accessible areas within or
surrounding the site and site operations, including, but not limited to,
ensuring the contractor:
            (A)   Maintain the site free of any construction debris, or
rubbish, materials and equipment;
            (B)   Maintains all areas and surfaces such that they are neat,
clean and free of damage, illegal signage, graffiti and sharp objects;
            (C)   Maintains free of snow and ice on sidewalks and snow and ice
that poses potential danger to the public.
         (ii)   The designated responsible party must monitor the contractor
and the site to ensure that the community impact is minimized, which includes,
but is not limited to, ensuring that the contractor:
            (A)   Installs enhanced netting systems and sidewalk protections.
            (B)   Reduces or shields the public from noise, vibration, dust and
noxious substances;
            (C)   Protects street trees, plants, sidewalk amenities and
furniture; and
            (D)   Addresses nuisance and environmental complaints.
         (iii)   The designated responsible party must promote community
relations, including, but not limited to, the following:
            (A)   Establish a method to receive and provide responses to
complaints or questions and to provide timely updates about on-going
construction operations, including project scope and expected duration of the
project;
            (B)   Provide notification to the respective Community Board prior
to affixing the best construction site management program name or logo on a
sidewalk shed parapet panel at a participating site; and
            (C)   For new buildings, alterations or demolitions of major
buildings, as that term is defined in Chapter 33 of the New York City Building
Code, provide live project updates to the respective community board within
thirty (30) days of a site joining a best construction site management program
and every six months thereafter.
         (iv)   The designated responsible party must conduct periodic reviews
of its participating sites to verify program compliance. Such reviews must be
conducted more frequently if so directed by the Department.
         (v)   The designated responsible party must maintain the following
records until construction is complete and make them available to the
Department upon request:
            (A)   Current list of the participating site addresses, contractor
name, address and contact number and the owner name and address;
            (B)   Details of each review with respect to any program
requirements set forth in paragraph (4) of this subdivision and any actions
resulting therefrom; and
            (C)   Details of complaint resolution for each complaint, including
mitigation strategies.
         (vi)   The designated responsible party must develop a process for:
            (A)   Notifying the Department of any changes to the best
construction site management program, plan or the designated responsible party
within ten days of such change; and
            (B)   Notifying the contractor and owner if the best construction
site management program is no longer accepted by the Department or if an order
has been issued by the Commissioner instructing that the program's name or logo
and the Department's acceptance logo must be immediately removed from the sign.
   (e)   Revocation.
      (1)   Failure to comply with duties. Following notice and an opportunity
to be heard, the Department may revoke acceptance of a best construction site
management program and order removal of the program's name or logo and
Department acceptance logo from the sidewalk shed parapet panel at a particular
site or at all the program's sites for failure to comply with the duties set
forth in paragraph (3) of subdivision (d) of this section and the plan
described in the accepted best construction site management program
application.
      (2)   Failure to ensure compliance with plan. Following notice and an
opportunity to be heard, the Department may order removal of the program's name
or logo and Department acceptance logo from the sidewalk shed parapet panel at
a particular site where the best construction site management program fails to
ensure that the participating work site is well-managed, clean and responsive
to community concerns.
      (3)   Removal of logos. If the program's name or logo and the
Department's acceptance logo are not removed from the sidewalk shed parapet
panel within 10 days of the order, the Department may cover the program's name
or logo and the Department acceptance logo, at the owner's expense.
      (4)   Continuation of program without logos. Revocation of the
Department's program acceptance or order to remove the program name or logo and
the Department's acceptance logo at a particular site, shall not affect the
ability of the best construction site management program to continue its
mission without inclusion of its name or logo on the sidewalk shed parapet
panel and without reference to Department program acceptance.
(Amended City Record 4/19/2018, eff. 5/19/2018)
§ 3301-02 Registration of Construction Superintendents.
Construction superintendents must be registered with the Department, in
accordance with the following provisions.
   (a)   Form and manner of registration. An application for registration as a
construction superintendent must be submitted in a form and manner acceptable
to Department, and provide such information as the department may require.
   (b)   Qualifications. All applicants for construction superintendent
registration are subject to the provisions of Article 401 of Chapter 4 of Title
28 of the New York City Administrative Code and must submit satisfactory proof
establishing that the applicant:
      (1)   Holds a valid site safety manager or site safety coordinator
certificate, or a valid registration as a concrete safety manager; or
      (2)   Is able to read construction plans and specifications; and
      (3)   Has satisfactorily completed, within two (2) years prior to the
date of application, a course that is at least ten hours (10) in length and
approved by the United States Department of Labor Occupational Safety and
Health Administration (OSHA) in construction industry safety and health; and
also meets one of the following:
         (i)   Is a registered design professional and has satisfactorily
completed, within one (1) year prior to the date of the application, a course
in site safety that is at least 8 hours in length and approved by the
department;
         (ii)   Holds a Certified Safety Professional ("CSP") designation or a
Construction Health and Safety Technician ("CHST") designation from the Board
of Certified Safety Professionals ("BCSP") and has satisfactorily completed,
within one (1) year prior to the date of the application, a course in site
safety that is at least 8 hours in length and approved by the department;
         (iii)   Has five (5) years of experience, within ten (10) years prior
to the date of the application, as a Building Code enforcement official charged
with enforcement of the provisions of the New York City Building Code, and has
satisfactorily completed, within one (1) year prior to the date of the
application, a course in site safety that is at least 8 hours in length and
approved by the department. The enforcement must have included inspections of
buildings under construction or demolition and thus this basis for
qualification excludes officials whose primary role is to perform inspections
of occupied or vacant buildings;
         (iv)   Has five (5) years of full-time field experience in the United
States, within 10 years prior to the date of the application, working on
buildings as a safety official for a governmental entity or construction firm
or as a safety manager or safety engineer for a safety consulting firm
specializing in construction or demolition and has satisfactorily completed,
within one (1) year prior to the date of the application, a course in site
safety that is at least 8 hours in length and approved by the department; or
         (v)   Has five (5) years of full time experience in the United States,
within ten (10) years prior to the date of the application, as verified by
employer affidavit, working with plans in a relevant construction trade in
furtherance of the construction, vertical or horizontal enlargement, or full
demolition of a building or structure, and has satisfactorily completed, within
one (1) year prior to the date of the application, a course in site safety that
is at least 40 hours in length and approved by the department.
   (c)   Credits. For purposes of paragraph (3) of subdivision (b) of this
section, the following credits may be applied:
      (1)   Educational credit. Each year of full-time formal training or
education in a program with emphasis on construction at a college, technical or
trade school may be substituted for one year of work experience, up to a
maximum of three years.
      (2)   Training credit. Possession of a valid Site Safety Training
Supervisor Card will be accepted in lieu of providing proof that the applicant
has completed the OSHA and site safety courses specified in paragraph (3) of
subdivision (b) of this section.
   (d)   Audits. Applications for registration are subject to audit at any
time. An audit may also be made at any time upon receipt of complaints or
evidence of falsification.
   (e)   Registration term. Registrations issued under this section are valid
for three years from the date of issuance.
   (f)   Registration fees. The initial fee for registration in accordance with
this section is one hundred dollars ($100.00).
   (g)   Renewals. 
      (1)   Renewals may be subject to the provisions of Article 401 of Chapter
4 of Title 28 of New York City Administrative Code. The fee for timely renewal
is fifty dollars ($50.00). Renewals not submitted in a timely manner will be
subject to a late surcharge of fifty dollars ($50.00).
      (2)   Timely renewal applications must be accompanied by proof that the
applicant has, during the one-year prior to renewal, successfully completed an
8-hour Site Safety Coordinator course approved by the department.
      (3)   Renewals not filed within one year of registration expiration will
be treated as a new application.
   (h)   Notification of change of address. Registered construction
superintendents must notify the department, in writing, of any address change
within thirty (30) days of the change.
(Added City Record 4/28/2016, eff. 5/28/2016; amended City Record 4/19/2018,
eff. 5/19/2018; amended City Record 7/15/2022, eff. 8/14/2022; amended City
Record 1/26/2023, eff. 2/25/2023)
§ 3301-03 Worker Safety Information at Construction Sites. [Repealed]
(Added City Record 10/15/2019, eff. 10/15/2019; amended City Record 11/10/2020,
eff. 12/10/2020; repealed City Record 5/20/2025, eff. 6/19/2025)
§ 3301-04 Duties of the Construction Superintendent.
   (a)   Duties. Construction superintendents, at a minimum, must perform the
duties set out in this section at each job site for which the construction
superintendent is responsible.
   (b)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have
the following meanings:
      Approved Documents. The term “approved documents” has the same meaning as
set forth in Section 3301.13.2 of the New York City Building Code.
      Competent person. The term “competent person” has the same meaning as set
forth in Section 202 of the New York City Building Code.
      Construction Superintendent. The primary construction superintendent,
designated pursuant to Section 3301.13.3 of the New York City Building Code, or
the alternate construction superintendent designated pursuant to Section
3301.13.5 of the New York City Building Code when acting in place of the
primary construction superintendent.
      License. The term “license” has the same meaning as set forth in § 28-
401.3 of the New York City Administrative Code.
      Licensee. An individual, sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
business association or other person who holds a license issued by the
department.
      Qualified person. The term “qualified person” has the same meaning as set
forth in Section 202 of the New York City Building Code.
      Registered design professional. The term “registered design professional”
has the same meaning as set forth in § 28-101.5 of the New York City
Administrative Code.
      Special inspector. The term “special inspector” has the same meaning as
set forth in § 28-101.5 of the New York City Administrative Code.
   (c)   Ensuring compliance. In order to satisfy the requirements of items
number 1 and 2 of Section 3301.13.7 of the New York City Building Code, the
construction superintendent must, at a minimum, ensure compliance with the
requirements listed in Table 1:
Table 1: Compliance Requirements 
The construction superintendent must ensure that:
(1)  Work required to be performed by or supervised by a licensee is performed
     by or supervised by the appropriate licensee. 1
     Required supervisors are present during activities required to be
(2)  supervised by a competent person in accordance with Chapter 33 of the New
     York City Building Code or rules promulgated thereunder. 2
     Inspections, monitoring, examinations, or similar checks requiring a
(3)  registered design professional, qualified person, or competent person are
     performed by such person when required by Chapter 33 of the New York City
     Building Code or rules promulgated thereunder. 2
     Work requiring a special inspection, as identified by the registered
     design professional of record, or work requiring an inspection,
(4)  monitoring, examination, or similar check, as required by Chapter 33 of
     the New York City Building Code or rules promulgated thereunder, remains
     accessible until the inspection, monitoring, examination, or similar check
     has been successfully completed. 3
     Work contingent upon successful completion of a special inspection, as
     identified by the registered design professional of record, or an
(5)  inspection, monitoring, examination, or similar check, as required by
     Chapter 33 of the New York City Building Code or rules promulgated
     thereunder does not proceed until the inspection has been successfully
     completed. 3
(6)  Ongoing and completed work complies with approved documents. 4
     When dewatering operations are occurring, compliance is maintained with
(7)  the dewatering plan and dewatering monitoring program required by Section
     3303.14.5 of the New York City Building Code. 5
     When excavation operations are occurring or an open excavation is present
     at the site, compliance is maintained with the support of excavation plan
     required by Section 3304.4.1 of the New York City Building Code, 4 or
(8)  where the work is exempt from a support of excavation plan, the work
     remains within the scope of the applicable exemption and maintains
     compliance with the applicable provisions of Section 3304.4 of the New
     York City Building Code.
     When slurry is utilized to support an excavation, trench, or drilled or
(9)  bored hole, compliance is maintained with the slurry installation
     procedures required by Section 3304.12 of the New York City Building Code.
     4
     When underpinning, or other methods of supporting buildings or adjacent
     property, are being installed, compliance is maintained with the
(10) installation procedures for the underpinning, or other methods of support,
     as specified on the construction documents required by Section 1817 of the
     New York City Building Code. 4
     When structural steel, precast concrete, or structural aluminum is being
     installed, or when concrete formwork is being installed or removed, or
     concrete is being placed, compliance is maintained with the applicable
(11) provisions of Section 3305 of the New York City Building Code, 6 including
     but not limited to ensuring compliance is maintained with shop drawings,
     erection drawings, formwork design drawings, shoring and bracing drawings,
     reshoring schedules, and similar documents prepared by a registered design
     professional. 4
     When cold formed steel is being installed, all requirements imposed upon
(12) the construction superintendent by Section 3305.8 of the New York City
     Building Code are complied with.
     During concrete placement in cold or hot weather, procedures to implement
(13) the requirements of Sections 1905.12 and 1905.13 of the New York City
     Building Code are in place.
     When masonry construction is occurring, compliance is maintained with the
(14) masonry bracing plan required by Section 2104.5 of the New York City
     Building Code. 4
     During demolition operations, compliance is maintained with the demolition
     submittal documents required by Section 3306.5 of the New York City
(15) Building Code, 4 or where the work is exempt from demolition submittal
     documents, the work remains within the scope of the applicable exemption
     and maintains compliance with the applicable provisions of Sections
     3306.7, 3306.8, and 3306.9 of the New York City Building Code.
     During demolition operations requiring a demolition monitoring plan,
(16) compliance is maintained with the demolition monitoring plan required by
     Sections 3306.12 or 3306.13 of the New York City Building Code. 5
     During demolition operations, compliance is maintained with the access and
(17) safety zone provisions of Sections 3306.2.1 and 3306.2.2 of the New York
     City Building Code.
     Hoisting operations have ceased when the wind speed exceeds either 30 mph
(18) (3-second gust), the threshold specified by the manufacturer of the
     hoisting equipment, or the threshold indicated on approved documents,
     whichever is lower.
(19) The site is secured for inclement weather.
     The site is locked or otherwise secured at the end of the shift, with
(20) watchpersons or security monitoring in place when required by Section
     3303.3 of the New York City Building Code.
     For after-hours work, an after-hours variance has been obtained, and the
(21) work is in compliance with the requirements and stipulations for the
     after-hours work.
 
Notes to Table 1:
1.   For certain license types, supervision may be in the form of offsite
supervision by the licensee in accordance with code and rules. The construction
superintendent is not required to determine if individuals supervised by the
licensee are employed by the licensee or qualified to perform the work of the
licensee’s trade.
2.   The construction superintendent is not required to determine if the
individual possesses the proper qualifications to serve as a supervisor or
inspector. It is the responsibility of licensed professionals to practice
within their authorized scope of practice. It is the responsibility of permit
holders, contractors, and similar entities to designate only persons who meet
the criteria of a competent person or qualified person for work requiring such
persons.
3.   Successful completion to be determined by the special inspector,
registered design professional, qualified person, or competent person who
performed the inspection, monitoring, examination, or similar check.
4.   For elements of a plan, document, or specification inspected by a special
inspector or registered design professional, the construction superintendent
need only verify the inspection occurred and was passed by the special
inspector or registered design professional.
5.   Where the monitoring program calls for monitoring to be performed by a
registered design professional, qualified person, or competent person, the
construction superintendent need only verify such individual is present as
required by the monitoring plan. The criteria of footnote 2 also applies.
6.   Excluding provisions related to design calculations and the content of
approved documents prepared by a registered design professional. This does not
relieve the construction superintendent from their obligations per item #6 of
this table.
   (d)   Inspections. Inspections required to satisfy the requirements of
Section 3301.13.8 of the New York City Building Code must, at a minimum,
include an inspection of all items prescribed in Section 3310.8.3.2 of the New
York City Building Code and those prescribed in Tables 1 through 9 of Section
3310-01 of these rules. The inspections must be personally performed by the
construction superintendent. Inspections specified in Tables 1 through 9 of 1
RCNY §
3310-01 and required to occur at a frequency of “throughout the day” are, for
purposes of this rule, required to be performed daily.
      Exception: Where a site safety manager or coordinator has been designated
for the job in accordance with Section 3310 of the New York City Building Code,
the construction superintendent does not need to perform the inspections
required by this subdivision. Site safety inspections must be performed by the
site safety manager or coordinator in accordance with Section 3310 of the New
York City Building Code.
   (e)   Unsafe conditions. Unsafe conditions discovered by the construction
superintendent must be corrected in accordance with Section 3301.13.9 of the
New York City Building Code.
   (f)   Documenting in the construction super log. The date, location, and
result of inspections required by subdivision (d) of this section must be
recorded in the construction superintendent log required by Section 3301.13.13
of the New York City Building Code.
   (g)   Additional duties. The construction superintendent must also fulfill
all other duties assigned by code and rule, including but not limited to those
specified in items 3 and 4 of Section 3301.13.7 of the New York City Building
Code. Nothing in this rule prevents the permit holder from assigning additional
duties to the construction superintendent, including, but not limited to,
monitoring for compliance with other applicable laws and regulations when the
construction superintendent is qualified or competent to do so in accordance
with such other laws and regulations.
   (h)   Does not diminish responsibility. Nothing in this rule is intended to
alter or diminish any obligation otherwise imposed by law on individuals other
than a construction superintendent, including, but not limited to, the owner,
permit holder, construction manager, general contractor, contractor,
materialman, architect, engineer, land surveyor, site safety manager, site
safety coordinator, concrete safety manager, or other party involved in a
construction project to engage in sound engineering, design, and construction
practices, and to act in a reasonable and responsible manner to maintain a safe
job site.
(Added City Record 12/2/2024, eff. 1/1/2025)
§ 3307-01 Artwork on Temporary Protective Structures.
   (a)   Required installation of artwork approved by the Department of
Cultural Affairs (“DCLA”). Temporary protective structures installed on and
after September 1, 2023 must include DCLA-approved artwork as defined in
Section 3307.11.2 of the Building Code unless the owner of the property at
which such temporary structure is installed opts out in accordance with the
provisions of this section. For the purposes of this section, the term
“temporary protective structures” refers to sidewalk sheds, construction
fences, and supported scaffolds that are or will be installed for at least 90
days. For the purposes of this section, the term “install” with respect to
artwork means affixed to or painted on a temporary protective structure.
   (b)   Notification of solicitation of alternative artwork. 
      (1)   A property owner may install artwork approved by DCLA in accordance
with Section 2508 of the New York City Charter or alternative artwork in
accordance with Section 3307.11.2.1 of the Building Code that is also approved
by DCLA. If the owner chooses to install alternative artwork, the owner must
comply with notification of solicitation of such alternative art in accordance
with paragraph (2) below.
      (2)   Prior to seeking approval from DCLA, the property owner must notify
the Council Member and Community Board where such property is located of a
request to solicit artwork and proof of such notification must be submitted to
DCLA at the time of application for approval of such alternative artwork.
   (c)   Opting out. A property owner may opt out of the requirement to install
artwork on temporary protective structures at the time of filing an application
for construction documents approval for such structure, pursuant to Article 104
of Chapter 1 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code of the City of New York, or
at any time thereafter. If the property owner is in the process of obtaining
alternative artwork as set forth in subdivision (b) above at the time of filing
such application, they must opt out of the requirement to install artwork until
they file a post approval amendment in accordance with the requirements of
paragraph 2 of subdivision (d) below.
      Exception. Subject to appropriation of funds for city capital projects to
install approved or alternative artwork, properties owned by the City of New
York or receiving capital funding from the City or a City agency may not opt
out, except as otherwise provided in Section 3307.11.7.1 of the Building Code.
   (d)   Installation of the artwork. 
      (1)   The applicant of record for the temporary protective structure must
submit plans showing area of coverage, materials, and method of installation of
the artwork to the temporary protective structure.
      (2)   If DCLA approval for alternative artwork is not received by the
time that the application for the temporary protective structure is approved,
the applicant must file a post approval amendment with revised plans that
comply with paragraph (1) above when DCLA approval is received and prior to
installation of the artwork.
   (e)   Method of installation. 
      (1)   Artwork installed on sheds. Artwork may be installed on the outer
sides and ends of sidewalk sheds by stretching such artwork over the shed and
fastening to the back or on panels that adhere directly to the outer sides and
ends of the shed. Artwork cannot extend above or below the shed parapet or be
larger than four (4) feet in height. Artwork may also be painted directly onto
the shed.
      (2)   Artwork installed on construction fences. Artwork may be installed
on the outside of the construction fence by stretching such artwork over the
fence and fastening to the back or on panels that adhere directly to the fence
structure. Artwork cannot extend beyond the top of the fence. Artwork may also
be painted directly onto the fence.
      (3)   Artwork installed on supported scaffolds. Artwork must be printed
on debris netting meeting the requirements of Section 3314.8.2 of the Building
Code.
   (f)   Inspections. 
      (1)   Upon completion of the installation of affixed artwork on a
temporary protective structure, such installation must be inspected by a
qualified person designated by the permit holder for the temporary protective
structure or a third party acceptable to such permit holder to verify that the
artwork is in a safe condition and has been installed in accordance with
approved plans. The results of the inspection must be documented in an
installation inspection report signed and dated by the person who performed the
inspection.
      (2)   In addition, the affixed artwork must be inspected in accordance
with the following provisions:
         (i)   Sheds – daily, as set out in Section 3307.6.5.10 of the Building
Code.
         (ii)   Fences – weekly, as set out in Section 3307.7.8 of the Building
Code.
         (iii)   Supported scaffolds – prior to each shift, as set out in
Section 3314.4.3.4 of the Building Code.
      (3)   Inspection records must be kept on site and made available to the
Department on request.
      Exception. The requirements of this subdivision do not apply to artwork
painted on a temporary protective structure.
(Added City Record 9/12/2023, eff. 10/12/2023; amended City Record 5/12/2025,
eff. 6/11/2025)
§ 3310-01 Site Safety.
   (a)   Site safety inspections for construction, alteration, or demolition
projects. The primary site safety manager or coordinator for a construction,
alteration, or demolition project must, at all times such site safety manager
or coordinator is required to be present, perform the site safety inspections
detailed in Tables 1 through 9, below, at the intervals prescribed in the
tables, or ensure such inspections are performed by a site safety manager or
coordinator. The requirements of this subdivision do not apply to a project
whose scope is limited to facade work.
Table 1 
General Inspections
   Requirement                                Minimum Schedule of Inspections 
    When a building is being constructed or
    demolished at a height greater than 75
(1) feet (22.86 m), verify that at least one   As appropriate
    elevator or personal hoist in a state of
    readiness is available for FDNY access.
    When a personnel hoist requires a jump,
(2) verify that all necessary permits are      As appropriate
    obtained and testing performed.
    When a building is being constructed or
    demolished at a height greater than 75
(3) feet (22.86 m), verify that a standpipe    Daily
    system is available and in readiness at
    all times for use by the Fire Department.
    (i) Verify the standpipe is in place at
    each story below the construction or
    demolition floor. For the purposes of this
    section, the construction floor shall be
   the stripping operation floor, except for  Daily
    steel construction, in which case it shall
    be the uppermost finished and walkable
    concrete floor; for demolition the
    demolition floor shall be the floor being
    demolished.
    (ii) Verify that valves are in place at
   each story below the construction or       Daily
    demolition floor.
   (iii) Verify that the standpipe is capped. Daily
    (iv) Verify that standpipes are connected
   to a water source, as applicable, and a    Daily
    siamese connection.
   (v) Verify that siamese hose connections   Daily
    are not obstructed.
    (vi) Verify siamese hose connections are
   marked by a red light and a sign reading,  Daily
    "Standpipe Siamese Connection."
    (vii) Verify that no breach exists by
   visually tracing standpipe risers, cross   Weekly
    connections and siamese connections.
    If a construction shed is located within
(4) 30 feet (9.144 m) of the building, verify  Once per shed
    that it meets the requirements of section
    3303.1.3 of the Building Code.
    Verify that interior and exterior
(5) guardrails and toeboards are provided and  Daily
    properly installed as required by the
    Building Code.
(6) Verify that all openings and/or holes in   Daily
    the floor are covered at all times.
(7) Verify that all stairwells have standard   Daily
    handrails.
    Verify that all signs required by section
(8) 3301.9 of the Building Code are installed  Once per sign
    and contain the required information.
 
Table 2
Safety Netting Inspections
 
   Requirement                                Minimum Schedule of Inspections 
    Verify that horizontal safety netting is
    maintained not more than two stories below
    the stripping operation floor on concrete
    structures or the uppermost finished and
(1) walkable concrete floor on steel frame     Daily
    structures, provided that such floor is
    more than six stories or 75 feet (22.86 m)
    in height above the adjoining ground or
    adjoining roof level, whichever is
    applicable.
    Verify that horizontal safety netting
(2) projects outward horizontally from the     Daily
    edge of the floor a minimum of 10 feet
    (3.048 m).
    Verify that omitted horizontal safety
    netting in designated crane and derrick
(3) lifting areas is indicated and approved on Weekly
    the crane application and the site safety
    plan.
    For steel frame construction, where the
    steel frame extends more than eight
    stories above the walkable concrete floor,
    verify that the vertical safety netting is
(4) provided on the floors at and below the    Daily
    topmost working metal deck where this deck
    is substantially completed and that the
    required guardrails and toeboards are in
    place.
    Verify that vertical safety netting is
(5) provided on all floors below the floor on  Daily
    which horizontal netting is required.
    Verify that vertical safety netting is
(6) secured and kept closed at all times,      Daily
    except during actual loading operations or
    perimeter construction operations.
 
Table 3
Maintenance of Site and Adjacent Area Inspections
 
   Requirement                                Minimum Schedule of Inspections 
    Verify that all areas used by the public
    are maintained free from ice, snow,
    grease, debris, equipment, materials,
(1) projections, tools, or other items,        Throughout the day
    substance, or conditions that may
    constitute a slipping, tripping or other
    hazard.
    Verify that guards, shields or barricades
    surround all exposed, electrically
(2) charged, moving or otherwise dangerous     Daily
    parts of machines and construction
    equipment so as to prevent contact with
    the public.
    Verify that there are no exposed hose
(3) lines, wire, rope, or other items that may Throughout the day
    constitute a tripping hazard to the
    public.
    Verify that adjoining property is
(4) protected when the height of the building  Daily
    exceeds that of the adjoining property.
    When the building is extended, enlarged or
    increased in height so that any portion of
    such building, except chimneys or vents,
(5) extends higher than the top of any         As appropriate
    previously constructed chimneys within 100
    feet (30.48 m), verify that the chimneys
    conform to Section 801 of the New York
    City Mechanical Code.
 
Table 4
Housekeeping Inspections
 
   Requirement                                Minimum Schedule of Inspections
(1) Verify that floors and stairs are clean     Throughout the day
    from excess debris.
(2) Verify that tools and equipment not in use  Throughout the day
    are kept away from edges or openings.
(3) Verify that the roof of the sidewalk shed   Daily
    and the street are free of debris.
(4) Verify that sufficient containers for the   Daily
    storage of garbage and debris are provided.
(5) Verify that containers are covered and      Daily
    secured when full.
 
Table 5
Removal and Storage of Material Inspections
                                                                        Minimum
   Requirement                                                         Schedule of
                                                                        Inspections 
(1) Verify that combustible waste material and combustible debris have  Daily
    been removed from the site.
(2) Verify that chutes used for the removal of debris are installed and Weekly
    maintained in accordance with § 3303.5.5 of the Building Code.
(3) Verify that material stored on floors of a building is secured when Daily
    not being used.
    When exterior walls are not in place, verify that stored material
    is kept at least 10 feet (3.048 m) back from the perimeter of the
    building, or at least 5 feet (1524 mm) back from the perimeter of
(4) the building if the floor area is less than 1,000 square feet       Daily
    (304.8 m), or at least 2 feet (609.6 mm) back from the perimeter of
    the building on upper working floors located not more than two
    stories below the stripping operation on concrete structures or the
    uppermost concrete floor on steel structures.
    Verify that no material hangs over the edge of a building unless
(5) banded and braced for relocation by the end of the workday, except  Daily
    on the floor of the stripping operation and on floors designated as
    the lumber or steel mill.
    (i) On the floor of the stripping operation, verify that material
   that overhangs the floor is banded and braced, overhangs by not     Daily
    more than one-third of its length, and is relocated by the next
    workday for concrete operations.
   (ii) Where the steel mill and lumber mill are located, verify that  Daily
    any material that overhangs is relocated by the next workday.
 
Table 6
Protection of Sidewalks Inspections
   Requirement                                Minimum Schedule of Inspections 
    Verify that valid permits for sidewalk
(1) sheds have been obtained, have not         Periodic
    expired, and are posted in a central,
    visible area.
    Verify that approved drawings of the
(2) sidewalk shed are at the construction      Periodic
    site.
    Verify that the designer and/or supplier
    of the sidewalk shed has certified that
(3) such shed has been erected in accordance   Once
    with the approved plans and that the
    proper forms have been filed with the
    department.
(4) Verify that sidewalk sheds extend the      Once
    entire perimeter of the building.
    Verify that when the building exceeds 100
(5) feet (30.48 m) in height, the sidewalk     Once
    sheds extend 20 feet (6.096 m) beyond the
    property line.
    Verify that required sidewalk sheds remain
    in place until the structure is enclosed,
    all exterior work completed, the sash is
    gazed above the second story, the exterior
(6) facade is cleaned down, all outside        Weekly
    handling of material equipment and
    machinery is completed, and dismantling of
    a hoist, crane, or the use of a derrick in
    their removal above the second story has
    been completed.
    Verify that all openings in sidewalk
(7) sheds, fences and railings for loading     Throughout the day
    purposes are kept closed, barricaded,
    protected, or guarded at all times.
    Verify that sidewalk sheds are illuminated
    at night by the equivalent of 100-watt
(8) bulbs spaced 15 feet (4.572 m) apart at a  Daily
    minimum height of 8 feet (2.44 m) above
    the sidewalk.
    Verify that temporary footbridges and
(9) walkways for the public are at least 5     Daily as appropriate
    feet (1.524 m) in width.
 
Table 7
Warning Signs and Lights Inspections
 
   Requirement                             Minimum Schedule of Inspections
    Verify that all areas that are dangerous
    or hazardous to the public or areas
(1) where work is performed near vehicular   Daily
    traffic are appropriately marked with
    warning signs and lights.
    Verify that steps necessary to protect
    the public are taken, including
    provisions for flagmen/flagwomen
(2) whenever intermittent operations are     Throughout the day, as appropriate
    conduced on or across areas open to the
    public or when dangerous operations,
    such as blasting, may affect such areas.
 
Table 8
Scaffolds, Structural Ramps, Runways and Platform Inspections
 
   Requirement                               Minimum Schedule of Inspections
    Verify that where they pose a risk to the
    public that all structural ramps,
(1) scaffolds, runways and platforms are      Daily
    provided with guardrails, toeboards,
    screening, or nets, unless otherwise
    specified by the Building Code.
 
Table 9
Material Handling and Hoisting Equipment Inspections
   Requirement                                Minimum Schedule of Inspections 
    Verify that all certificates of approval,
    operation, and onsite inspection for all
(1) cranes, derricks, and/or cableways have    As required
    been obtained and are available for
    inspection at the construction site.
    Verify that all permits for highway and
(2) street closings are available for          As required
    inspection at the construction site.
(3) Verify that licenses of crane operators    Daily
    are available at the construction site.
    When a crane is to be jumped, verify that
(4) it is in accordance with the schedule      As appropriate
    submitted by the professional engineer and
    approved by the department.
    Verify that a means of communication
    exists between the responsible parties
(5) when the operator of hoisting machinery    Daily when operational
    has no vision of the lift or loading
    areas.
    Verify that a program has been established
    and is operational for the control of
(6) pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic around Daily when operational
    the construction site during all lifting
    and hoisting operations.
    Verify that flagmen/women are present to
(7) stop pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic   As appropriate
    during the following intermittent
    operations:
   (i) During all lifting and hoisting         
    operations;
   (ii) When trucks enter and exit the site;   
   (iii) When materials are being lifted over  
    the sidewalk shed;
   (iv) When dangerous operations, e.g.,       
    blasting, occur;
   (v) When the sidewalk and/or street is      
    temporarily closed.
 
   (b)   Definitions.
      Alteration. For the purposes of this section, the term "alteration" shall
have the same meaning as set forth in § 28-101.5 of the Administrative Code.
      Alternate site safety manager or coordinator. A site safety manager or
coordinator who is acting on behalf of and is approved by, the primary site
safety manager or coordinator in accordance with the provisions of section
3310.5.3 of the Building Code.
      Construction. For the purposes of this section, the term "construction"
shall have the same meaning as set forth in section 3302.1 of the Building
Code.
      Demolition. For the purposes of this section, the term "demolition" shall
have the same meaning as set forth in section 3302.1 of the Building Code.
      Facade work (facade project). The restoration of an existing facade to a
safe and like new condition following decay, wear, or damage; the modification
of an existing facade; or the recladding of a facade.
      Facade recladding (recladding of a facade). The removal of the exterior
building envelope and replacement with a new exterior building envelope; or the
installation of a new exterior building envelope over the existing facade.
      Primary site safety manager or coordinator. The site safety manager or
coordinator who has been designated as the primary site safety manager in
accordance with the provisions of section 3310.5 of the Building Code.
      Project. For the purposes of this section, the term "project" shall have
the same meaning as set forth in § 28-101.5 of the Administrative Code.
      Qualified person. For the purposes of this section, the term "qualified
person" shall have the same meaning as set forth in section 3302.1 of the
Building Code.
      Rigging foreman. An individual working under the direct and continuing
supervision of a licensed rigger and who meets the qualifications as a
designated rigging foreman as set forth in 1 RCNY §
104-20.
      Site safety coordinator. An individual who holds a valid site safety
coordinator certificate from the department.
      Site safety manager. An individual who holds a valid site safety manager
certificate from the department.
   (c)   Site safety inspections for facade project. For a project whose scope
is limited to facade work:
      (1)   The primary or alternate site safety manager must, whenever he or
she is present at the project site, perform the site safety inspections
detailed in Table 10, below, at the intervals prescribed in the table.
      (2)   At all times when paragraph (1) of subdivision (e) of this section
requires the presence of a qualified person, and the primary or alternate site
safety manager is not present at the site, the qualified person as described by
subdivision (e) must perform the site safety inspections detailed in Table 10,
below, at the intervals prescribed in the table.
Table 10
Facade project inspections
    Requirement                          Minimum Schedule of Inspections
(1)  Verify that the approved site safety Prior to the commencement of the
     plan is on site.                     project; and daily thereafter
     Verify that required sidewalk sheds,
     fences, pedestrian protection, roof
     and adjoining property protection,   Prior to the commencement of the
(2)  safety netting, guardrails,          project; and daily thereafter
     perimeter protection, and controlled
     access zones are in accordance with
     the approved site safety plan.
     Verify that all scaffolds, cranes,
     derricks, hoisting machines, mast
     climbers, sidewalk sheds, and fences
     possess a valid permit/certificate,  Prior to the commencement of the
     and that such information is         project; as each piece of equipment
(3)  recorded in the permit log. (Note:   is brought to the site; and at the
     certain types of scaffolds and       renewal or expiration of the permit/
     cranes/derricks are exempt from      certificate
     permit/certificate requirements; see
     sections 3314.2 and 3319.3 of the
     Building Code for details.)
     Verify that, where required,
(4)  Department of Transportation permits Once per permit
     for street or sidewalk closings are
     available at the site.
     Verify that notice has been provided
     to the department prior to the
(5)  installation or removal of a         Prior to each instance
     suspended scaffold or a mast
     climber.
     Verify that plans for all scaffolds,
     cranes, derricks, hoisting machines,
     mast climbers, sidewalk sheds, and   Prior to the commencement of the
     fences are available at the site.    project; as each piece of equipment
(6)  (Note: certain types of scaffolds    is brought to the site; and monthly
     and cranes/derricks are exempt from  thereafter
     design requirements; see sections
     3314.3 and 3319.3 of the Building
     Code for details.)
     Verify that installation inspections
     have been completed for all
     scaffolds, tower/climber cranes,
     derricks, hoisting machines, mast
     climbers, and sidewalk sheds, and
     that a record of such inspection is
(7)  available at the site. (Note,        Following the installation of each
     installation inspections may also be piece of equipment
     required when equipment is moved to
     a new location at the site, or when
     components are relocated - for
     example, when decking and guardrails
     on a supported scaffold are moved to
     a different level.)
     Verify that daily/pre-shift
     inspections have been completed for
     all scaffolds, cranes, derricks,
     hoisting machines, mast climbers,
(8)  and sidewalk sheds and that a record Daily
     of such inspection is available at
     the site. (Note: certain types of
     cranes do not require an inspection;
     see section 3319.3 of the Building
     Code for details.)
     Verify that inspections have been
     completed following an adjustment or
(9)  repair to a scaffold, crane,         Following each adjustment or repair
     derrick, hoisting machine, mast
     climber, or sidewalk shed.
     Verify that the general contractor
     or subcontractors, as appropriate,
     are verifying that workers have
     completed a course that is at least
     ten hours in length and approved by
     the United States Department of
(10) Labor Occupational Safety and Health Daily
     Administration (OSHA) in
     construction industry safety and
     health, or an equivalent training,
     and that documentation of such
     verification is maintained at the
     site by the general contractor or
     subcontractors.
     Verify that the general contractor
     or subcontractors, as appropriate,
     are providing a site specific safety
(11) orientation to all workers employed  Weekly
     at the site, and that documentation
     of such orientation is maintained at
     the site by the general contractor
     or subcontractors.
     Verify that contractors engaged in
     scaffold, mast climber, rigging,
     hoisting, or sign hanging work are
     checking that individuals engaged in
(12) such work possess training,          Daily
     certification, or licensing for such
     work, as appropriate, and that
     documentation of such check is
     maintained at the site by the
     contractor.
     Verify that flagpersons are present
(13) to stop pedestrian and/or vehicular  Throughout the day
     traffic during the following
     intermittent operations:
    (i) During all lifting and hoisting   
     operations;
    (ii) When trucks enter and exit the   
     site;
    (iii) When materials are being        
     lifted over the sidewalk shed;
    (iv) When dangerous operations,       
     e.g., blasting, occur; and
    (v) When the sidewalk and/or street   
     is temporarily closed.
     Verify workers are provided with and
     are utilizing required personal
(14) protection equipment (PPE),          Throughout the day
     including but not limited to harness
     and life line.
     Verify that a means of communication Prior to the start of any such
     exists between the responsible       hoisting operation; and throughout
(15) parties when the operator of         the day as such hoisting operation is
     hoisting machinery has no vision of  ongoing
     the lift or loading areas.
     Verify that all signs required by    Prior to the commencement of the
(16) section 3301.9 of the Building Code  project; and upon the posting of any
     are installed and contain the        sign added after the commencement of
     required information.                the project
     Verify that scaffolds, sidewalk
     sheds, fences, and other pedestrian  Prior to the commencement of the
(17) protection are free of signs or      project; and daily thereafter
     advertisements not directly related
     to the project.
     Verify that the standpipe system has
     passed its most recent hydrostatic   Prior to the commencement of the
(18) pressure test and flow test, and     project; and, if applicable, when a
     that the sprinkler system has passed new hydrostatic pressure test and/or
     its most recent hydrostatic pressure flow test is required.
     test.
     Verify that where active work is
     occurring, where project material/
(19) debris/equipment is being stored,    Daily
     and where sidewalk sheds, fences, or
     other pedestrian protection is
     located:
     (i) Standpipe valves/hose
    connections/fire department           
     connections are in place; and
     (ii) Standpipe valves/hose
    connections/fire department           
     connections are free from
     obstruction.
     In areas where a sidewalk shed or
     fence has been installed, verify
     that the required red light marking  Prior to the commencement of the
(20) the fire department connection is    project; and daily thereafter
     functional and the required sign
     identifying the fire department
     standpipe connection is visible.
     If "hot works" (welding, grinding
     operations producing sparks, torch
     operations, etc.) operations are
     performed, verify that fire          Prior to start of any "hot works"
(21) extinguishers and dedicated          operations; and throughout the day as
     personnel with valid FDNY fire watch "hot works" operations are performed.
     certificate of fitness are on site
     at the location of "hot works"
     operations.
     Verify compliance with the           Prior to the start of any welding
     provisions of section 3314.11.5 of   operation from a suspended scaffold;
(22) the Building Code when welding       and throughout the day as welding
     operations are conducted from a      operations occur from a suspended
     suspended scaffold.                  scaffold
     Verify that all flammable/
     combustible liquids and gases are
     located in a well-ventilated area,
(23) away from combustible materials, and Throughout the day
     away from open flame or sources of
     ignition in accordance with the
     requirements of the fire department.
     Verify that, where active work is
     occurring, where project material/
(24) debris/equipment is being stored, or Throughout the day
     where sidewalk sheds, fences, or
     other pedestrian protection are
     located:
    (i) Building egress is not            
     obstructed;
     (ii) Areas used by the public are
     maintained free from ice, snow,
     grease, debris, equipment,
    materials, projections, tools,        
     hoses, wires, ropes, or other items,
     substances, or conditions that may
     constitute a slipping, tripping, or
     other hazard; and
     (iii) Guards, shields or barricades
     surround all exposed, electrically
    charged, moving or otherwise          
     dangerous parts of machines and
     equipment so as to prevent contact
     with the public.
(25) Verify that:                         Prior to the commencement of the
                                          project; and daily thereafter
    (i) Sidewalk shed lights are          
     functioning;
     (ii) No brace or rail is hanging
    unattached at one or more ends of     
     the sidewalk shed;
     (iii) No portions of the sidewalk
    shed support structure are            
     disconnected;
    (iv) No section of the sidewalk shed  
     parapet is missing; and
     (v) All legs of the sidewalk shed
    remain on their support and are       
     supported to the ground.
     Verify that contractor sheds and     Prior to the commencement of the
(26) offices are in accordance with       project; and upon the installation of
     section 3303.16 of the Building      any contractor shed added after the
     Code.                                commencement of the project
     Verify that chutes used for the      As new chutes are installed at the
     removal of debris are installed and  site; as existing chutes are
(27) maintained in accordance with        relocated at the site; and weekly
     section 3303.5.5 of the Building     thereafter
     Code.
(28) Verify required safety netting is    Daily
     installed and in good repair.
     Verify required guardrails and
(29) toeboards on exterior scaffolds are  Daily
     installed and in good repair.
     Verify that sufficient containers
     for the storage of waste/debris
(30) generated by the project are         Daily
     provided, and that such containers
     are:
    (i) Covered at the end of the shift;  
    (ii) Covered anytime when full to     
     near the rim; and
    (iii) Wheels are secured at the end   
     of the shift.
     Verify that, at the end of the
     shift, all tools and loose materials
     have been secured, and that all
     waste/debris generated by the
(31) project, including but not limited   Daily, at the end of the shift
     to garbage/debris located on
     scaffolds, mast climbers, sidewalk
     sheds, roofs, and setbacks, has been
     placed into containers or removed
     from the site.
     Verify that combustible waste/debris
(32) generated by the project is not      Throughout the day
     allowed to accumulate and is removed
     from the site.
     Verify that tools and equipment not
(33) in use are kept away from edges or   Throughout the day
     openings.
     Verify that materials placed/stored
     on a sidewalk shed are placed/stored
     only in areas designated on the
     sidewalk shed plans, and such
(34) materials are secured against        Daily
     dislodgement, and there is no
     evidence of deflection or failure of
     the sidewalk shed in the vicinity of
     the storage.
     Verify that, at the end of the
     shift, suspended scaffolds have been
     lowered to the street, sidewalk shed
(35) deck, or building setback, or have   Daily, at the end of the shift
     been otherwise secured to the roof
     or the building in accordance with
     the scaffold plans.
 
   (d)   Site safety manager requirements for a facade project.
      (1)   Site safety manager presence at a facade project which does not
constitute facade recladding. For a project that is limited in scope to facade
work, and which does not constitute facade recladding:
         (i)   The primary site safety manager must, at a minimum, visit the
site after required sidewalk sheds, fences, pedestrian protection, and roof and
adjoining property protection have been installed, but prior to the
commencement of the project.
         (ii)   The primary or alternate site safety manager must be present
while the following work is performed:
            (A)   Supported scaffold installation or removal, but not including
the relocation of existing deck planking or guardrails to a different level of
the scaffold provided any such relocation is designated on the scaffold design
documents;
            (B)   Mast climber installation or removal; or
            (C)   Other work as directed by the commissioner.
         (iii)   The primary or alternate site safety manager must visit the
site within 24-hours of the issuance of a hazardous violation by the
department.
         (iv)   The primary or alternate site safety manager must be present
when the following rigging work is performed, and such rigging work is not
performed by or under the direct and continuing supervision of a licensed
rigger:
            (A)   Suspended scaffold installation or removal;
            (B)   Suspended scaffold use; or
            (C)   Hoisting machine installation/assembly/erection, climbing/
jumping, removal/disassembly, or a relocation requiring modifications to tie-
backs, counterweights, or connections to the base building/structure.
      (2)   Facade recladding. For a project that is limited in scope to facade
work, and which constitutes facade recladding, the primary or alternate site
safety manager is required to be present at the site during all times active
work is occurring, through all phases of work, beginning with the commencement
of the facade work and continuing until the building is enclosed and the
sidewalk shed is removed, except that, the primary or alternate site safety
manager is not required to be present at the site during the following
activities, provided no other work is in progress:
         (i)   Surveying that does not involve the disturbance of material,
structure, or earth;
         (ii)   Use of a hoist to transport personnel only;
         (iii)   Use of a material hoist that is fully enclosed within the
perimeter of the building;
         (iv)   Finish trowelling of concrete floors;
         (v)   When personnel are provided for temporary heat, light, or water;
or
         (vi)   Truck deliveries to the site where the sidewalk is closed and
the entrance gate is within that closed sidewalk area.
      (3)   Multiple facade jobs. A site safety manager may serve as the
primary or alternate site safety manager at multiple projects whose scope is
limited to facade work, and which does not constitute facade recladding,
provided such site safety manager is not contemporaneously the primary or
alternate site safety manager for any construction, alteration, or demolition
project, or any facade recladding project, and further provided that the site
safety manager is able to fulfill all duties imposed upon the site safety
manager by law and these rules.
      (4)   Site safety log. In addition to the requirements of subdivisions
(f) and (g) of this section, the primary or alternate site safety manager
working pursuant to this subdivision must:
         (i)   Record their presence at the jobsite by signing the site safety
log and noting their time of arrival and departure from the site, immediately
after arriving at the site and immediately prior to leaving the site,
respectively; and
         (ii)   Record the results of inspections required by subdivision (c)
of this section prior to leaving the site for the day.
   (e)   Qualified person for facade project.
      (1)   Qualified person to be present. For a project that is limited in
scope to facade work, and which does not constitute facade recladding, a
qualified person, who meets the requirements of paragraphs (2) and (3) of this
subdivision, must be present at the site during all times active work is
occurring, continuing through all phases of work, beginning with the
installation of the sidewalk shed and continuing until the building is enclosed
and the sidewalk shed is removed, except that such qualified person is not
required to be present at the site during the following activities, provided no
other work is in progress:
         (i)   Surveying that does not involve the disturbance of material,
structure, or earth;
         (ii)   Use of a hoist to transport personnel only;
         (iii)   Use of a material hoist that is fully enclosed within the
perimeter of the building;
         (iv)   Finish trowelling of concrete floors;
         (v)   When personnel are provided for temporary heat, light, or water;
or
         (vi)   Truck deliveries to the site where the sidewalk is closed and
the entrance gate is within that closed sidewalk area.
      (2)   Written designation of the qualified person. The designation of one
or more individuals to serve as a qualified person pursuant to this subdivision
must be evidenced by a written letter, signed and dated by the permit holder.
Such letter must, at a minimum, contain the name and contact information for
each designated individual. Such letter must be kept on site and be available
for inspection by the commissioner upon request.
      (3)   Qualifications of qualified person. A qualified person designated
in accordance with this subdivision must possess all of the following
qualifications:
         (i)   Completed the orientation and training required by Section
3310.10 of the Building Code;
         (ii)   Beginning July 1, 2016, completed a department approved site
safety manager training course that is least 40 hours in length, and every
three years thereafter, complete a department approved site safety manager
refresher course that is at least 7 hours in length;
         (iii)   Beginning July 1, 2016, completed the training required by
Section 3314.4.5.1 of the Building Code for supported scaffold installers;
         (iv)   Beginning July 1, 2016, completed the training required by
Section 3314.4.5.3 of the Building Code for suspended scaffold supervisors;
         (v)   Beginning July 1, 2016, completed a course that is at least 30
hours in length and approved by the United States Department of Labor
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) in construction industry
safety and health; and
         (vi)   If the qualified person is not a licensed rigger or a rigging
foreman, be approved by the primary site safety manager.
      (4)   Proof of qualifications. Evidence, acceptable to the commissioner,
of completion of the licensure, training, or other qualifications required by
paragraph (3) of this subdivision must be made readily available to the
commissioner upon request.
      (5)   Site safety log. In addition to the requirements of subdivisions
(f) and (g) of this section, the qualified person working pursuant to this
subdivision must:
         (i)   Record his or her presence at the jobsite by signing the site
safety log and noting the time of arrival and departure from the site,
immediately after arriving at the site and immediately prior to leaving the
site, respectively;
         (ii)   Record the results of inspections required by subdivision (c)
of this section prior to leaving the site for the day; and
         (iii)   Record any conditions reported to the site safety manager in
accordance with paragraph (8) of this subdivision.
      (6)   Reporting to the department. The qualified person working pursuant
to this subdivision must immediately report to the department any:
         (i)   Accidents or incidents that require notification to the
department in accordance with Section 3301.8 of the Building Code; and
         (ii)   Any items listed in Section 3310.8.2.1 of the Building Code.
      (7)   Providing a copy of the log to the site safety manager. The
qualified person working pursuant to this subdivision must, at the end of the
day, provide a copy of the day's completed site safety log to the primary site
safety manager, or to the alternate site safety manager where so directed by
the primary site safety manager.
      (8)   Reporting to the site safety manager. The qualified person must
immediately report the following items to the primary or alternate site safety
manager:
         (i)   Any accidents or incidents that require notification to the
department in accordance with Section 3301.8 of the Building Code;
         (ii)   Any items that fail the inspections required by subdivision (c)
of this section;
         (iii)   Any items listed in Section 3310.8.2.1 of the Building Code;
and
         (iv)   Any violations issued by the department relating to the work
performed.
   (f)   Site safety log for jobs whose site safety plan was approved prior to
December 31, 2014. For jobs whose site safety plan was approved by the
department prior to December 31, 2014, a site safety log must be maintained at
the site by the site safety manager or coordinator and made available for
inspection upon the request of the commissioner.
      (1)   The site safety manager or coordinator shall ensure that all daily
entries in the site safety log are completed. These entries must be recorded by
7:00 a.m. on the day following the activities.
      (2)   The site safety manager or coordinator, or an alternate, shall sign
the log at the beginning of each day, and must be present at the job at all
times during ongoing construction or demolition. If at any point during the day
the site safety manager or coordinator, or alternate, shall be relieved of his
or her responsibilities at the site, or leave the site for any reason, he or
she shall indicate this in the log and an alternate shall sign in.
      (3)   Log contents. At a minimum, the site safety log shall contain the
following:
         (i)   Date and location of inspections performed in accordance with
subdivision (a) of this rule;
         (ii)   Date and names of individuals met with to satisfy the
requirements of § 3310.8.1 of the Building Code;
         (iii)   Any unsafe acts and/or conditions, and dates and locations of
said unsafe acts and/or conditions;
         (iv)   Companies and representatives notified of unsafe acts and/or
conditions;
         (v)   Dates of notification of unsafe acts and/or conditions;
         (vi)   Dates of correction of unsafe acts and/or conditions;
         (vii)   Any accident involving the public or damage to public or
private property;
         (viii)   Any violations, stop work orders or summonses issued by the
department, including date issued and date lifted or dismissed;
         (ix)   Dates and location where horizontal and vertical netting have
been installed, replaced and/or repaired;
         (x)   Date horizontal safety netting is removed; and
         (xi)   Date when building reaches a height of 75 feet (22.860 mm).
   (g)   Site safety log for jobs whose site safety plan was approved on or
after December 31, 2014. For jobs whose site safety plan was approved on or
after December 31, 2014, the requirements of Section 3310.8.4 of the Building
Code shall apply.
   (h)   Permit log for jobs whose site safety plan was approved prior to
December 31, 2014. For jobs whose site safety plan was approved by the
department prior to December 31, 2014, any equipment brought onto the job that
requires permits, as well as a description of the equipment, where it is to be
located, permit number, issue and expiration date of the permit, and
certificate of inspection, if required, must be entered on a separate permit
log that must be maintained at the site by the site safety manager or
coordinator and made available for inspection upon the request of the
commissioner.
   (i)   Permit log for jobs whose site safety plan was approved on or after
December 31, 2014. For jobs whose site safety plan was approved on or after
December 31, 2014, the requirements of Section 3310.8.5 of the Building Code
shall apply.
   (j)   Notification for jobs whose site safety plan was approved prior to
December 31, 2014. For jobs whose site safety plan was approved by the
department prior to December 31, 2014, the site safety manager or coordinator
must immediately and directly notify the department in accordance with section
3310.8.2 of the Building Code, as such code existed on the date the site safety
plan was approved, if he or she discovers in the routine performance of the job
any of the conditions listed in such section 3310.8.2 or below:
      (1)   Required standpipe is not in place at each story below the
construction or demolition floor;
      (2)   Required standpipe valve(s) are not in place at each story below
the construction or demolition floor;
      (3)   Required standpipe is not capped;
      (4)   Required standpipe is not connected to a water source or siamese
connection;
      (5)   Required standpipe siamese hose connection(s) is obstructed;
      (6)   Required standpipe siamese hose connections are not marked by a red
light and a sign reading, "Standpipe Siamese Connection"
      (7)   A breach exists in the required standpipe risers, cross
connections, or siamese connections;
      (8)   The standpipe alarm activates; or
      (9)   When a building over 75 feet (22.86 m) is being constructed or
demolished and at least one elevator or hoist in a state of readiness is not
available for FDNY access.
   (k)   Notification for jobs whose site safety plan was approved on or after
December 31, 2014. For jobs whose site safety plan was approved on or after
December 31, 2014, the requirements of Section 3310.8.2.1 of the Building Code
shall apply.
   (l)   Limitation on serving as a construction superintendent. No person
designated as the primary site safety manager or site safety coordinator for a
job, or acting as the alternate site safety manager or site safety coordinator
for a job, may be designated, act, or serve as the primary or alternate
construction superintendent for that job. No person designated as the primary
site safety manager or coordinator for a job may serve as the primary
construction superintendent for any other job.
(Amended City Record 1/26/2023, eff. 2/25/2023)
§ 3310-02 Concrete Safety Managers.
   (a)   Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms
shall have the following meanings:
      (1)   Concrete safety manager. The term "concrete safety manager" shall
mean the individual registered in accordance with subdivision (c) of this
section and responsible for those duties defined in subdivision (e) of this
section.
      (2)   Job. The term "job" shall mean a major building construction
project that involves the placement of two thousand (2,000) cubic yards or more
of concrete including the placement of the foundation. The term job shall not
include exterior non-structural on-grade flatwork, such as sidewalks,
driveways, mechanical pads and curb cuts, or any other work as determined by
the Commissioner.
      (3)   Concrete operations. The term "concrete operations" shall mean the
placement of concrete and the construction and stripping of concrete forms and
related concrete activities pertaining to the duties defined in paragraph (e)
of this rule. For the purposes of this section, concrete operations shall not
include layout, surveying, crane jumping, temporary heating, electrical,
plumbing or mechanical work.
   (b)   Permits.
      (1)   Ninety (90) days after the effective date of this rule, no permit
for a job shall be issued or renewed until the permittee or his or her
representative has identified on the permit application form a concrete safety
manager registered with the Department in accordance with the provisions of
this section. Permits issued before the effective date of this rule shall not
require a concrete safety manager.
      (2)   Where a concrete safety manager is permanently relieved of his or
her duties, the concrete operations for which the designated concrete safety
manager is relieved shall cease immediately until notification of a new
concrete safety manager is made to the department in a manner as determined by
the commissioner.
   (c)   Registration of concrete safety managers.
      (1)   Designation at a job site. A concrete safety manager shall be
designated by the concrete contractor at all job sites in accordance with
section 3310.9 of the New York City Building Code ("Building Code"). In
accordance with section 3310.9 and any applicable Department rules, the
concrete safety manager and his or her alternate shall coordinate directly with
the designated site safety manager or site safety coordinator on the job site.
      (2)   Registration date. Ninety (90) days after the effective date of
this rule, all individuals serving as concrete safety managers or alternate
concrete safety managers for jobs shall be registered with the Department and
subject to the provisions of Article 401 of Chapter 4 of Title 28 of the New
York City Administrative Code.
      (3)   Qualifications. The Department shall issue a concrete safety
manager registration to an individual who shall, at the time of his or her
application, meet the requirements of Article 401 of Chapter 4 of Title 28 of
the New York City Administrative Code and submit proof that he or she has
completed the thirty (30) hour training course required by section 3310.9, the
OSHA thirty- (30) hour construction safety and health course, and:
         (i)   is a registered design professional and has, within the ten (10)
years prior to the date of the application, five (5) years of experience in
concrete operations, at least one (1) of which was in concrete operations where
the concrete portion of the project(s) involved the placement of a minimum of
two thousand (2,000) cubic yards of concrete; or
         (ii)   has, within the ten (10) years prior to the date of the
application, five (5) years of experience in concrete operations, at least four
(4) of which were in concrete operations where the concrete portion of the
project(s) involved the placement of a minimum of two thousand (2,000) cubic
yards of concrete; or
         (iii)   has a bachelor's degree in engineering or an appropriate
engineering technology degree from an accredited college or university and has,
within the ten (10) years prior to the date of the application, five (5) years
of experience in concrete operations, at least three (3) of which were in
concrete operations where the concrete portion of the project(s) involved the
placement of a minimum of two thousand (2,000) cubic yards of concrete; or
         (iv)   is a certified site safety manager and has, within the ten (10)
years prior to the date of the application, five (5) years of experience in
concrete operations, at least two (2) of which were in concrete operations
where the concrete portion of the project(s) involved the placement of a
minimum of two thousand (2,000) cubic yards of concrete.
      (4)   Term. Registrations shall be valid for three (3) years from the
date of issuance.
      (5)   Fees. Registration fees shall be as set forth in 1 RCNY §
101-03.
   (d)   Renewals. An application for renewal of a concrete safety manager
registration shall be submitted between thirty (30) and sixty (60) days prior
to the expiration date of the registration.
      (1)   The renewal fee as set forth in 1 RCNY §
101-03 shall be submitted with the application. Renewals not submitted in a
timely manner shall be subject to a late renewal fee as set forth in 1 RCNY §
101-03.
      (2)   Timely renewal applications shall be accompanied by proof that the
applicant has, during the year prior to renewal, successfully satisfied the
continued education requirements as set forth in 1 RCNY §
104-06.
      (3)   Renewals not filed within one (1) year of registration expiration
shall be treated as new applications.
      (4)   Renewals are subject to the provisions of Article 401 of Chapter 4
of Title 28 of the New York City Administrative Code.
   (e)   Duties. A concrete safety manager shall have responsibilities
including, but not limited to:
      (1)   being onsite and available during all concrete operations and until
the removal of the reshores and horizontal safety netting is completed. A
concrete safety manager need not be present for concrete operations involving
exclusively sidewalks, driveways, mechanical pads or other miscellaneous areas.
The concrete safety manager is not required to be onsite when no concrete
operations are taking place.
      (2)   being available to the Department at all other times until
completion of the concrete operations by email, mobile phone or other means as
determined by the Department. If the registered concrete safety manager is
unavailable, an alternate concrete safety manager shall be available to the
Department at all times until completion of the concrete operations, by email,
mobile phone or other means as determined by the Department;
      (3)   monitoring compliance with and notifying the contractor of any
violation of:
         (i)   Chapter 19 and Chapter 33 of the Building Code and OSHA
standards relating to concrete operations;
         (ii)   the use and installation of fall protection measures and
personal protection equipment for all personnel engaged in concrete operations;
and
         (iii)   safe techniques and use of equipment for installation and
removal of
            (A)   concrete;
            (B)   formwork;
            (C)   shores; and
            (D)   reinforcing steel. in order to protect against falls, falling
concrete and objects, collapsing floors and similar dangers;
      (4)   immediately notifying the site safety manager or the site safety
coordinator on the job site and the Department of:
         (i)   any fatality;
         (ii)   any injury to a member of the public;
         (iii)   any worker injury resulting in emergency medical response or
hospitalization;
         (iv)   any damage to public or private property occurring on or
adjacent to the job site that arises from the concrete operations;
         (v)   any form failure; or
         (vi)   any material or debris falling from the concrete operations;
      (5)   advising the Department of contact information and changes thereto;
      (6)   cooperating with any investigation by the Department, or other city
or law enforcement agency, into the activities at any job site under his or her
supervision and providing prompt, accurate and complete responses to inquiries
by the Department and other agencies about the conduct of such activities;
      (7)   keeping a daily log of all concrete operations pertaining to the
job site including, but not limited to, the following:
         (i)   safety precautions put in place for concrete operation for each
day;
         (ii)   any unsafe work or practice, the corrective action taken and
the date of correction;
         (iii)   amount of concrete poured for each day;
         (iv)   location of pouring, forming, stripping, and rebar tying for
each day;
         (v)   name of the qualified person designated by the contractor to
inspect the formwork for each day;
         (vi)   name of the foreman in charge of the formwork for each day;
         (vii)   the presence of the design drawings for the formwork,
including shoring foundations, required for the job under section 1906.3 of the
Building Code; and
         (viii)   visits of the site safety manager or site safety coordinator
during concrete operations.
      (8)   ensuring that the assigned concrete testing laboratory and special
inspector(s) are present as required by Chapter 17 of the Building Code; and
      (9)   performing inspections in accordance with the current Concrete
Safety Manager General Inspections checklist prescribed by the Department.
   (f)   Limitation of duties.
      (1)   A concrete safety manager may supervise only one (1) job at a time.
      (2)   A concrete safety manager may also hold a certification as a site
safety manager or a site safety coordinator, and a registration as a
construction superintendent. No person who is serving as a concrete safety
manager for a job may serve as a site safety manager, site safety coordinator,
or construction superintendent simultaneously on the same job.
   (g)   Advising the Department of relief from duties.
      (1)   All registered concrete safety managers shall immediately notify
the Department in writing or other manner determined by the Commissioner upon
being permanently relieved of or resigning from their duties in connection with
any job on which they are designated.
      (2)   All permittees shall immediately notify the Department in writing
or other manner determined by the Commissioner when a concrete safety manager
is permanently relieved of his or her duties. The permittee shall complete the
appropriate job filings to identify the new concrete safety manager and comply
with the provisions of paragraph (2) subdivision (b) of this section until such
application is accepted by the Department.
   (h)   Obligations of others. Nothing in this rule is intended to alter or
diminish any obligation otherwise imposed by law on others, including but not
limited to, the owner, construction manager, concrete contractor, general
contractor, contractor, material man, architect, engineer, site safety manager,
site safety coordinator, land surveyor, or other party involved in a
construction project to engage in sound engineering, design and construction
practices, and to act in a reasonable and responsible manner to maintain a safe
construction site.
   (i)   Notification of alternate. When a concrete safety manager will not be
onsite as required by paragraph (1) of subdivision (e) of this section, the
registered concrete safety manager or other responsible party shall notify the
Department of such absence and replacement by an alternate.
(Amended City Record 6/28/2018, eff. 7/28/2018; amended City Record 1/26/2023,
eff. 2/25/2023)
§ 3314-01 Mast-Climbing Work Platforms (Mast Climbers).
   (a)   Scope. The design, construction, permitting, installation, removal,
maintenance, adjustment, repair, use, operation, and inspection of a mast
climber shall conform to the requirements of the mast climber manufacturer,
ANSI/SIA A92.9-1993, Section 3314.19 of the New York City Building Code
("Building Code"), and this section. Exception. A mast climber shall be exempt
from the requirements of this section where a professional engineer, on behalf
of the equipment owner, certifies to the department, supported by plans and
calculations, that the installation, removal, and use of the mast climber at
the job site meets the following conditions:
      (1)   The mast climber is installed, removed, and used within the
confines of the job site; and
      (2)   The job site is closed to the public by means of a controlled
access zone and protected in accordance with section BC 3307 of the Building
Code; and
      (3)   The mast climber, in all conditions of loading, will not overload
the street, ground, foundation, structure, roof, setback, or any subsurface
vault, tunnel, or utility; and
      (4)   The mast climber is set back from the edge of the job site at a
distance that is equal to or more than 125% of the height of the final most
vertical member of the mast climber to be installed, as measured from the
ground, roof, setback, or structure upon which the mast climber sits; or the
mast climber is utilized inside a building or interior court yard, and such
area where the mast climber is utilized is closed to the public by means of a
controlled access zone and separated from the public by an independent wall or
similar solid full height enclosure.
   (b)   Definitions. In addition to the definitions set forth in Chapter 33 of
the Building Code, for the purposes of this section, the following terms shall
have the following meanings:
      (1)   Adjustment. The calibration or modification of equipment, including
any part or component, that does not otherwise meet the definition of an
installation, removal, repair, or maintenance.
      (2)   Approved plans. For the purposes of this section, such term shall
include the approved mast climber notice application.
      (3)   Critical component. A mast section, platform section, the drive
system, and the high/low limit stops.
      (4)   Equipment owner. The entity that owns the mast climber.
      (5)   Equipment user. The contractor or entity operating or utilizing the
mast climber.
      (6)   Installation (install).
         (i)   The initial assembly, set up, or placement of a mast climber at
a job site; or
         (ii)   following the initial installation, the addition, relocation,
or removal of any part or component, including counterweights, attachments,
tie-backs, anchorage, or connection to the structure, which does not otherwise
constitute a repair, or does not otherwise occur automatically as part of the
normal operation of the mast climber; or
         (iii)   any horizontal relocation of the mast climber at the job site.
      (7)   Job site. A construction, alteration, or demolition site within New
York City.
      (8)   Maintenance. Regular or periodic upkeep as specified by the
manufacturer to keep the mast climber, including all parts and components, in
like new condition and safe working order, and that does not otherwise meet the
definition of an installation, removal, or repair.
      (9)   Manufacturer. The entity that owns the rights to the design and
manufacturing of the mast climber and possesses the capacity to build and
service the mast climber, provide replacements parts or components, and provide
technical support for the mast climber.
      (10)   Mast climber. A mast-climbing work platform as defined by Chapter
33 of the Building Code.
      (11)   Removal (remove). The disassembly of the mast climber at the job
site.
      (12)   Repair. Work performed to restore a piece of equipment, part, or
component to like new condition and safe working order following decay, wear,
or damage. It shall also include the replacement of a part or component.
      (13)   Valid certificate. A department-issued certificate of approval,
operation, or on-site inspection that has not expired or been suspended or
revoked.
   (c)   Certificates required. No equipment owner, equipment user, or other
entity shall use or permit the use of a mast climber that does not possess and/
or is not in conformance with a valid certificate of approval, certificate of
operation, and certificate of on-site inspection. Where a mast climber is found
not to be in compliance with one or more certificates, the use of such mast
climber shall cease. The mast climber shall not be used until it has been
brought into conformance with the certificate(s) or a valid or amended
certificate(s) has(have) been granted by the department. The three certificates
shall be considered to meet the permitting requirements of section 3314.19 of
the New York City Building Code.
   (d)   Certificate of approval.
      (1)   Application for a certificate of approval. To request a certificate
of approval, a mast climber prototype application shall be filed with the
department by the mast climber manufacturer. The application shall contain the
following information:
         (i)   Owner's manual and operator's manuals. The manufacturer's
owner's manual and operator's manual shall show all configurations for which
approval is sought, general equipment specifications, installation and removal
procedures, break and over speed governor test procedures, daily, frequent, and
annual inspection requirements, shutdown wind criteria, maintenance procedures,
and repair criteria and standards. Such manuals shall be printed in English,
provided in an electronic format, and shall be in conformance with the
requirements of Section 4.18 of ANSI/SIA A92.9-1993.
         (ii)   Capacity chart. The manufacturer's capacity rating chart(s)
shall be printed in English, show each configuration for which approval is
sought and contain chart numbers and page numbers for identification.
         (iii)   Brochure. The advertising brochure, or drawing, shall show the
general configurations and specifications for which approval is sought.
         (iv)   Manufacturer's affidavit. An affidavit from the manufacturer of
the mast climber that shall contain the following information:
            (A)   Design certification. Certification from the manufacturer
that the mast climber has been designed in accordance with and meets the
requirements of ANSI/SIA A92.9-1993;
            (B)   Free standing height. A listing of the maximum free standing
height shall be provided for each configuration for which approval is sought;
            (C)   Tie-in spacing. Maximum and minimum tie-in spacing shall be
provided for each configuration for which approval is sought;
            (D)   Wind speed. Maximum safe in-service and out-of-service wind
speed information shall be provided for each configuration for which approval
is sought;
            (E)   Safety devices. A listing of safety devices included in the
mast climber shall be provided;
            (F)   Annual inspection checklist. An annual inspection checklist,
based on the requirements of the manufacturer's owner's and operator's manuals;
            (G)   Safety bulletins. Certification shall be provided by the
manufacturer that all manufacturer safety bulletins and recall notices related
to the mast climber shall be submitted to the department within five (5)
business days of issuance; and
            (H)   Service information. Points of contact for technical and
service questions shall be provided, including name(s), phone number(s), fax
number(s), address(es), and e-mail address(es).
         (v)   Additional information. Any supporting data, drawings, or
calculations to verify the above-required submissions shall be provided upon
request.
      (2)   Issuance of the certificate of approval. Upon approval of the mast
climber prototype application, the department shall issue a certificate of
approval for the mast climber to the manufacturer. The submitted manuals,
including the configurations and capacity rating chart(s) shall be considered
part of the certificate of approval.
      (3)   Amendments. A request to amend a valid certificate of approval
shall only be made by the mast climber manufacturer. Upon approval of the
amendment(s), the department shall issue an amended certificate of approval. A
certificate of approval is required to be amended when:
         (i)   Capacity ratings are altered;
         (ii)   Configurations are altered;
         (iii)   Maximum free standing mast height is altered;
         (iv)   Maximum or minimum tie-in spacing is altered;
         (v)   Maximum safe in service or out of service wind speed is altered;
or
         (vi)   Any part, component, attachment, extension, or equipment is
added that is not authorized by the manufacturer, or not accounted for in the
design calculations of the manufacturer, or not provided for in the
manufacturer's manual, or is not provided for in the certificate of approval.
      (4)   Safety bulletins. Manufacturers of mast climbers with a valid
certificate of approval shall provide to the department manufacturer safety
bulletins and recall notices related to the mast climber within five (5)
business days of issuance. Safety bulletins and recall notices shall not be
considered an amendment to the certificate of approval and shall not impact the
validity of the certificate of approval. The department may require mast
climber manufacturers with a valid certificate of operation or certificate of
on-site inspection, or applying for such certificates, to demonstrate
compliance with the safety bulletin or recall notice.
      (5)   Manuals. Manufacturers shall provide updated manufacturer's owner's
and operator's manual(s) to the department within thirty (30) business days of
issuance. Updated manuals shall replace the manuals on file with the department
for the certificate of approval and shall be considered part of such
certificate. No fee shall be charged to update such manuals.
      (6)   Manufacturer support. When points of contact for technical and/or
service questions, including name(s), phone number(s), fax number(s), address
(es), and e-mail address(es) change, the manufacturer shall provide updated
information to the department within five (5) business days of the change. If
the manufacturer of the mast climber changes, the new manufacturer shall notify
the department and provide updated information to the department within five
(5) business days of the change. Updated manufacturer information shall replace
the information on file with the department for the certificate of approval and
shall be considered part of such certificate. No fee shall be charged to update
such information. Where there is no manufacturer to support the mast climber,
the certificate of approval shall remain valid. However, no certificate of
operation for such mast climber shall be issued or renewed unless the
requirements of subparagraph (iv) of paragraph (2) of subdivision (e) of this
section are met.
      (7)   Transferability. Where a mast climber, its configuration(s), and
capacity rating chart(s) are identical to equipment already possessing a valid
certificate of approval from the department and such mast climber will be
configured and operated as provided in that certificate of approval, the
certificate of approval issued for the initial mast climber shall be accepted
for the duplicate mast climber.
      (8)   2012 Amendment. Certificates of approval issued prior to the
effective date of this section shall be amended by July 1, 2012, in accordance
with paragraph (3) of this subdivision (d) to supply any information currently
not included in the certificate of approval as required by paragraph (1) of
this subdivision (d). Valid certificates of approval that are not amended by
July 1, 2012 shall be deemed to be revoked.
      (9)   Suspension or revocation of a certificate of approval. The
department may suspend or revoke a certificate of approval in accordance with §
28-105.10 of the New York City Administrative Code ("Administrative Code").
   (e)   Certificate of operation.
      (1)   Conformity with the certificate of approval. No certificate of
operation or extension, renewal, or amendment of a certificate of operation
shall be granted by the department for a mast climber that does not possess a
valid certificate of approval or is not in conformance with the valid
certificate of approval.
      (2)   Application for a certificate of operation. To request or renew a
certificate of operation, the equipment owner shall sign and file with the
department a mast climber device application. The application shall contain the
following information:
         (i)   Listing of critical components. The equipment owner shall list
the critical components of the mast climber, provide information regarding the
dimensions and/or capacity of the critical components, and provide a unique
identification number, acceptable to the department, for each critical
component. Exception. An identification number is not required for the high/low
limit stops.
         (ii)   Owner's certification. The equipment owner shall certify that:
            (A)   The mast climber, including all parts and components, has
passed an inspection performed by the equipment owner or an authorized person
on behalf of the equipment owner who meets the definition of a qualified
person. Such inspection shall consist of the inspection as required by section
6.5 of ANSI/SIA A92.9-1993, plus a full visual inspection of all parts and
components of the mast climber. Such certification shall be accompanied by an
inspection checklist signed and dated by the equipment owner, and shall also be
accompanied by photographs in accordance with subdivision (g) of this section
showing the mast climber controls, limit stops, platform(s), and typical mast
section(s).
            (B)   The mast climber, including all parts and components, shall
be delivered to the job site in good condition and safe working order, with no
known hazardous conditions or maintenance problems that could compromise the
safe operation of the mast climber.
            (C)   Inspection, adjustment, maintenance, repair, and installation
work required to be performed by or on behalf of the owner shall be performed
in accordance with subdivisions (h), (j), and (k) of this section.
         (iii)   Disclosure of history. The equipment owner shall disclose if:
            (A)   A repair has been made to any critical component by or with
the knowledge of the equipment owner within the last five (5) years. If a
repair occurred, the nature of the repair shall be disclosed and the equipment
owner shall certify the repair was in accordance with the requirements of
paragraph (4) of subdivision (j) of this section.
            (B)   The mast climber, including any critical component, has, to
the knowledge of the equipment owner, been involved in an accident within the
last five (5) years. If an accident occurred, the equipment owner shall
disclose the address and nature of the accident.
         (iv)   Manufacturer support. Where there is no manufacturer to provide
technical or service support for the mast climber, such circumstance shall be
disclosed to the department by the equipment owner. Where there is no
manufacturer to provide technical support, the equipment owner shall designate
a professional engineer, acceptable to the department, to take responsibility
for all technical support. Where there is no manufacturer to provide service
support, the owner of the mast climber shall take responsibility for all
service support. The owner and/or the engineer shall provide point of contact
information for questions from the department for the specific mast climber
including name(s), phone number(s), fax number(s), address(es), and e-mail
address(es). This information shall be updated with the department as changes
occur within five (5) business days of such change.
      (3)   Issuance of the certificate of operation. Upon approval of the mast
climber device application, the department shall issue a certificate of
operation for the mast climber to the equipment owner. The mast climber shall
not be installed until it possesses a valid certificate of operation.
      (4)   Job specific validity. The certificate of operation for a mast
climber shall be valid for only one job site and shall expire at the end of the
job. The certificate must then be renewed prior to the start of a new job by
filling an application in accordance with paragraph (2) of this subdivision
(e).
      (5)   Amendments. A request to amend a valid certificate of operation
shall only be made by the equipment owner. Upon approval of the amendment, the
department shall issue an amended certificate of operation to the equipment
owner. A certificate of operation is required to be amended when:
         (i)   A critical component listed in the original application is
adjusted or repaired;
         (ii)   A critical component not listed in the original application is
added;
         (iii)   The mast climber, or any part or component, is found not to
have been repaired, adjusted, or maintained in accordance with paragraph (4) of
subdivision (j) of this section;
         (iv)   A mast climber with a valid certificate of operation is
involved in an accident; or
         (v)   A mast climber with a valid certificate of operation is sold to
a new equipment owner; or
         (vi)   The manufacturer no longer provides technical or service
support for the mast climber. Amendments shall be granted by the department
following provision of the information required in paragraph (2) of this
subdivision (e), if requested, or performance and certification of repair(s),
adjustment(s), or maintenance in accordance with paragraph (4) of subdivision
(j) of this section, or passage of an inspection in accordance with subdivision
(k) of this section.
      (6)   Sale of equipment.
         (i)   Valid certificate of operation. When a mast climber possessing a
valid certificate of operation is sold to a new equipment owner, the department
shall be notified, in writing, by such new equipment owner within fourteen (14)
days following the date of sale. Such notification shall include a copy of the
bill of sale. The mast climber shall not be operated until the new equipment
owner has filed an application to amend the certificate of operation in
accordance with paragraph (5) of this subdivision (e) containing all the
information required by paragraph (2) of this subdivision (e) and the
department has approved an amended certificate of operation for the mast
climber.
         (ii)   Expired certificate of operation. Where a mast climber with an
expired certificate of operation is sold to a new equipment owner, the
department shall be notified, in writing, by such new equipment owner when the
new owner renews the certificate of operation. Such notification shall include
a copy of the bill of sale.
      (7)   Multiple mast climbers. Where multiple mast climbers are combined
together, a separate certificate of operation shall be required for each drive
system.
      (8)   Suspension or revocation of a certificate of operation. The
department may suspend or revoke a certificate of operation in accordance with
§ 28-105.10 of the Administrative Code.
   (f)   Certificate of on-site inspection.
      (1)   Conformity with the certificate of approval and certificate of
operation. An application for a certificate of on-site inspection may be filed
with the department for a mast climber that does not possess a valid
certificate of approval or certificate of operation. However, no certificate of
on-site inspection or amendment to such certificate shall be granted by the
department for a mast climber that does not possess a valid certificate of
approval and certificate of operation, or is not in conformance with the
certificate of approval and certificate of operation.
      (2)   Application for a certificate of on-site inspection. To apply for a
certificate of on-site inspection, a professional engineer on behalf of the
equipment owner shall file a mast climber notice application with the
department. Accompanying plans and calculations shall include the proposed
project address and be signed and sealed by the engineer. The application shall
contain the following information:
         (i)   Ground and subsurface conditions.
            (A)   Certification from the engineer that he/she has inspected the
ground conditions at the proposed location of the mast climber and accounted
for them in his or her design;
            (B)   Identification of all pertinent ground and subsurface
conditions, including but not limited to: elevations and slopes, all sheeting,
shoring, retaining walls or excavations, all vaults, foundations, utilities, or
other subsurface structures that could be impacted by the presence of the mast
climber, along with identification of assumed soil, street, or sidewalk bearing
values; and
            (C)   Certification from the engineer, supported by calculations,
demonstrating that the mast climber, in all in-service and out-of-service
conditions of loading, including those due to wind conditions, will not
overload the street, soil, sidewalk, or any ground, utility, vault, or
subsurface condition identified in subparagraph (B) above.
         (ii)   Footing. Plans showing the footing and any ground anchorage,
outriggers, or dunnage of the mast climber, including matting necessary to
support and distribute the loads of the mast climber. The engineer shall
certify, supported by calculations, the adequacy of the footing for all in-
service and out-of-service conditions of loading, including those due to wind
conditions.
         (iii)   Foundations and structures. Where a foundation or structure is
to support the mast climber, including but not limited to tie-in connections or
setting the mast climber on a foundation, setback, or roof:
            (A)   Plans showing the connection of the mast climber to the
foundation or structure, including tie-ins, any foundation or structure to be
constructed to support the mast climber and any modifications to be made to an
existing foundation or structure to support the mast climber;
            (B)   For tie-in connections, specification of the materials to
support the loads of the tie-in connections, identification of assumed bearing
values, and pull out calculations;
            (C)   Where the building is under construction, a copy of the mast
climber plans stamped "reviewed for loads imposed" by the registered design
professional for the building, or a letter from the registered design
professional for the building stating that he or she has reviewed the mast
climber plan(s) for the loads it will impose on the building and attesting to
the adequacy of the building to support such loads;
            (D)   Where the mast climber is used on or connected to an existing
structure, certification from the engineer that he or she has inspected the
structure at the proposed location of the mast climber and accounted for it in
his or her design; and
            (E)   Certification from the engineer, supported by calculations,
of the adequacy of the foundation or structure to support the mast climber and
of the adequacy of all connections, including tie-ins, to support the mast
climber in all in-service and out-of-service conditions of loading, including
those due to wind conditions.
         (iv)   Setup plan. The notice application shall include a site plan(s)
and elevation plan(s) showing the following:
            (A)   The proposed location of the mast climber;
            (B)   The setup and configuration of the mast climber, including
dimensions of mast sections and platforms and maximum weight-bearing capacity
for each section;
            (C)   All phases of the installation and removal of the mast
climber;
            (D)   Plans detailing the installation and removal of the mast
climber, based on the requirements of the manufacturer;
            (E)   Optimal platform location when the mast climber is out of
service, for all phases;
            (F)   Certification from the engineer, supported by calculations,
that the mast climber, in all proposed configurations and phases, will be
stable and able to support all conditions of loading, including those due to
wind conditions;
            (G)   The final proposed height of the mast climber;
            (H)   Maximum and minimum tie-in spacing;
            (I)   Requirements for all bolted connections of the tie-in
connections, foundation, and anchorages, including bolt grade and torque
values;
            (J)   Netting, weather protection, or overhead protection to be
installed on the mast climber;
            (K)   Any material or article intended to overhang from the mast
climber, including building materials, or equipment including but not limited
to hoisting machines or winches;
            (L)   The facade of the building or structure along which the mast
climber will travel, including items such as balconies, and setbacks; temporary
construction such as runback structures, sidewalk sheds, scaffolds, and hoists;
and surrounding trees and above ground utilities including street lights,
traffic lights, antennas, electrical lines with voltage values indicated, phone
or other lines, bridges, viaducts, and overhead infrastructure; and
            (M)   Certification from the engineer that the mast climber will
clear all site obstructions.
         (v)   Pull out test. Where the mast climber attaches to masonry or
concrete, criteria developed by the engineer for the pull out test(s).
      (3)   Approval. Upon approval of the mast climber notice application, a
copy of such approval shall be given to the applicant. The mast climber shall
not be installed until the department has given such approval. A copy of the
approved notice application, along with copies of the approved plans shall be
kept at the job site and shall be made available to the department upon
request.
      (4)   Issuance of the certificate of on-site inspection.
         (i)   Inspections. Following the installation of the mast climber at
the job site, it shall be inspected as follows:
            (A)   Owner's inspection for the certificate of on-site inspection.
The equipment owner, or an authorized representative of the equipment owner who
meets the definition of a qualified person, shall inspect the mast climber,
including all parts and components, in accordance with sections 6.4 of ANSI/SIA
A92.9-1993, and shall also verify the critical components installed match those
listed in the certificate of operation.
            (B)   Engineer's inspection for the certificate of on-site
inspection. The engineer who filed the mast climber notice application, or an
authorized representative of the engineer who meets the definition of a
qualified person, shall inspect the mast climber to verify the mast climber has
been installed in accordance with the approved plans; verify the tie-in
connections, anchorages, footing, ground conditions, and the foundation and any
structural support(s) are in accordance with the approved plans; perform pull
out test(s) where required by approved plans; and survey the mast climber to
ensure plumbness in accordance with approved plans.
         (ii)   Inspection reports for a certificate of on-site inspection.
            (A)   Owner's inspection report for a certificate of on-site
inspection. Upon passing such owner's inspection required by subparagraph (A)
of subparagraph (i) of this paragraph (4), the owner, or the authorized
representative of the owner who performed the inspection, shall complete, sign,
and date an inspection report verifying passage of the owner's inspection and
detailing the results of the owner's inspection.
            (B)   Engineer's inspection report for a certificate of on-site
inspection. Upon passing such engineer's inspection required by subparagraph
(B) of subparagraph (i) of this paragraph (4), the engineer who filed the mast
climber notice application, or the authorized representative of the engineer
who performed the inspection, shall complete, sign, and date an inspection
report verifying passage of the engineer's inspection and detailing the results
of the engineer's inspection. Such report shall subsequently be sealed by the
engineer who filed the mast climber notice application. In addition, the
engineer's inspection report shall also contain the results of the survey for
plumbness, a torque report for the tie-in, foundation, and/or anchorage bolts,
the results of the pullout test, where required by approved plans, and
photographs of the mast climber installed at the job site, along with
photographs of the foundation, and typical tie-in connection(s), in accordance
with subdivision (g) of this section.
            (C)   Record of failing an initial inspection for a certificate of
on-site inspection. If the mast climber failed the owner's inspection or the
engineer's inspection before subsequently passing an additional inspection,
this shall be detailed in the passing inspection report, along with a
description of any adjustment, maintenance, or repairs made to the mast
climber.
         (iii)   Temporary certificate of on-site inspection. The mast climber
may begin operation once the mast climber passes both the owner's inspection
and the engineer's inspection, both inspection reports are completed, signed,
and dated, and the engineer's inspection report is sealed. Such reports shall
be deemed a temporary certificate of on-site inspection. Copies of both reports
shall be kept at the job site, and made available to the department upon
request.
         (iv)   Submittal of reports to the department. Within two business
days following the completion of the inspection reports, a completed, signed,
and dated copy of the owner's inspection report shall be submitted to the
department by the equipment owner, and a completed, signed, dated, and sealed
copy of the engineer's inspection report shall be submitted to the department
by the engineer who filed the mast climber notice application. If one or both
reports are not submitted to the department within the required timeframe, the
temporary certificate of on-site inspection shall be deemed expired and the
mast climber shall not resume operation until the department issues a
certificate of on-site inspection.
         (v)   Certificate of on-site inspection. Upon the department's
acceptance of both the owner's inspection report and the engineer's inspection
report, the department shall issue a certificate of on-site inspection for the
mast climber. A copy of the certificate of on-site inspection shall be
maintained at the job site.
         (vi)   Rejection of the inspection report. If one or both of the
inspection reports are rejected by the department, the mast climber shall cease
operation and shall not resume operation until a new owner's inspection report,
engineer's inspection report, or both, are accepted by the department and a
certificate of on-site inspection is issued by the department.
      (5)   Amendments. An approved mast climber notice application and/or a
valid certificate of on-site inspection shall only be amended by a professional
engineer on behalf of the equipment owner, and shall be approved by the
department. Amendments shall be approved in the order in which they were
received. Amendments shall be required where the mast climber is proposed to be
or has been installed, removed, located, or configured in a manner not provided
for in or beyond the tolerances provided in the approved plans and cannot be
brought into conformance with the approved plans.
      (6)   Job specific validity. The certificate of on-site inspection shall
be valid for only one (1) job site and shall expire at the end of the job.
      (7)   Installation in phases. Where a mast climber is to be installed in
phases, the continued validity of the certificate of on-site inspection shall
be contingent upon the following.
         (i)   Inspections.
            (A)   Owners inspection for a phase. Following installation work
subsequent to the initial installation, the equipment owner, or an authorized
representative of the equipment owner who meets the definition of a qualified
person, shall inspect the components added during the subsequent installation
to verify their safety, correct installation, and to verify that any critical
components added match those listed in the certificate of operation; run the
mast climber to verify its safe operation; and inspect the safety devices and
limit switches.
            (B)   Engineer's inspection for a phase. Where the subsequent
installation work included the attachment of a new tie-in connection,
anchorage, or structural support, the engineer who submitted the mast climber
notice application, or an authorized representative of the engineer who meets
the definition of a qualified person, shall inspect the added tie-in connection
(s), anchorage(s), or structural support(s) to verify they are in accordance
with the approved plans; perform pull out test(s) where required by approved
plans; and survey the mast climber to ensure plumbness in accordance with
approved plans.
         (ii)   Inspection reports for a phase.
            (A)   Owner's inspection report for a phase. Upon passing such
owner's inspection required by subparagraph (A) of subparagraph (i) of this
paragraph (7), the owner, or the authorized representative of the equipment
owner who performed the inspection, shall complete, sign, and date an
inspection report verifying passage of the owner's inspection and detailing the
results of the owner's inspection.
            (B)   Engineer's inspection report for a phase. Upon passing such
engineer's inspection where required by subparagraph (A) of subparagraph (i) of
this paragraph (7), the engineer who filed the mast climber notice application,
or the authorized representative of the engineer who performed the inspection,
shall complete, sign, and date an inspection report verifying passage of the
engineer's inspection and detailing the results of the engineer's inspection.
Such report shall subsequently be sealed by the engineer who filed the mast
climber notice application. In addition, the engineer's report shall also
contain the results of the survey for plumbness, a torque report for the tie-
in, foundation, and/or anchorage bolts, the results of the pullout test, where
required by approved plans, and photographs of the mast climber installed at
the job site, along with close up photographs of the foundation, and typical
tie-in connection(s), in accordance with subdivision (g) of this section.
            (C)   Record of failing the initial inspection for a phase. If the
mast climber failed the owner's inspection or the engineer's inspection before
subsequently passing an additional inspection, this shall be detailed in the
relevant inspection report, along with a description of any adjustment,
maintenance, or repairs made to the mast climber.
         (iii)   Temporary extension of the certificate of on-site inspection.
Following subsequent installation work, the mast climber shall not resume
operation until the mast climber passes both the owner's inspection and the
engineer's inspection, where required, and the inspection report(s) are
completed, signed, and dated, and where required, sealed. The previously
existing certificate of on-site inspection shall be deemed temporarily valid
for the new configuration until an amended certificate of on-site inspection is
issued, and the mast climber may resume operation. Copies of both reports shall
be kept at the job site, and made available to the department upon request.
         (iv)   Submittal of reports to the department. Within two business
days following the completion of the inspection report(s), a completed, signed,
and dated copy of the owner's inspection report shall be submitted to the
department by the equipment owner, and, where required, a completed, signed,
dated, and sealed copy of the engineer's inspection report shall be submitted
to the department by the engineer who filed the mast climber notice
application. If one or both reports, where required, are not submitted to the
department within the required timeframe, the temporarily extended certificate
of on-site inspection shall be deemed expired and the mast climber shall not
resume operation until the department renews the certificate of on-site
inspection.
         (v)   Certificate of on-site inspection. Upon the department's
acceptance of the owner's inspection report and the engineer's inspection
report, where required, the department shall issue an amended certificate of
on-site inspection for the mast climber in the new configuration. A copy of the
amended certificate of on-site inspection shall be maintained at the job site.
         (vi)   Rejection of the inspection report. If one or both of the
inspection reports are rejected by the department, the mast climber shall cease
operation and shall not resume operation until a new owner's inspection report,
engineer's inspection report, or both, are accepted by the department and an
amended certificate of on-site inspection for the new configuration is issued
by the department.
      (8)   Relocation. Where a mast climber is horizontally relocated during
the course of the job, this shall not be considered a phase or amendment to a
certificate of on-site inspection. Such relocation shall require a new mast
climber notice application and a new certificate of on-site inspection.
      (9)   Suspension or revocation of a certificate of on-site inspection.
The department may suspend or revoke a certificate of on-site inspection in
accordance with the provisions of § 28-105.10 of the Administrative Code.
   (g)   Photographs. Where photographs are required to accompany an inspection
report for a certificate of operation or on-site inspection, such photographs
shall be taken at the time of the inspection and shall have sufficient
resolution and lighting to clearly show the objects photographed.
   (h)   Installation and removal. Mast climbers shall be installed and removed
in accordance with the requirements of ANSI/SIA A92.9-1993, the requirements of
the manufacturer of the mast climber, approved plans, and the following:
      (1)   Owner's responsibility. The equipment owner, or an entity
authorized by the equipment owner, shall be responsible for the installation
and removal of a mast climber. All violations stemming from the actions taken,
or not taken, by those installing or removing a mast climber shall be issued to
the equipment owner, or the entity authorized by the equipment owner, not to an
individual worker or supervisor.
      (2)   Insurance. All individuals involved in the installation or removal
of a mast climber shall be covered by workers' compensation and general
liability insurance of the equipment owner, or the entity authorized by the
equipment owner, and shall be insured by the equipment owner, or the entity
authorized by the equipment owner, to the minimum requirements specified by
law.
      (3)   Supervisor. The installation and removal of a mast climber shall be
supervised by a representative of the equipment owner, or the entity authorized
by the equipment owner, who is both a competent person and a qualified person.
Such individual shall be present at the job site during all installation and
removal work and shall have the ability to directly communicate with all
individuals involved in the installation or removal work.
      (4)   Training. On and after July 1, 2012, individuals who install or
remove a mast climber, including the person supervising such installation or
removal, shall be trained in accordance with the requirements of paragraph (1)
of subdivision (m) of this section.
      (5)   Safety meeting. Within twenty four (24) hours prior to the
commencement of installation or removal operations, a safety meeting with all
individuals involved in such work shall be conducted. The following topics
shall be discussed during the safety meeting:
         (i)   Scope of work;
         (ii)   Roles and responsibilities;
         (iii)   The specific sequence of work;
         (iv)   Inspection of all equipment, materials, and tools to be used
during the installation or removal work;
         (v)   Review of all mast climber equipment to be installed;
         (vi)   Permit validity;
         (vii)   Qualifications and training of personnel;
         (viii)   Relevant weather warnings; and
         (ix)   Compliance with ANSI/SIA A92.9-1993, requirements of
manufacturer of the mast climber, and the approved plans.
      (6)   Notification to department. The equipment owner shall notify the
department of the upcoming installation or removal of the mast climber within
one business day, but not more than two business days, prior to the
commencement of the safety meeting required by paragraph (5) of this
subdivision (h).
      (7)   Removal of tie-ins. Tie-ins shall not be removed unless the removal
is expressly authorized by the person supervising the work in accordance with
paragraph (3) of this subdivision (h).
      (8)   Inspection. Following installation work, the mast climber shall be
inspected in accordance with subdivision (f) of this section.
   (i)   Use and operation. Mast climbers shall be used and operated in
accordance with the requirements of ANSI/SIA A92.9-1993, the requirements of
the manufacturer of the mast climber, approved plans, and the following
requirements of this subdivision.
      (1)   Responsibility of owner. Following the installation of the mast
climber, the equipment owner shall not be responsible for its use or operation,
except where the equipment owner also meets the definition of the equipment
user. The responsibility for the safe use and operation of the mast climber
shall rest with the equipment user.
      (2)   Equipment users. The equipment user shall only use the mast climber
for work related to its trade. Where a separate trade or contractor uses the
mast climber, such trade or contractor shall assume responsibility for the use
and operation mast climber as the equipment user. A change in equipment user
during the course of the day shall be considered a new shift for the purposes
of paragraph (4) of subdivision (k) of this section.
      (3)   Training. On and after July 1, 2012, individuals who use or operate
a mast climber, including the person supervising such use and operation, shall
be trained in accordance with the requirements of paragraph (2) of subdivision
(m) of this section.
      (4)   Safety talk. Prior to their first use of the mast climber at the
job site, any individual who uses or operates the mast climber shall be given a
safety talk by the equipment owner, an authorized agent of the owner, or the
equipment user when so authorized by the equipment owner. The safety talk shall
include, but not be limited to, the following topics:
         (i)   Controls of the mast climber;
         (ii)   Emergency descent procedures; and
         (iii)   Site specific safety considerations.
      (5)   Supervision of use and operation. The equipment user shall
designate a competent person to supervise the use and operation of the mast
climber. Such supervisor does not need to be on the mast climber, but shall
remain on site at all times the mast climber is in use or operation and shall
have the ability to directly communicate with the individuals on the mast
climber. Such supervisor shall also:
         (i)   Ensure all individuals using or operating the mast climber on
and after July 1, 2012 have completed the training required by paragraph (2) of
subdivision (m) of this section and have received the safety talk in accordance
with paragraph (4) of this subdivision (i).
         (ii)   Ensure the pre-shift inspection is performed in accordance with
paragraph (4) of subdivision (k) of this section.
         (iii)   Ensure the mast climber log is maintained in accordance with
paragraph (1) of subdivision (n) of this section. The designation of a person
to supervise the use and operation of a mast climber shall not relieve the
liability of the equipment user for all aspects of mast climber use and
operation, including but not limited to the actions of the person supervising
the use and operation of the mast climber and those using or operating the mast
climber. All violations stemming from actions taken or not taken by such
personnel shall be issued to the equipment user, not the person supervising the
use and operation of the mast climber or those using or operating the mast
climber.
      (6)   Safe travel speeds. Safe travel speeds established by the
manufacturer of the mast climber shall be followed at all times by the
equipment user. Safe travel speed information shall be prominently displayed on
the mast climber.
      (7)   Loads and capacities. The equipment user shall ensure no use or
operation of a mast climber exceeds the rated load capacity of the mast climber
or any part or component of the mast climber. Load capacities shall be
prominently displayed on the mast climber.
      (8)   Stable and secure. The equipment user shall ensure the mast
climber, all parts and components of the mast climber, and all materials,
tools, and other articles located on and/or used from the mast climber are kept
secure and stable at all times to prevent the mast climber from losing balance,
overturning, collapsing, or any part, component, material, tool, or other
article from falling from the mast climber.
      (9)   Overhang. The equipment user shall ensure no material or article
overhangs from a mast climber unless provided for in plans submitted with the
application for a certificate of on-site inspection and approved by the
department.
      (10)   Rigging. Where a hoisting machine or winch located on a mast
climber is used to hoist or lower materials, the mast climber shall remain
stationary throughout the hoisting or lowering operation, and the requirements
of the Building Code for rigging, hoisting, or lowering operations shall apply.
Such hoisting machine or winch shall be located and installed on the mast
climber in accordance with the engineer's approved plans for the mast climber.
      (11)   Wind. Where sustained winds or wind gusts at the jobsite exceed 30
miles per hour, the use and operation of the mast climber shall cease. If the
manufacturer of the mast climber recommends work to cease at a lower wind
speed, such recommendation shall instead apply. Wind shutdown criteria from the
manufacturer shall be maintained on the mast climber. Wind speed shall be
determined based on data from the nearest United States weather bureau
reporting station, or an anemometer located at the job site, freely exposed to
the wind, and calibrated in accordance with ASTM D 5096-02, 2007.
      (12)   Wheels. Equipment users shall not use or operate a mast climber
while the mast climber is resting on wheels. It is permissible to relocate a
mast climber, while it is not being used or operated, on wheels.
      (13)   Failsafe. No mast climber shall be used or operated that does not
have a failsafe method of lowering the platform in the event of a power
failure.
      (14)   Signs. No sign, information, pictorial representation, business,
or advertising message(s), other than the name of the manufacturer or equipment
owner where normally provided on the mast climber, shall be posted or displayed
on a mast climber.
      (15)   End of shift. At the end of each shift, the mast climber shall be
secured in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations, and lowered in
accordance with the engineer's approved plans.
   (j)   Mast climber equipment requirements. Mast climbers shall meet the
requirements of ANSI/SIA A92.9-1993 and the following.
      (1)   Good condition. Equipment owners shall only provide to the job site
mast climbers, including all parts and components, that are in good condition
and safe working order with no known hazardous conditions or maintenance
problems that will compromise the safe operation of the mast climber.
      (2)   Locking. Mast climbers shall be provided with a positive means for
preventing the unauthorized operation of such mast climber.
      (3)   Parts and components. All parts and components of a mast climber,
including netting, wind protection, or overhead projection, shall be:
         (i)   Authorized by the manufacturer, or accounted for in the design
calculations of the manufacturer, or provided for in the manufacturer's manual,
or provided for in the certificate of approval; and
         (ii)   Covered by the owner's certification for the certificate of
operation; and
         (iii)   Accounted for in the certificate of on-site inspection.
      (4)   Repairs, adjustments, and maintenance. All repairs, adjustments, or
maintenance made to a mast climber, including any part or component, shall be
made by a qualified person(s) in accordance with the specifications of the
equipment manufacturer and the requirements of ANSI/SIA A92.9-1993, and shall
provide at least the manufacturer's original factor of safety and shall conform
to the following.
         (i)   Job site repairs. While at the job site, equipment users shall
not perform repair(s). Equipment users shall immediately notify the equipment
owner of any need for a repair. The mast climber shall not resume operation
until a qualified person on behalf of the equipment owner has inspected the
mast climber in accordance with the requirements of the manufacturer to verify
the adequacy of the repair. A description of such repair, and the results of
such inspection shall be recorded in the mast climber log in accordance with
paragraph (1) of subdivision (n) of this section by the person who performed
the inspection, with the log entry signed and dated by such person.
         (ii)   Job site adjustments. While at the job site, equipment users
shall not perform adjustments(s) unless so authorized, in writing, by the
equipment owner. Where not so authorized by the equipment owner, the equipment
user shall immediately notify the equipment owner of any need for an
adjustment. The mast climber shall not resume operation until a qualified
person on behalf of the equipment owner, or where the equipment user has been
authorized to perform the adjustment, a qualified person on behalf of the
equipment user, has inspected the mast climber in accordance with the
requirements of the manufacturer to verify the adequacy of the adjustment, and
the mast climber has passed such inspection. A description of such adjustment,
and the results of such inspection shall be recorded in the mast climber log in
accordance with paragraph (1) of subdivision (n) of this section by the person
who performed the inspection, with the log entry signed and dated by such
person.
         (iii)   Job site maintenance. Mast climbers at the job site shall be
maintained in accordance with the specifications of the manufacturer and
Section 6.3 of ANSI/SIA A92.9-1993. Equipment users shall not perform
maintenance work on mast climbers unless so authorized, in writing, by the
equipment owner. Where not so authorized, the equipment user shall immediately
notify the equipment owner of any need for maintenance. The equipment owner
shall develop a maintenance checklist based on the specifications of the
manufacturer and Section 6.3 of ANSI/SIA A92.9-1993. Such checklist shall be
maintained at the job site, and shall be signed, dated, and completed by the
person who performed the maintenance.
         (iv)   Critical components. Where a critical component is repaired or
adjusted, the certificate of operation for the mast climber shall be considered
invalid. The mast climber shall not resume operation until the equipment owner
discloses the work to the department and the certificate of operation is
amended in accordance with paragraph (5) of subdivision (e) of this section.
   (k)   Inspection of mast climbers.
      (1)   Inspection for a certificate of operation. Mast climbers shall be
inspected in accordance with the requirements of subdivision (e) of this
section.
      (2)   Inspection(s) for a certificate of on-site inspection. Mast
climbers shall be inspected in accordance with the requirements of subdivision
(f) of this section.
      (3)   Inspection(s) following repairs or adjustments. Following a repair
or adjustment, the mast climber shall be inspected in accordance with paragraph
(4) of subdivision (j) of this section.
      (4)   Pre-shift inspection.
         (i)   Inspection checklist. The equipment owner shall provide the
equipment user a pre-shift inspection checklist for the mast climber. Such
checklist shall be based on the manufacturer requirements for the inspection of
the mast climber, as well as Section 7.4.3 of ANSI/SIA A92.9-1993, and shall
also include a verification that the mast climber is located in accordance with
approved plans. Such checklist shall be maintained at the job site, available
for inspection by the department upon request.
         (ii)   Inspection performance. Inspections required by the checklist
shall be performed by, and the checklist signed, dated, and completed by the
person supervising the use and operation of the mast climber in accordance with
paragraph (5) of subdivision (i) of this section prior to the start of each
shift. A change in equipment user during the course of the day shall be deemed
to be a new shift and shall require a new pre-shift inspection prior to the use
of the mast climber.
         (iii)   Failing inspection. If the mast climber fails the inspection,
it shall cease operation and shall not resume until it has been adjusted,
repaired, or maintained and passed a follow up inspection. Such failure shall
be detailed in the mast climber log required by paragraph (1) of subdivision
(n) of this section, along with a description of any adjustment, maintenance,
or repair made to the mast climber.
      (5)   Three-month and annual inspection.
         (i)   Three-month inspection. Where a mast climber remains at a job
site for three months or longer, it shall be inspected by a qualified person
authorized by the equipment owner. Such inspection shall be in accordance with
Section 6.4 of ANSI/SIA A92.9-1993, and shall also verify that the mast climber
remains installed in accordance with approved plans. Such inspection shall be
performed between two and a half to three months following the issuance of the
initial certificate of on-site inspection by the department for the mast
climber at the job site, and every two and a half to three months thereafter.
         (ii)   Annual inspection. Where a mast climber remains at a job site
for one year or longer, the mast climber shall be inspected by a qualified
person authorized by the equipment owner. Such inspection shall be in
accordance with Sections 6.4 and 6.5 of ANSI/SIA A92.9-1993, and shall also
verify that the mast climber remains installed in accordance with approved
plans. Such inspection shall be performed between eleven months to one year
following the issuance of the initial certificate of on-site inspection by the
department for the mast climber at the job site, and every eleven months to one
year thereafter.
         (iii)   Inspection report. Upon passing such three-month or annual
inspection, a report detailing the inspection results shall be signed, dated,
and completed by the person who performed the inspection, and shall be
maintained at the job site, and made available to the department upon request.
         (iv)   Failing inspection. If the mast climber fails a three-month or
annual inspection, it shall cease operation and shall not resume until it has
been adjusted, repaired, or maintained and passed a subsequent inspection. Such
failure shall be detailed in the inspection report and the mast climber log
required by paragraph (1) of subdivision (n) of this section, along with a
description of any adjustment, maintenance, or repairs made to the mast
climber.
   (l)   Hazardous conditions. When a hazardous condition associated with a
mast climber that could impact the public or adjoining property is identified,
or where the mast climber fails an inspection required by subdivision (k) of
this section, the use and operation of such mast climber shall cease. The mast
climber shall not resume operation until the hazardous condition has been
corrected and, where necessary, passed a subsequent inspection and/or has been
repaired, adjusted, or maintained in accordance with paragraph (4) of
subdivision (j) of this section.
   (m)   Training. Training shall be required for all individuals who install,
remove, use, or operate a mast climber.
      (1)   Installation or removal. Beginning July 1, 2012, individuals who
install or remove a mast climber, including the person supervising such
individuals, shall have completed manufacturer provided training for the
installation and removal of the specific make and model of the mast climber.
      (2)   Operation or use. Beginning July 1, 2012, individuals who operate
or use a mast climber, including the person supervising such individuals, shall
have completed a department-approved training course that is at least four (4)
hours long, and a department-approved four (4) hour refresher course every (4)
years thereafter that covers areas including, but not limited to, mast climber
use and operation, hazards associated with such work, pre-use inspections,
start up and shut down procedures, emergency descent procedures, fall
protection, mast climber stability and balance, and storage of materials on a
mast climber.
      (3)   Examinations. Successful completion of a four (4) hour mast climber
training or refresher course required by paragraph (2) of this subdivision (m)
shall be dependent upon passing a written examination conducted by the training
provider.
      (4)   Training providers. Mast climber training and refresher courses
required by paragraph (2) of this subdivision (m) shall be approved by the
department and conducted by a provider approved by the department. A provider
shall either be:
         (i)   A registered New York State Department of Labor apprenticeship
training program;
         (ii)   An educational institution or school chartered, licensed or
registered by the New York State Department of Education;
         (iii)   The mast climber manufacturer;
         (iv)   The mast climber owner; or
         (v)   An entity otherwise acceptable to the department.
      (5)   Instructors. Instructors of training courses required by paragraphs
(1) or (2) of this subdivision (m) shall meet the definition of a qualified
person with regard to the course material being taught.
      (6)   Records. The training provider of training courses required by
paragraphs (1) or (2) of this subdivision (m) shall maintain records of all who
attended the course(s) for a period of not less than seven (7) years. Such
records shall be made available to the department upon request.
      (7)   Identification cards. Upon successful completion of a mast climber
training or refresher course required by paragraphs (1) or (2) of this
subdivision (m), the individual shall be issued a wallet size identification
card acceptable to the department. Such card shall be kept on the person during
the course of work and shall be presented to the department upon request. Such
card shall contain the following information:
         (i)   The name of the individual to whom it was issued;
         (ii)   A photograph of the individual to whom it was issued;
         (iii)   The name and address of the issuing organization;
         (iv)   The date of issuance;
         (v)   An indication of the type of training completed (installer,
user, operator); and
         (vi)   The signature of the course administrator.
   (n)   Documents. A copy of the operators manual, the manufacturer's capacity
charts for the mast climber, approved plans, the valid certificate of
operation, valid temporary or full certificate of on-site inspection,
inspection reports and checklists, the maintenance checklist, and the log
required by paragraph (1) of this subdivision (n) shall be kept at the job
site, available for inspection by the department upon request. All such
documents shall be in English. In addition to the above, where the equipment
owner authorizes the equipment user to provide the safety talk in accordance
with paragraph (4) of subdivision (i) of this section, or perform adjustments
or maintenance to the mast climber in accordance with paragraph (4) of
subdivision (j) of this section, a copy of such written authorization shall be
kept at the jobsite, available to inspection by the department upon request.
Such authorization shall be in English and signed and dated by the equipment
owner.
      (1)   Log. A log for each mast climber shall be maintained at the job
site and shall be made available to the department upon request. All log
entries shall be legible and written in English. The equipment user is
responsible for ensuring the log is signed, dated, and completed. The log shall
be kept up to date and contain the following information:
         (i)   The name and contact information of the person supervising
installation or removal of the mast climber per paragraph (3) of subdivision
(h) of this section;
         (ii)   A record of the meeting held prior to installation or removal
work in accordance with paragraph (5) of subdivision (h) of this section,
including the date and time of the meeting; the names, titles and company
affiliations of all present at the meeting; a summary of what was discussed,
including specific tasks and the name of the person to whom they were assigned;
a list of the decisions made at the meeting; and a certification that all
workers have completed the required training per paragraph (1) of subdivision
(m) of this section;
         (iii)   The logging in, prior to each shift, of the person supervising
the use and operation of the mast climber in accordance with paragraph (5) of
subdivision (i) of this section, including the date and time, the name and
signature of the person, and the business name, address, and phone number of
the equipment user. Where this information changes during the day, the new
person supervising the use and operation of the mast climber shall sign in;
         (iv)   The date, time, and names of the individuals who received a
safety talk in accordance with paragraph (4) of subdivision (i) of this
section, along with the name and signature of the person who conducted the
safety talk;
         (v)   A record of any accidents involving the mast climber at the job
site;
         (vi)   Record of repairs and adjustments made to the mast climber in
accordance with paragraph (4) of subdivision (j) of this section; and
         (vii)   A record of any hazardous conditions discovered with the mast
climber at the job site.
      (2)   The log shall be turned over by the equipment user to the equipment
owner at the end of the job.
   (o)   Accident and incident reporting. When a mast climber operating in New
York City and requiring a certificate of operation is involved in an accident
or incident, the department shall be immediately notified, and use and
operation of the mast climber shall cease. Following an accident or incident,
no person shall permit any of the following without the permission of the
department or under the lawful order of the New York City Police or Fire
Department:
      (1)   Use or operation of such mast climber;
      (2)   Removal of the mast climber or any part thereof from the area of
the job site; or
      (3)   Removal of any debris, objects or evidence involved in the accident
or incident.
   (p)   Open applications. Applications shall be deemed abandoned, and the fee
forfeited, one (1) year after the date of their filing pursuant to the
provisions of § 28-105.7 of the Administrative Code.
   (q)   Waiver. Where the equipment owner or equipment user can demonstrate
practical hardship in complying with a requirement of this section, but can
provide alternative means of compliance that do not compromise the safety of
the public or property, the department may grant a waiver from such requirement
of this section, provided the alternative means are complied with.
§ 3314-02 Suspended Scaffold Training Requirements.
On and after December 31, 2014, all individuals who install, adjust, repair,
maintain, use, inspect, or remove a suspended scaffold, or who supervise such
work must have completed the training specified in Section BC 3314.4.5 of the
New York City Building Code.
§ 3316-01 Rigging Operations and Rigging Equipment.
   (a)   Applicability. This section applies to rigging operations performed in
connection with the hoisting or lowering of articles on the outside of a
building and all rigging equipment utilized in connection with such operations.
   (b)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, terms defined in
Chapter 2 of the New York City Building Code and 1 RCNY §
3319-01 have the same meaning here.
   (c)   Manufacturer specifications, design, and capacity restrictions.
Rigging operations must be performed, and rigging equipment utilized, in
accordance with specifications and rated capacities established by the
manufacturer of the rigging equipment and the manufacturer of the object to be
hoisted or lowered. In addition, where plans or design documents are provided,
the rigging operations must be performed in accordance with such plans or
design documents.
      Exceptions: Deviations from the manufacturer specifications and rated
capacities are allowed provided they are in accordance with design drawings
prepared by a registered design professional who has demonstrated knowledge and
experience with rigging. Such design drawings must clearly indicate the
deviations from the manufacturer specifications and rated capacities.
   (d)   Precautions. The following precautions must be observed during rigging
operations.
      (1)   Tag lines. A tag or restraint line must be used where a load could
be subject to rotation that would pose a hazard.
      (2)   Releasing the load. The rigging supervisor required by Section
3316.9.1 of the New York City Building Code is required to ensure that no load
is released from the hoisting line or otherwise deposited until either:
         (i)   The load is securely attached in place to the building or
structure; or
         (ii)   The load has been placed on a surface or structure capable of
supporting the load.
      (3)   Shock loading. Precautions must be taken to avoid shock loading.
      (4)   Makeshift links or fasteners. Makeshift links or fasteners formed
from bolts or rods, or other such attachments are prohibited.
      (5)   Job built equipment. Job built rigging equipment must be designed
by a registered design professional who has demonstrated knowledge and
experience with rigging. Signed and sealed drawings for the job built rigging
equipment must be kept at the site at all times.
      (6)   Trimming and balancing loads. Loads must be securely slung and
balanced before they are set in motion. Loads must be trimmed to prevent the
dislodgment of any part during raising, lowering, swinging, or transit.
      (7)   Load suspended beneath another load ("Christmas treeing")
prohibited. No load may be suspended directly beneath an existing load.
      (8)   Attachment points. Only an attachment point, consisting of a hook
or other secure connection not allowing any undesirable movement, and provided
or authorized by the manufacturer of the hoisting machine or hoisting
equipment, may be used to support a suspended load. No load shall be slung
over, wrapped around, tied to, or otherwise draped from a boom, fork, cradle,
lifting arm, bucket, platform, basket, or similar accouterment.
   (e)   Slings. Slings must be utilized in accordance with the requirements of
this subdivision and ASME B30.9. Where differences occur between the provisions
of this section and referenced standards, the provisions of this section apply.
      (1)   Repairs, alterations, and modifications. Slings may only be
repaired, altered, or modified by the manufacturer of the sling, or an entity
authorized by the manufacturer.
         Exception: Missing or illegible identification tags may be replaced by
a qualified person in accordance with the requirements of the manufacturer of
the sling.
      (2)   Inspections. The frequent inspection required by ASME B30.9 must be
performed prior to each shift by the individual responsible for supervising the
rigging operation in accordance with Section 3316.9 of the New York City
Building Code. Where synthetic slings are utilized, the softening mechanisms
must also be inspected as part of the frequent inspection. The periodic
inspection and other inspections required by ASME B30.9 must be performed by a
competent person designated by the owner of the sling at the intervals
prescribed by ASME B30.9.
         (i)   Additional inspection for synthetic slings. Synthetic materials
can be degraded by exposure to sunlight or ultraviolet light. Manufacturer
recommendations for the inspection of synthetic slings to determine the damage
from sunlight or ultraviolet light must be followed.
      (3)   Records. Where ASME B30.9 requires a record or documentation of an
inspection or test, such record or documentation must be signed and dated by
the individual who performed the inspection or test, and must be maintained by
the owner of the sling.
      (4)   Identification. Tags or similar identification on the sling must be
legible.
      (5)   Discarded rope. Discarded rope cannot be used for slings.
      (6)   Weakest component. Hooks, rings, oblong links, pear shaped links,
welded or mechanical coupling links, or other attachments must have a rated
capacity at least equal to that of the sling with which they are used.
      (7)   Protection of synthetic slings from edges, corners, or protrusions.
Synthetic slings cannot be used unless softening mechanisms have been applied
to all edges, corners, or protrusions.
      (8)   Use of synthetic slings in conjunction with climber or tower crane
erection, jumping, climbing, and dismantling. Synthetic slings can only be used
in conjunction with climber or tower crane erection, jumping, climbing, and
dismantling if the manufacturer's manual specifically states or recommends the
use of synthetic slings.
   (f)   Below-the-hook lifting devices. Below-the-hook lifting devices must be
utilized in accordance with the requirements of this subdivision and ASME
B30.20. Where differences occur between the provisions of this section and
referenced standards, the provisions of this section apply.
      (1)   Repairs, alterations, and modifications. Below-the-hook lifting
devices may only be repaired, altered, or modified by the manufacturer of the
device, or an entity authorized by the manufacturer.
         Exception: Missing or illegible identification tags may be replaced by
a qualified person in accordance with the requirements of the manufacturer of
the below-the-hook lifting device.
      (2)   Inspections. The frequent inspection required by ASME B30.20 must
be performed prior to each shift by the individual responsible for supervising
the rigging operation in accordance with Section 3316.9 of the New York City
Building Code. The periodic inspection and other inspections required by ASME
B30.20 must be performed by a competent person designated by the owner of the
below-the-hook lifting device at the intervals prescribed by ASME B30.20.
      (3)   Records. Where ASME B30.20 requires a record or documentation of an
inspection or test, such record or documentation must be signed and dated by
the individual who performed the inspection or test, and must be maintained by
the owner of the below-the-hook lifting devices.
      (4)   Identification. Tags or similar identification on the below-the-
hook lifting device must be legible.
   (g)   Rigging hardware. Rigging hardware described in ASME B30.26 must be
utilized in accordance with the requirements of this subdivision and ASME
B30.26. Where differences occur between the provisions of this section and
referenced standards, the provisions of this section apply.
      (1)   Repairs, alterations, and modifications. Rigging hardware may only
be repaired, altered, or modified by the manufacturer of the rigging hardware,
or an entity authorized by the manufacturer.
         Exceptions: 
            1.   Missing or illegible identification tags may be replaced by a
qualified person in accordance with the requirements of the manufacturer of the
rigging hardware.
            2.   Safety latches may be replaced by a qualified person in
accordance with the requirements of the manufacturer of the rigging hardware.
      (2)   Inspections. The frequent inspection required by ASME B30.26 must
be performed prior to each shift by the individual responsible for supervising
the rigging operation in accordance with Section 3316.9 of the New York City
Building Code. The periodic inspection and other inspections required by ASME
B30.26 must be performed by a competent person designated by the owner of the
rigging hardware at the intervals prescribed by ASME B30.26.
      (3)   Records. Where ASME B30.26 requires a record or documentation of an
inspection, calibration, or test, such record or documentation must be signed
and dated by the individual who performed the inspection, calibration, or test,
and must be maintained by the owner of the rigging hardware.
      (4)   Identification. Tags or similar identification on the rigging
hardware must be legible.
   (h)   Hooks. Hooks must be utilized in accordance with the requirements of
this subdivision and ASME B30.10. Where differences occur between the
provisions of this section and referenced standards, the provisions of this
section apply.
      (1)   Repairs, alterations, and modifications. Hooks may only be
repaired, altered, or modified by the manufacturer of the hook, or an entity
authorized by the manufacturer. Repairs, alterations, or modifications by
welding or reshaping are not acceptable unless prior written approval of the
department is obtained.
         Exception: Safety latches may be replaced by a qualified person in
accordance with the requirements of the manufacturer of the hook.
      (2)   Inspections. The frequent inspection required by ASME B30.10 must
be performed prior to each shift by the individual responsible for supervising
the rigging operation in accordance with Section 3316.9 of the New York City
Building Code. The periodic inspection and other inspections required by ASME
B30.10 must be performed by a competent person designated by the owner of the
hook at the intervals prescribed by ASME B30.10.
      (3)   Records. Where ASME B30.10 requires a record or documentation of an
inspection or test, such record or documentation must be signed and dated by
the individual who performed the inspection or test, and must be maintained by
the owner of the hook.
      (4)   Identification. Tags or similar identification on the hook must be
legible.
      (5)   Latches and self-locking mechanisms. Hooks without a latch or self-
locking mechanism are prohibited.
   (i)   Documents made available upon request. Where this section or a
referenced standard requires inspection records, design drawings, or other
documentation to be maintained, such record, design drawing, or documentation
must be made available to the commissioner upon request.
   (j)   Referenced standards. The standards referenced in this section are
considered part of the requirements of this section to the prescribed extent of
each such reference. Where differences occur between provisions of this section
and referenced standards, the provisions of this section apply.
 
Standard    Name                             Year
American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME)
ASME B30.9  Slings [                         2021
ASME B30.10 Hooks [                          2019
ASME B30.20 Below-the-hook lifting devices [ 2021
ASME B30.26 Rigging hardware                 2015
 
(Added City Record 10/10/2018, eff. 11/9/2018; amended City Record 6/23/2020,
eff. 7/23/2020; amended City Record 12/7/2023, eff. 1/6/2024) [
§ 3319-01 Cranes and Derricks.
   (a)   Applicability. The design, construction, permitting, installation,
removal, adjustment, repair, inspection, maintenance, operation and use of
cranes and derricks must conform to the requirements of Section 3319 of the New
York City Building Code and this section. This includes, but is not limited to,
cranes and derricks used for hoisting and/or rigging purposes; or used for
construction, alteration, demolition, excavation and maintenance purposes,
including for buildings, highways or sewers; or used for the installation of
piles; or used for the hoisting or lowering of any article on the outside of
any building or structure. This also includes any equipment that meets the
definition of a crane or derrick, including, but not limited to. dedicated pile
drivers and manufactured or custom designed hoisting machines.
      Exception: Cranes and derricks listed in the exceptions set forth in
Sections 3316.1 or 3319.1 of the New York City Building Code.
   (b)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms
have the following meanings:
      ACCEPTANCE OR ACCEPTED (Construction documents). See § 28-101.5 of the
Administrative Code.
      ACCESSORY. A secondary part or assembly of parts which contributes to the
overall function and usefulness of a machine.
      ANGLE INDICATOR (boom). An accessory which measures the angle of the boom
to the horizontal.
      APPOINTED. Assigned specific responsibilities by the employer or by the
employer's representative.
      APPROVAL OR APPROVED (Construction documents). See § 28-101.5 of the
Administrative Code.
      ARCHITECT. A person licensed and registered to practice the profession of
architecture under the education law of the state of New York.
      ASSEMBLY/DISASSEMBLY (ASSEMBLED OR DISASSEMBLED). The installation or
removal of structural components or attachments to a crane or derrick, or the
installation or removal of elements that connect or attach a crane or derrick
to a building or structure. The term assembly/disassembly includes the
erection, climbing, jumping, or dismantling of a tower crane. The term
assembly/disassembly does not include operations exclusive to the installation
or removal counterweights, or to the unfolding and pinning of a boom or swing-
away jib. The term assembly/disassembly also does not include the setup or
breakdown of a self-erecting tower crane provided the setup of the self-
erecting tower crane does not require a boom, mast, or jib section, or other
attachment, to be installed at the site.
      ATTACHMENTS. Elements that can be readily added to or removed from a
crane or derrick and which expand the range or function of the crane or
derrick. Examples include, but are not limited to: an auger, boom extension,
clamshell, drill, jib, jib extension, or pile-driver.
      AXIS OF ROTATION. See Chapter 2 of the New York City Building Code.
      AXLE. See Chapter 2 of the New York City Building Code.
      AXLE (bogie). Two or more automotive type axles mounted in tandem in a
frame so as to divide the load between the axles and permit vertical
oscillation of the wheels.
      BASE (mounting). See Chapter 2 of the New York City Building Code.
      BOOM. See Chapter 2 of the New York City Building Code.
      BOOM ANGLE. The angle between the longitudinal centerline of the boom and
the horizontal. The boom longitudinal centerline is a straight line between the
boom foot pin (heel pin) centerline, and boom point sheave pin centerline.
      BOOM HARNESS. The block and sheave arrangement on the boom point to which
the topping lift cable is reeved for lowering and raising the boom.
      BOOM HOIST. A hoist drum and rope reeving system used to raise and lower
the boom.
      BOOM POINT. See Chapter 2 of the New York City Building Code.
      BOOM STOP. A device used to limit the angle of the boom at the highest
position.
      BRAKE. See Chapter 2 of the New York City Building Code.
      CAB. A housing which covers the rotating superstructure machinery and/or
operators station.
      CABLEWAY. See Chapter 2 of the New York City Building Code.
      CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL. See Chapter 2 of the New York City Building
Code.
      CERTIFICATE OF OPERATION. See Chapter 2 of the New York City Building
Code.
      CERTIFICATE OF ON-SITE INSPECTION. See Chapter 2 of the New York City
Building Code.
      CLAMSHELL. See Chapter 2 of the New York City Building Code.
      CLUTCH. A friction, electromagnetic, hydraulic, pneumatic or positive
mechanical device for engagement of power.
      COMPETENT PERSON. See Chapter 2 of the New York City Building Code.
      COMPONENT. A structural part or mechanical system that is integral to the
crane or derrick, or an element that supports an integral structural part or
mechanical system. Examples include, but are not limited to: a-frame,
attachments, boom, boom tip, braking system, climbing frame or section,
climbing mechanism, collar, counter jibs, counterweight, counterweight support
system, engine, heel boom, hoist drum, hoist motor, machine deck or platform,
mast, operator's cabin, pendant bars (excluding wire rope pendants), suspension
system, tower base/base frame, tower top, and turntable. For a derrick, a
component also includes base plates, junctions, poles and other uprights,
seats, and stiff legs.
      COUNTERWEIGHT. See Chapter 2 of the New York City Building Code.
      CRANE. See Chapter 2 of the New York City Building Code.
         ARTICULATING BOOM CRANE. See Chapter 2 of the New York City Building
Code.
         MOBILE CRANE. See Chapter 2 of the New York City Building Code.
            COMMERCIAL TRUCK MOUNTED CRANE (BOOM TRUCK). See Chapter 2 of the
New York City Building Code.
            CRAWLER CRANE. See Chapter 2 of the New York City Building Code.
            WHEEL MOUNTED CRANE (MULTIPLE CONTROL STATIONS). See Chapter 2 of
the New York City Building Code.
            WHEEL MOUNTED CRANE (SINGLE CONTROL STATION). See Chapter 2 of the
New York City Building Code.
         SERVICE CRANE. A mobile crane utilized exclusively to perform one or
more of the following auxiliary tasks at a site: (1) repairing or maintaining
construction machinery, (2) delivering material within the confines of the
site, (3) moving material within the site to a central location so that it may
be lifted to the required areas of construction, or (4) moving within the site
matting, dunnage, or equivalent from one location to another. A service crane
does not include a crane used to make a delivery to the site by hoisting it
into the site from a point external to the site, or a crane used to hoist or
lower articles to or from a building or structure during the course of
construction or demolition.
         TOWER CRANE. See Chapter 2 of the New York City Building Code.
            CLIMBER CRANE. See Chapter 2 of the New York City Building Code.
            SELF-ERECTING TOWER CRANE. See Chapter 2 of the New York City
Building Code.
      CRANE OR DERRICK NOTICE ENGINEER. The engineer, licensed and registered
to practice the profession of engineering under the education law of the state
of New York, who filed the crane or derrick notice application.
      CRITICAL PICK. See Chapter 2 of the New York City Building Code.
      DEDICATED PILE DRIVER. See Chapter 2 of the New York City Building Code.
      DELIVERY. The dropping off or retrieval of materials or equipment to or
from a site. Delivery does not include the performance of any construction or
demolition work, including but not limited to holding steel, HVAC equipment,
hoist towers, scaffolding, sidewalk shed components, or any other loads in
place while they are bolted or otherwise affixed, or to the securing or
lowering materials during the course of demolition work.
      DERRICK. See Chapter 2 of the New York City Building Code.
         A-FRAME DERRICK. A derrick in which the boom is hinged from a cross
member between the bottom ends of two upright members spread apart at the lower
ends and joined at the top; the boom point secured to this junction of the side
members, and the side members are braced or guyed from the junction point.
         BASKET DERRICK. A derrick without a boom, similar to a gin pole with
its base supported by ropes attached to corner posts or other parts of the
structure. The base is at a lower elevation than its supports. The location of
the base of a basket derrick can be changed by varying the length of the rope
supports. The top of the pole is secured with multiple reeved guys to position
the top of the pole to the desired location by varying the length of the upper
guy lines. The load is raised and lowered by ropes through a sheave or block
secured to the top of the pole.
         BREAST DERRICK. A derrick without a boom. The mast consists of two
side members spread farther apart at the base than at the top and tied together
at top and bottom by rigid members. The mast is prevented from tipping forward
by guys connected to its top. The load is raised and lowered by ropes through a
sheave or block secured to the top crosspiece.
         CHICAGO BOOM DERRICK. A derrick with a boom which is attached to a
structure, an outside upright member of the structure serving as the mast, and
the boom being stepped in a fixed socket clamped to the upright. The derrick is
complete with toad, boom and boom point swing line falls.
         GIN POLE DERRICK. A derrick that consists of a boom without a mast and
which has guys arranged from its top to permit leaning the mast in one or more
directions. The load is lifted and lowered by ropes reeved through sheaves or
blocks at the top of the mast and the lower block.
         GUY DERRICK. A fixed derrick consisting of a mast capable of being
rotated, supported in a vertical position by guys, and a boom whose bottom end
is hinged or pivoted to move in a vertical plane with a reeved rope between the
head of the mast and the boom point for raising and lowering the boom, and a
reeved rope from the boom point for raising and lowering the load.
         SHEARLEG DERRICK. A derrick without a boom. The mast, wide at the
bottom and narrow at the top, is hinged at the bottom and has its top secured
by a multiple reeved guy to permit handling loads at various radii by means of
load tackle suspended from the mast top.
         STIFFLEG DERRICK. A derrick similar to a guy derrick except that the
mast is supported or held in place by two or more stiff members, called
stifflegs, which are capable of resisting either tensile or compressive forces.
Sills are generally provided to connect the lower ends of the stifflegs to the
foot of the mast.
      DIRECT AND CONTINUING SUPERVISION. See § 28-401.3 of the Administrative
Code.
      DISMANTLING. See Chapter 2 of the New York City Building Code.
      DRUM. See Chapter 2 of the New York City Building Code.
      DYNAMIC (loading). Loads introduced into the machine or its components by
forces in motion.
      ENGINEER. A person licensed and registered to practice the profession of
engineering under the education law of the state of New York; except that the
certifications for matters relating to the manufacturer's design and
applications for prototyping a crane or derrick may be made by an engineer who
is (1) employed full time by the crane or derrick manufacturer and (2) who is
licensed to practice the profession of engineering under the law of any state
or foreign jurisdiction, or who submits proof, acceptable to the commissioner,
of his or her professional qualifications.
      ERECTION. See Chapter 2 of the New York City Building Code.
      EXTENSION. See "Attachment."
      GANTRY (A-Frame). A structural frame, extending above the superstructure
of a crane, to which the boom support ropes are reeved.
      GUDGEON PIN. A pin connecting the mast cap to the mast, allowing rotation
of the mast.
      GUY. A rope used to steady or secure the mast or other members in the
desired position.
      HOISTING EQUIPMENT. See Chapter 2 of the New York City Building Code.
      HOISTING MACHINE. See Chapter 2 of the New York City Building Code.
      HOISTING MECHANISM. See Chapter 2 of the New York City Building Code.
      INDEPENDENT (peer reviewer). A person who does not engage in any
activities that may conflict with their objective judgement or integrity,
including but not limited to having a financial and/or other interest in the
design, construction, installation, manufacturer, or maintenance of the crane
or derrick they are reviewing.
      JIB. See Chapter 2 of the New York City Building Code.
      JUMP (jumping or climbing). See Chapter 2 of the New York City Building
Code.
      LAY. That distance measured along a wire rope in which one strand makes
one complete helical convolution about the core or center.
      LOAD (working). See Chapter 2 of the New York City Building Code.
      LOAD BLOCK (upper). See Chapter 2 of the New York City Building Code.
      LOAD BLOCK (lower). See Chapter 2 of the New York City Building Code.
      LOAD HOIST. A hoist drum and rope reeving system used for hoisting and
lowering loads.
      LOAD INDICATOR. A device that measures the weight of the load.
      LOAD MOMENT INDICATOR. A system that aids the operator by sensing
(directly or indirectly) the overturning moment of the crane or derrick. It
compares this lifting condition to the equipment's rated capacity, and
indicates to the operator the percentage of capacity at which the equipment is
working.
      LOAD MOMENT LIMITER. A system which aids the operator by sensing
(directly or indirectly) the overturning moment of the crane or derrick. It
compares this lifting condition to the equipment's rated capacity, and when the
rated capacity is reached, it shuts off power to those equipment functions
which can increase the severity of loading on the equipment.
      LOAD RATINGS. See Chapter 2 of the New York City Building Code.
      LOAD RATING CHART. See Chapter 2 of the New York City Building Code.
      MAJOR BUILDING. See Chapter 2 of the New York City Building Code.
      MANUFACTURER. A person, firm, or corporation that (i) builds or
assembles, or has built or assembled, a crane or derrick, (ii) may lawfully
sell and/or distribute such crane or derrick under its own name or trademark,
and (iii) provides, either by itself or through authorized representatives,
replacement parts, service support, technical support, safety bulletins, and
recall notices for such crane or derrick.
      MAST (derrick). The upright member of a derrick.
      MAST (boom). A frame hinged at or near the boom hinge for use in
connection with supporting a boom. The head of the mast is usually supported
and raised or lowered by the boom hoist ropes.
      MAST (jib). A frame hinged at or near the boom point for use in
connection with supporting a jib.
      MAST (tower). See "Tower."
      OPERATION (OPERATED). Any work or activity performed by a crane or
derrick, including but not limited to the lifting, lowering, or swinging of
loads.
      OUTRIGGERS (crane). See Chapter 2 of the New York City Building Code.
      PILE DRIVER. See Chapter 2 of the New York City Building Code.
      QUALIFIED (peer reviewer). A New York State professional engineer who has
the education, training, and experience required for the design of structures
of a similar complexity and size as the crane or derrick notice application to
be peer reviewed and to perform a complete review of the means, methods, and
design proposed by the crane or derrick notice engineer.
      QUALIFIED PERSON. See Chapter 2 of the New York City Building Code.
      REEVING. A rope system in which the rope travels around drums and
sheaves.
      REGISTERED DESIGN PROFESSIONAL. An architect or engineer.
      RIGGING FOREMAN. See 1 RCNY §
104-20.
      ROPE. See Chapter 2 of the New York City Building Code.
      ROTATING TELEHANDLER. See Chapter 2 of the New York City Building Code.
      SIDE LOADING. A load applied at an angle to the vertical plane of the
boom.
      SILL. A member connecting the foot block and stiffleg or a member
connecting the lower ends of a double member mast.
      STANDING (GUY) ROPE. A supporting rope which maintains a constant
distance between the points of attachment to the two components connected by
the rope.
      SUPERSTRUCTURE. See Chapter 2 of the New York City Building Code.
      SWING. See Chapter 2 of the New York City Building Code.
      SWING MECHANISM. The machinery involved in providing rotation of the
superstructure.
      TACKLE. An assembly of ropes and sheaves arranged for hoisting and
pulling.
      TELEHANDLER. See Chapter 2 of the New York City Building Code.
      TELESCOPIC BOOM. A boom constructed of sections of diminishing cross
sections in which the sections fit within each other. The boom may be extended
in a manner similar to a telescope.
      TRANSIT. See Chapter 2 of the New York City Building Code.
      TRAVEL. See Chapter 2 of the New York City Building Code.
      TRAVEL MECHANISM. The machinery involved in providing travel power.
      TWO-BLOCKING. A condition in which the lower load block or hook assembly
comes into contact with the upper load block or boom point sheave assembly.
      WHEEL BASE. Distance between centers of front and rear axles. For a
multiple axle assembly the axle center wheel base measurement is taken as the
midpoint of the assembly.
      WHIPLINE. A separate hoist rope system of lighter load capacity and
higher speed than provided by the main hoist.
      WINCH HEAD. A power driven spool for handling of loads by means of
friction between fiber or wire rope and spool.
   (c)   Permit and notification requirements for cranes and derricks. 
      (1)   Certificates of approval, operation, and on-site inspection. Cranes
and derricks must possess a certificate of approval, certificate of operation,
and certificate of on-site inspection when required by Section 3319 of the
Building Code.
      Exceptions: 
         1.   A certificate of on-site inspection is not required for:
            1.1   A pile driver that:
               1.1.1   Is set up and operated entirely within a site that is
closed to the public; and
               1.1.2   Does not impart a load on the ground in excess of 500
psf (23.94 kPa), including the load of the platform, matting, or dunnage
utilized to support the equipment.
            1.2   A clamshell that:
               1.2.1   Is set up and operated entirely within a site that is
closed to the public;
               1.2.2   Is set up and operated at locations within the site that
are set back from the edge of the excavation by a distance that is equal to or
greater than the depth of the excavation; and
               1.2.3   Does not impart a load on the ground in excess of 500
psf (23.94 kPa), including the load of the platform, matting, or dunnage
utilized to support the equipment.
            1.3   A mobile crane that has a boom length of 135 feet (41.15 m)
or less, and is utilized at the site exclusively to:
               1.3.1   Install, adjust, maintain, repair, or remove a sidewalk
shed; or
               1.3.2   Install or dismantle the initial level of a single or
dual cab hoist, provided:
                  1.3.2.1   Such installation or dismantling is limited to the
hoist cars, counterweights, and initial mast sections needed for the car;
                  1.3.2.2   Car or motor components to be hoisted are equipped
with lifting lugs; and
                  1.3.2.3   No object is hoisted more than 20 feet (6.1 m)
above the bed of the delivery truck during such installation or dismantling
operation.
         2.   A certificate of on-site inspection is not required for a mobile
crane that is utilized under the direct and continuing supervision of a
licensed master rigger, provided:
            2.1   Onsite supervision is provided by the licensee or a master
rigging foreman, except that for a critical pick the licensee must provide the
onsite supervision;
            2.2   A drawing indicating pertinent site features, obstacles, and
restrictions, the location and configuration of the crane at the site, required
matting or dunnage, and pedestrian and traffic control to be provided as per
the requirements of the Department of Transportation, is prepared by or on
behalf of the licensed master rigger and kept at the site, available to the
commissioner upon request;
            2.3   The licensed master rigger is responsible for ensuring
compliance with the drawing; and
            2.4   Such mobile crane:
               2.4.1   Does not exceed 250 feet (76.2 m) in boom length,
including jibs and any other attachments;
               2.4.2   Is utilized for work that is not related to the
construction of a new building, the full demolition of an existing building, or
the vertical or horizontal enlargement of an existing building, including but
not limited to the installation or removal of boilers or tanks at a new
building, full demolition, or vertical or horizontal enlargement site;
               2.4.3   In all conditions of loading, is provided with adequate
footing so as to not exceed the bearing capacity of the ground or subsurface
elements;
               2.4.4   Does not impose a bearing pressure, including dunnage,
exceeding 3,500 psf (167.85 kPa);
               2.4.5   Is not set up on a vault or similar subsurface
structure;
               2.4.6   Is not set up on a steel platform, excluding mats or
dunnage at the street or ground level; and
               2.4.7   Is not set up and operated in a location that requires
approval of the New York City Transit Authority.
         3.   Provided an engineer, licensed and registered to practice the
profession of engineering under the education law of the state of New York,
files an on-site waiver with the department on behalf of the equipment user,
supported by plans and calculations upon request, certifying compliance with
the items specified below, a certificate of on-site inspection is not required
for:
            3.1   A mobile crane that:
               3.1.1   Is located at the site for no more than 48 hours;
               3.1.2   Does not exceed 160 feet (48.76 m) in boom length,
including jibs and any other attachments;
               3.1.3   Is set up and operated entirely within a safety zone
where the distance from the crane to the boundary of the safety zone is equal
to or greater than the length of the boom, jib, and any other attachments, and
all areas and structures within the safety zone are closed to the public; and
               3.1.4   In all conditions of loading, is provided with adequate
footing so as to not exceed the bearing capacity of the ground or subsurface
elements.
            3.2   A service crane that:
               3.2.1   Is set up and operated entirely within a site that is
closed to the public;
               3.2.2   Does not exceed 110 feet (33.53 m) in boom length,
including jibs and any other attachments; and
               3.2.3   In all conditions of loading, is provided with adequate
footing so as to not exceed the bearing capacity of the ground or subsurface
elements.
            3.3   A pile driver or clamshell that:
               3.3.1   Is set up and operated entirely within a site that is
closed to the public;
               3.3.2   Imparts a load on the ground in excess of 500 psf (23.94
kPa) but not exceeding 2,500 psf (119.7 kPa), including the load of the
platform, matting, or dunnage utilized to support the equipment;
               3.3.3   In all conditions of loading, is provided with adequate
footing so as to not exceed the bearing capacity of the ground or subsurface
elements; and
               3.3.4   Is set up on ground that is able to support the load, as
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the department on the basis of borings
filed by the engineer.
         4.   A certificate of on-site inspection is only required for a
rotating telehandler, or an articulating boom crane attached to a commercial
truck chassis, when specified by paragraph (14) of subdivision (g) of this
section.
         5.   Prior to January 1, 2028, a certificate of operation is not
required for a rotating telehandler, nor for an articulating boom crane
attached to a commercial truck chassis.
         6.   Prior to January 1, 2028, a certificate of approval is not
required for a rotating telehandler, nor for an articulating boom crane
attached to a commercial truck chassis.
         7.   On and after January 1, 2028, a certificate of approval is not
required for a rotating telehandler, nor for an articulating boom crane
attached to a commercial truck chassis, that does not require a certificate of
on-site inspection.
      (2)   Temporary construction equipment permit. A temporary construction
equipment permit is required for:
         (i)   A mobile crane that meets exception numbers 3 or 4 of Section
3319.3 of the New York City Building code, but does not meet any other
exception of Section 3319.3 of the New York City Building code, and is used in
conjunction with the construction, alteration, or demolition of a building.
         (ii)   Cranes and derricks with a manufacturer's rated capacity of 1
ton (907 kg) or less and used in conjunction with the installation, alteration,
maintenance, repair, or removal of a building, building systems, or equipment
located on a building.
         (iii)   Rotating telehandlers, or articulating boom cranes attached to
a commercial truck chassis, when specified by paragraph (14) of subdivision (g)
of this section.
      (3)   Noncompliance. Where a crane or derrick requiring one or more of
the certificates, on-site waivers, or permits is found not to be in compliance
with one or more of the required certificates, on-site waivers, or permits, the
use of such crane or derrick must cease. The crane or derrick must not be used
until it has been brought into conformance with the certificates, on-site
waivers, or permits, or amended certificates, on-site waivers, or permits have
been issued by the department to reflect the state of the crane or derrick.
      (4)   Construction documents. Plans, calculations, inspection reports,
and other documents filed in conjunction with a certificate of approval,
certificate of operation, certificate of on-site inspection, on-site waiver, or
temporary construction equipment permit are considered to be construction
documents subject to the provisions of Article 104 of Title 28 of the
Administrative Code. Expect as otherwise specified, the terms "approval" or
"approved" in conjunction with such plans, calculations, inspection reports,
and other documents will also mean "acceptance" or "accepted."
      (5)   Notification. 
         (i)   Notification prior to certain activities. For a crane or derrick
that requires a certificate of on-site inspection or an on-site waiver, or that
is used under the direct and continuing supervision of a licensed master
rigger, the equipment user must notify the department at least one day, but no
more than two days, before an activity listed below:
            (A)   The arrival of the crane or derrick at the site;
            (B)   Any assembly/disassembly operation; except that for the
erection, climbing, jumping, or dismantling of tower crane, the notification
requirements of Section 3319.8.4 of the Building Code instead apply; or
            (C)   The pouring of a concrete foundation for a tower crane.
         (ii)   Cancellation and rescheduling of notification. If a scheduled
activity pursuant to subparagraph (i) of this paragraph above is canceled after
a notification is made to the department, the equipment user must notify the
department no later than the date for which the activity was scheduled. The
equipment user must notify the department of the new intended commencement date
at least one day but no more than two days before such activity.
         (iii)   Notification of departure of equipment. For a crane or derrick
that requires a certificate of on-site inspection or an on-site waiver, or that
is used under the direct and continuing supervision of a licensed master
rigger, the equipment user must notify the department of the departure of the
crane or derrick from the site no more than two days following such departure.
            Exception: Where the crane or derrick is anticipated to be at the
site for 48 hours or less, notification of departure of the equipment pursuant
to this subparagraph is not required provided the anticipated short duration of
the crane or derrick at the site is indicated at the time of notification
pursuant to subparagraph (i) of this paragraph. However, if the job extends for
more than 48 hours, the department must be immediately notified of such
extension, and notification of the departure of the equipment pursuant to this
subparagraph is required.
         (iv)   Notification of operator. The department must be notified of
the licensed hosting machine operator or operators authorized to operate the
crane or derrick, or to supervise a learner on the crane or derrick, prior to
the commencement of their operation or supervision.
            Exception: Notification is not required for a crane or derrick that
does not require a certificate of on-site inspection.
   (d)   Certificate of approval. Certificates of approval must comply with the
requirements of Section 3319.4 of the New York City Building Code and the
following.
      (1)   Application for a certificate of approval. To request a certificate
of approval in accordance with Section 3319.4 of the New York City Building
Code, a prototype application must be filed on behalf of the manufacturer or
equipment owner by an engineer who meets the requirements of paragraph (2) of
subdivision (d) of this section. The application and all associated content
must be provided in English, with United States customary units, or where
acceptable to the commissioner, metric units. When required by the department,
the application must be submitted in an electronic format acceptable to the
commissioner. The application must include the following information:
         (i)   Manuals. One or more manufacturer-furnished manuals, as
necessary, to supply the information listed below. Required information is
generic and does not have to provide specific part or model numbers:
            (A)   All configurations for which approval is sought.
            (B)   Overall dimensions of the crane or derrick, including for the
boom, mast, jib, and attachments, or individual sections thereof, for which
approval is sought.
            (C)   Where applicable, information on the carrier type, overall
carrier length and width, and tailswing, both with outriggers extended and
without.
            (D)   Rope information, including cable sizes and the number of
drums, for both the main hoist line and the whipline.
            (E)   A generic listing of all safety devices and operational aids
provided with the crane or derrick.
            (F)   Required configurations and procedures to secure the crane or
derrick for unattended or out-of-service conditions. For a tower crane, other
than a self-erecting tower crane, this must include boom configurations for
weathervaning, information or limitations/prohibitions on locking or
restricting the boom, and procedures to secure the tower crane in advance of a
hurricane type wind event.
            (G)   For a tower crane, other than a self-erecting tower crane,
erection, jumping, climbing, and dismantling procedures. Torque values for all
bolted connections located on the crane and installed or modified during such
work must be included. Collar details and information on how to support,
install, and dismantle the collar must also be provided.
            (H)   For all cranes or derricks, other than a tower crane that is
not a self-erecting tower crane, assembly, disassembly, and travel procedures,
including, as applicable, installation and removal procedures for all
attachments for which approval is sought. Torque values for all bolted
connections installed or modified during crane set up or the installation of an
attachment must be included.
            (I)   Operating instructions.
            (J)   Inspection criteria, including a schedule of manufacturer-
recommended inspections.
            (K)   Maintenance criteria, including a schedule of manufacturer-
recommended maintenance.
         (ii)   Brochure. A manufacturer-furnished advertising brochure or
drawing showing the general configuration and specifications for which approval
is sought.
         (iii)   Load rating charts. Manufacturer-furnished load rating charts
showing each configuration for which approval is sought.
         (iv)   Inspection checklists. Manufacturer-furnished checklists for
the inspection of the crane or derrick. Such checklists must account for all
components for which approval is sought and all phases of the manufacturer's
recommended schedule of inspections, for example, daily, monthly, and annual.
         (v)   Maintenance checklists. Manufacturer-furnished checklists for
the maintenance of the crane or derrick. Such checklists must account for all
components for which approval is sought and all phases of the manufacturer's
recommended schedule of maintenance, for example, daily, monthly, and annual.
         (vi)   Listing of components. Manufacturer-furnished list of all
components for which approval is sought. The list is generic and does not have
to provide specific part or model numbers. The list must also be accompanied
by:
            (A)   For a tower crane, other than a self-erecting tower crane,
manufacturer-furnished drawings indicating the weight, dimensions, center of
gravity, and lifting points for the boom, mast, jib, collar, and all
attachments, or individual sections thereof, for which approval is sought.
            (B)   For all cranes or derricks, other than a tower crane that is
not a self-erecting tower crane, manufacturer-furnished drawings indicating, as
applicable, the weight, dimensions, center of gravity, and lifting points for
the lattice boom, jib, and all attachments, or individual sections thereof, for
which approval is sought.
            (C)   In addition to the provisions of clauses (A) and (B) above,
for a crane or derrick with a telescoping boom, manufacturer-furnished drawings
indicating the weight, dimensions, and center of gravity for the entire crane
or derrick with the boom fully retracted and fully extended.
         (vii)   Counterweight tables. Manufacturer-furnished table of all
counterweight combinations and counterweight attachments for each configuration
for which approval is sought.
         (viii)   Tables of allowable installation and use. 
            (A)   Tower cranes, other than self-erecting tower cranes. For
tower cranes, other than self-erecting tower cranes, the manufacturer must
submit tables that include the following data for the tower crane at its
maximum free standing height in each separate standard configuration indicated
in the submitted load rating charts:
               1.   The maximum in-service moment, based on a 45 mph in-service
wind.
               2.   The maximum out-of-service moment, based on a 98 mph out-
of-service wind.
               3.   The slewing moment, based on a 45 mph in-service wind.
               4.   Corresponding vertical loads at the foundation.
            Such data must be calculated in accordance with ASCE 7-2005, and be
provided at Exposures B, C, and D. The maximum free standing height must be
clearly indicated, and must be based on a 98 mph out-of-service wind, or a 45
mph in-service wind when such in-service wind produces a lower free standing
height.
            Special conditions in which the crane may not be used or installed
(e.g. crane configuration, height, exposure, etc.) must be clearly indicated.
            (B)   All other cranes and derricks. For all cranes or derricks,
other than tower cranes that are not self-erecting tower cranes, the
manufacturer must provide tables showing the maximum in-service and out-of-
service boom, mast and attachment lengths for each configuration for which
approval is sought.
         (ix)   Technical certification. A certification from the engineer who
files the prototype application that:
            (A)   The crane or derrick for which approval is sought was
designed and constructed in accordance with an applicable standard listed in
paragraph (1) of subdivision (e) of this section. The standard and the year of
the standard utilized must be noted.
            (B)   The manuals and load rating charts filed as part of the
prototype application are in accordance with the requirements of paragraph (2)
of subdivision (e) of this section.
            (C)   For a tower crane, other than a self-erecting tower crane,
the data provided per subparagraph (viii) of paragraph (1) of subdivision (d)
of this section conforms to ASCE 7-2005.
            (D)   For a crane, the crane, in all configurations for which
approval is sought, successfully passed the prototype testing required by
paragraph (3) of subdivision (e) of this section.
         (x)   Contact information. The manufacturer must supply contact
information for the following:
            (A)   Technical questions. For technical questions, an individual,
employed full-time by the manufacturer, who is authorized by the manufacturer
to provide answers to technical questions related to the crane or derrick.
            (B)   Service questions. For service questions, a 24/7 telephone
hotline that is maintained or authorized by the manufacturer.
            (C)   Service support. For jobsite service support, a manufacturer
authorized service center, distributor, or authorized service provider located
within a four hour travel window of New York City, which must be able to
dispatch a factory trained service technician to New York City in the event of
an emergency or major malfunction, as determined by the department, with the
crane or derrick.
         (xi)   Safety bulletins and recall notices. Certification from the
manufacturer that safety bulletins and recall notices for the crane or derrick
will be provided in accordance with paragraph (6) of subdivision (d) of this
section.
         (xii)   ISO certification. The manufacturer must certify that it
possesses the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), or
equivalent, certification required by paragraph (4) of subdivision (c) of this
section. A copy of the ISO certification, or equivalent, must be submitted.
      (2)   Engineer. The engineer who files the application for the
certificate of approval must be either:
         (i)   A full-time employee of the manufacturer who is licensed to
practice the profession of engineering under the law of any state or foreign
jurisdiction, or who submits proof, acceptable to the commissioner, of his or
her professional qualifications; or
         (ii)   A person licensed and registered to practice the profession of
engineering under the education law of the state of New York.
      (3)   Issuance of the certificate of approval. Upon approval of the
prototype application, the department will issue an initial certificate of
approval for the crane or derrick. The manuals, load rating charts, and other
information submitted with the prototype application and accepted by the
department are considered part of the certificate of approval.
      (4)   Amendments to the certificate of approval. 
         (i)   When required. A certificate of approval must be amended in any
of the following circumstances:
            (A)   Information provided in the load rating charts is no longer
valid or will be altered.
            (B)   A configuration that was not provided for in the certificate
of approval will be utilized.
            (C)   A component that was not provided for in the certificate of
approval will be utilized. This includes, but is not limited to, components
that have weights, dimensions, centers of gravity, or lifting points that are
different from those listed in the certificate of approval.
            (D)   Information supplied per subparagraph (vii) of paragraph (1)
of subdivision (d) of this section is no longer valid or will be altered.
            (E)   For a crane or derrick whose initial certificate of approval
was issued on or after January 1, 2016, information supplied per subparagraph
(viii) of paragraph (1) of subdivision (d) of this section is no longer valid
or will be altered.
         (ii)   Amendment request. A request to amend a certificate of approval
must be filed:
            (A)   On behalf of the manufacturer. On behalf of the manufacturer
by an engineer who meets the requirements of paragraph (2) of subdivision (d)
of this section; or
            (B)   On behalf of the owner. On behalf of the equipment owner by
an engineer licensed and registered to practice the profession of engineering
under the education law of the state of New York, provided:
               1.   The manufacturer is no longer in business; or
               2.   The equipment owner has submitted to the manufacturer a
detailed description of the proposed amendment, and has asked the manufacturer
to request the amendment, but:
                  A.   The manufacturer has not rejected the request. A
rejection must be in the form of a written explanation from the manufacturer
that rejects the request and explains the reasons for the rejection; and
                  B.   The manufacturer declines to review the request; or
                  C.   The manufacturer, within 30 days of the request, fails
to acknowledge the request or initiate a review of the request; or
                  D.   The manufacturer acknowledges the request or begins a
review of the request, but, within 120 days of the request, fails to submit an
amendment to the department.
         (iii)   Content of amendment request. Amendment requests, and all
associated content, must be provided in English, with United States customary
units, or where acceptable to the commissioner, metric units. When required by
the department, the application must be submitted in an electronic format
acceptable to the commissioner. The amendment request must include the
following information:
            (A)   A listing of revisions to the certificate of approval
necessary to accord with the proposed amendment.
            (B)   Where load ratings are altered, revised load rating charts,
along with a certification from the engineer who files the amendment request
that the revised load rating charts are in accordance with the requirements of
paragraph (2) of subdivision (e) of this section.
            (C)   Where applicable, revised component information in accordance
with subparagraph (vi) of paragraph (1) of subdivision (d) of this section.
            (D)   Where applicable, revised counterweight information in
accordance with subparagraph (vii) of paragraph (1) of subdivision (d) of this
section.
            (E)   Where applicable, revised data in accordance with
subparagraph (viii) of paragraph (1) of subdivision (d) of this section. For a
tower crane, other than a self-erecting tower crane, the engineer who files the
amendment request must certify that the revised data conforms to ASCE 7-2005.
            (F)   Where changes are made that decrease the structural stability
or structural strength of a crane, or increase the loads or stresses upon the
crane, including but not limited to adding configurations, booms, or jibs,
certification from the engineer who files the amendment request that the crane,
as proposed to be amended, has successfully passed the prototype testing
required by paragraph (3) of subdivision (e) of this section.
            (G)   In addition to the requirements of clauses (A) through (F)
above, where the amendment request is filed on behalf of the manufacturer, any
other supplements, as applicable, to the certificate of approval in accordance
with paragraph (5) of subdivision (d) of this section.
            (H)   In addition to the requirements of clauses (A) through (F)
above, where the amendment request is filed on behalf of the equipment owner:
               1.   A certification from the equipment owner that the
manufacturer is no longer in business; or a copy of the request made to the
manufacturer, along with any response from the manufacturer, as required by
item 2 of clause (B) of subparagraph (ii) of paragraph (4) of subdivision (d)
of this section.
               2.   When any information in the manufacturer's supplied manuals
has to be revised, one or more revised manuals, as necessary, along with a
certification from the engineer who files the amendment request that the
revised manuals are in accordance with the requirements of paragraph (2) of
subdivision (e) of this section. Deviations and modifications from the
manufacturer's original materials must be clearly indicated.
               3.   When any of the checklists required by subparagraphs (iv)
or (v) of paragraph (1) of subdivision (d) of this section has to be revised,
one or more revised checklists, as necessary. Deviations and modifications from
the manufacturer's original materials must be clearly indicated.
               4.   Certification from the engineer who files the amendment
request, based upon a review of the design calculations and testing of the
crane or derrick manufacturer by the engineer, or by sufficient calculations
made by the engineer, or by testing acceptable to the commissioner, that:
                  A.   The manufacturer's original safety factor of the
equipment is not reduced by the proposed amendment.
                  B.   The crane or derrick, as proposed to be modified by the
amendment, complies with the applicable design and construction standard for
the crane or derrick, as listed in paragraph (1) of subdivision (e) of this
section.
               5.   Plates, tags, and decals as necessary to accord with the
proposed amendment, along with instructions for their use. Such items must be
developed, signed, and sealed by the engineer who files the request for the
amendment.
               6.   Certification from the engineer who files the request for
amendment that the engineer approves the modification/addition stipulated in
the amendment, and specifies the equipment configuration to which the approval
applies.
               7.   Certification from the equipment owner that such owner will
comply with the provisions of the amendment, including but not limited to
ensuring their cranes or derricks which utilize the amendment are provided with
the revised load rating charts and manuals, as well as plates, tags, and decals
as necessary to accord with the proposed amendment.
         (iv)   Issuance. Upon approval of the amendment by the department, the
department will issue an amended certificate of approval for the crane or
derrick.
            (A)   Special provisions for an amendment filed by an equipment
owner. Where an amendment request is filed by an equipment owner on or after
January 1, 2016, only equipment owned by such owner may utilize the amendment.
However, nothing in this clause will prohibit a separate equipment owner from
filing, and the department approving, a separate amendment covering the same
material.
      (5)   Manufacturer supplements to the certificate of approval. When
required by subparagraphs (i) through (iv) below, the manufacturer must provide
supplements to the certificate of approval. Such supplements, and all
associated content, must be provided in English, with United States customary
units, or where acceptable to the commissioner, metric units. When required by
the department, the supplement must be submitted in an electronic format
acceptable to the commissioner. Supplements must be filed by an engineer who
meets the requirements of paragraph (2) of subdivision (d) of this section. No
fee will be charged to file a supplement. When accepted by the department, a
supplement will be considered pari of the certificate of approval; except that
any supplement filed under the provisions of subparagraph (iv) below will be
applicable only for the specific job detailed in the certificate of on-site
inspection.
         (i)   Manual updates. When the manufacturer revises any of the
information required by subparagraph (i) of paragraph (1) of subdivision (d) of
this section, the manufacturer must provide to the department one or more
revised manuals, as necessary. The engineer who files the revised manual must
certify that the manual is in accordance with the requirements of paragraph (2)
of subdivision (e) of this section.
         (ii)   Updates to inspection and maintenance checklists. When the
manufacturer revises any of the checklists required by subparagraphs (iv) or
(v) of paragraph (1) of subdivision (d) of this section, the manufacturer must
provide to the department one or more revised checklists, as necessary.
               Exception. Cranes or derricks whose initial certificate of
approval was issued prior to January 1, 2016.
         (iii)   Contact information updates. When any manufacturer contact
information required by subparagraph (x) of paragraph (1) of subdivision (d) of
this section changes, the manufacturer must provide updated points of contact
within five (5) business days of the change.
            (A)   Exception. Cranes or derricks whose initial certificate of
approval was issued prior to January 1, 2016.
            (B)   No manufacturer support. Where there is no manufacturer to
support a crane or derrick, the certificate of approval will remain valid.
         (iv)   Site specific wind analysis for a tower crane. For a tower
crane, other than a self-erecting tower crane, the manufacturer must submit a
site specific wind analysis to the department prior to the approval of the
crane or derrick notice application. Such analysis must:
            (A)   Cover each configuration for which crane or derrick notice
application approval is sought;
            (B)   Be based upon the following information, with such
information submitted to the manufacturer by the engineer who files the crane
or derrick notice application:
               1.   Project address;
               2.   Crane make and model;
               3.   Maximum lifting capacity;
               4.   Distance of the crane from the building;
               5.   Proposed tie-in spacing;
               6.   Elevations and sections detailing the location and
configuration of the crane at the site, in both plan view and elevation view,
with dimensions indicated;
               7.   Where an environmental load reduction is utilized in
accordance with Chapter 16 of the New York City Building Code:
                  7.1.   A copy of the action plan required by Chapter 16 of
the New York City Building Code;
                  7.2.   Proposed tie-in spacing for the action plan
configuration; and
                  7.3.   Elevations and sections detailing the action plan
configuration of the crane at the site, in both plan view and elevation view,
with dimensions indicated.
               8.   New York City wind load conditions, including exposure
category and height distribution of the wind. Such information must be in
accordance with Chapter 16 of the New York City Building Code, and based on the
following:
                  8.1.   An in-service wind speed of at least 45 mph;
                  8.2.   An out-of-service wind speed that is not less than
that allowed by Chapter 16 of the New York City Building Code; and
                  8.3.   Where an environmental load reduction is utilized in
accordance with Chapter 16 of the New York City Building Code, an out-of-
service wind speed equal to that required by Chapter 16 of the New York City
Building Code for the full, unreduced, design wind speed.
            (C)   Contain the following information from the manufacturer for
the given in-service, out-of-service, and, where applicable, full, unreduced,
design wind speed at the center of the tower:
               1.   Wind load base shear.
               2.   Wind load overturning moment at the base.
               3.   Vertical loads at the base.
               4.   Overturning moment at the base center due to vertical
loads.
               5.   Maximum tower and boom displacements due to wind.
               6.   The slewing moment.
            (D)   Contain a certification from the manufacturer that the
information provided per clause (C) above is based on the information provided
by the engineer per clause (B) above;
            (E)   Contain a certification from the manufacturer that, in
accordance with the requirements of the standard listed in the certificate of
approval for the design and construction of the crane (e.g. ASME B30-3 or EN
14439), the boom, mast, jib, attachments, and working deck of the crane will
sustain the wind loads specified in (B)(8) above; and
            (F)   Note any special conditions in which the crane may not be
used or installed (e.g. crane configuration, height, exposure, etc.).
      (6)   Safety bulletins and recall notices. The department will provide to
each manufacturer a list containing the serial numbers of all cranes and
derricks registered in New York City manufactured by such manufacturer. The
manufacturer in turn must provide to the department all safety bulletins and
recall notices issued by such manufacturer related to cranes and derricks found
on the list provided by the Department when the safety bulletin or recall
notice is issued. No fee will be charged to file such bulletin or notice with
the department.
         Safety bulletins and recall notices will not be considered part of a
crane or derrick's certificate of approval and will not impact the validity of
any such certificate. The department may require proof that a crane or derrick
with a certificate of operation or a certificate of on-site inspection, or a
crane or derrick for which such certificate(s) are sought complies with the
safety bulletin or recall notice.
      (7)   ISO certification. If the manufacturer loses its International
Organization for Standardization (ISO), or equivalent, certification for the
make and model of the crane or derrick, this loss must be reported to the
department within ten (10) business days after it occurs.
            Exception. Cranes or derricks whose initial certificate of approval
was issued prior to January 1, 2016.
      (8)   Current certificate of approval holders. Any crane or derrick that
conforms with a previously issued, currently valid certificate of approval need
not apply for a new certificate of approval.
      (9)   Previously issued temporary certificates of approval. Temporary
certificates of approval issued prior to January 1, 2016, are deemed to be
approved as an initial certificate of approval, retroactive to the date of
issuance of the temporary certificate of approval, provided such temporary
certificate of approval was not otherwise revoked prior to January 1, 2016, and
provided that the prototype application for such temporary certificate of
approval contained a certification from the manufacturer of the crane or
derrick, or a person licensed and registered to practice the profession of
engineering under the education law of the state of New York, that the crane or
derrick was designed and constructed in accordance with one of the standards
listed in clauses (A) through (F) of subparagraph (i) of paragraph (1) of
subdivision (e) of this section.
      (10)   Suspension or revocation of a certificate of approval. The
department may suspend or revoke a certificate of approval in accordance with §
28-105.10 of the New York City Administrative Code.
   (e)   Standards. 
      (1)   Design and construction standards. 
         (i)   Design and construction standards for cranes or derricks whose
prototype application is submitted on or after January 1, 2016. Cranes and
derricks, and their components, whose prototype application is submitted on or
after January 1, 2016 must, in their entirety, be designed and constructed in
accordance with the following:
            (A)   Mobile cranes, other than an articulating boom crane. For a
mobile crane, other than an articulating boom crane, ASME B30.5 (2004, 2007,
2011, or 2014 editions), or EN 13000 (2004, 2010, or 2014 editions).
            (B)   Tower cranes, other than a self-erecting tower crane. For a
tower crane, other than a self-erecting tower crane, ASME B30.3 (2004, 2009,
2012, or 2016 editions'), or EN 14439 (2006 or 2009 editions).
            (C)   Derricks. For a derrick, ASME B30.6 (2003, 2010, or 2015
editions).
            (D)   Articulating boom crane. For an articulating boom crane, ASME
B30.22 (2005, 2010, or 2016 editions).
            (E)   Self-erecting tower crane. For a self-erecting tower crane,
ASME B30.29 (2012 edition), or EN 14439 (2009 edition).
            (F)   Dedicated pile drivers. EN 996 (2009 or 2014 editions) or EN
16228 (2014 edition).
            (G)   Equivalent standards. For any type of crane or derrick, such
other standard as the commissioner deems equivalent to the ASME or EN standards
listed above.
         (ii)   Design and construction standards for cranes and derricks whose
prototype application was submitted prior to January 1, 2016. Cranes and
derricks, and their components, whose prototype application was submitted prior
to January 1, 2016 must have been designed and constructed in accordance with
the following:
            (A)   Mobile cranes manufactured prior to October 1, 2006 and whose
prototype application was submitted prior to October 1, 2006. Mobile cranes,
and their components-manufactured prior to October 1, 2006 and whose prototype
application was submitted prior to October 1, 2006 must, in their entirety, be
designed and constructed in accordance with ASME B30.5-1968.
            (B)   Mobile cranes manufactured on or after October 1, 2006 and
whose prototype application was submitted on or after October 1, 2006 but prior
to January 1,2016. Mobile cranes, and their components, manufactured on or
after October 1, 2006 and whose prototype application was submitted on or after
October 1, 2006 but prior to January 1, 2016, must, in their entirety, be
designed and constructed in accordance with ASME B30.5 – 2004 Chapter 5-
1 except Section 5-1.9.9, or EN 13000 (2004) except Section 4.2.6.
            (C)   Mobile cranes manufactured prior to October 1, 2006 and whose
prototype application was submitted on or after October 1, 2006 but prior to
January 1, 2016. Mobile cranes, and their components, manufactured before
October 1, 2006 and whose prototype application was submitted on or after
October 1, 2006 but prior to January 1, 2016, must, in their entirety, be
designed and constructed in accordance with one of the following standards:
               (i)   ASME B30.5 – 2004 Chapter 5-1 except Section 5-1.9.9;
               (ii)   ASME B30.5 – 2000 Chapter 5-1 except Section 5-1.9.9;
               (iii)   ASME B30.5 – 1994 Chapter 5-1 except Section 5-1.9.9;
               (iv)   ASME B30.5 – 1989 Chapter 5-1 except Section 5-1.9.9;
               (v)   ASME B30.5 – 1982 Chapter 5-1 except Section 5-1.9.9;
               (vi)   EN 13000 (2004) except Section 4.2.6; or
               (vii)   Such other standard as the Commissioner deems
appropriate.
      (2)   Manuals and load rating chart standards. Manuals and load rating
charts for cranes and derricks must be in English, with United States customary
units, or where acceptable to the commissioner, metric units, and be in
accordance with an applicable standard listed in paragraph (1) of subdivision
(e) of this section. Manuals and load rating charts must also include manual or
chart numbers, and page numbers.
         (i)   De-rating. Load rating charts, and amendments to load rating
charts, submitted on or after January 1, 2016, may not be de-rated to
circumvent licensing provisions, or to meet exemptions contained within this
section or within the New York City Construction Codes.
      (3)   Prototype testing standards. 
         (i)   Prototype testing of mobile cranes submitted prior to October 1,
2006. A prototype of each mobile crane, and their components, submitted before
October 1, 2006 must be tested for strength and stability in accordance with
ASME B30.5-1968. Lattice boom cranes must also be tested in accordance with SAE
J987 - 1967 and all mobile cranes with lattice or telescopic booms must also be
tested in accordance with SAE J765 - 1990.
         (ii)   Prototype testing of mobile cranes submitted on or after
October 1, 2006. A prototype of each mobile crane, and their components-
submitted on or after October 1, 2006 must meet the prototype testing
requirements in Test Option A or Test Option B as outlined below:
            (A)   Test Option A; SAE J1063 or SAE J987, 
               1.   The following applies to equipment with cantilevered booms
(such as telescopic boom cranes): All tests listed in SAE J1063 - 1993, Table
1, must be performed to load all critical structural elements to their
respective limits. All the strength margins listed in SAE J1063 - 1993. Table 2
must be met.
               2.   The following applies to equipment with pendant supported
lattice booms: All the tests listed in SAE J987-2003. Table 1, must be
performed to load all critical structural elements to their respective limits.
All the strength margins listed in SAE J987 - 2003, Table 2 must be met.
            (B)   Test Option B: EN 13000. All testing and verification
requirements of EN 13000 (2004) must be met. In applying EN 13000 (2004), the
following additional requirements must be met:
               1.   The following applies to equipment with cantilevered booms
(such as telescopic boom cranes): The analysis methodology, such as computer
modeling, must demonstrate that all load cases listed in SAE J1063 - 1993 meet
the strength margins listed in SAE J1063-1993 Table 2.
               2.   The following applies to equipment with pendant supported
lattice booms: The analysis methodology, such as computer modeling, must
demonstrate that all load cases listed in SAE J987 - 2003 meet the strength
margins listed in SAE J987-2003 Table 2.
               3.   Analysis verification. The physical testing requirements
under SAE J1063 - 1993 and SAE J987 - 2003 must be met unless the reliability
of the analysis methodology, such as computer modeling, has been demonstrated
by a documented history of verification through strain gauge measuring or
strain gauge measuring in combination with other physical testing.
         (iii)   Prototype testing of tower cranes manufactured on or after
November 8, 2010. Tower cranes manufactured on or after November 8, 2010, must
meet the prototype testing requirements in EN 14439 (2006).
      (4)   Manufacturing standards. Cranes and derricks, and their components,
whose application for prototype approval is submitted on or after January 1,
2016 must, in their entirety, be manufactured by an entity that possesses an
ISO 9001 certification, or an equivalent international certification acceptable
to the commissioner.
   (f)   Certificate of operation. Certificates of operation must comply with
the requirements of Section 3319.5 of the New York City Building Code and the
following.
      (1)   Application. An application for the issuance or renewal of a
certificate of operation, in accordance with Section 3319.5 of the New York
City Building Code, must be accompanied by:
         (i)   Owner name and contact information;
         (ii)   Certificate of origin and bill of sale, except for a renewal
where no change to the owner has occurred;
         (iii)   Device information, including but not limited to make and
model, capacity, dimensions, serial number, and date of manufacture;
         (iv)   Component and attachment information, including but not limited
to description of the component or attachment, the serial number or other
identification number acceptable to the commissioner for the component or
attachment, date of manufacture of the component or attachment, and as
applicable, capacity and dimensions of the component or attachment;
         (v)   For each lattice component, a report indicating passage of a
magnetic particle inspection or other crack detection inspection acceptable to
the commissioner, with the date of inspection no more than 60 days prior to the
submittal of the application;
         (vi)   Attestation from the owner of the crane or derrick disclosing
the repair and accident history of the crane or derrick, including its
components;
         (vii)   Attestation from the owner of the crane or derrick certifying
compliance with all applicable manufacturer service notices and recall
bulletins;
         (viii)   For a tower crane, other than a self-erecting tower crane, a
third-party report from a New York State professional engineer, other than the
engineer who filed the crane or derrick notice application for the associated
job, attesting to the repair and maintenance history of the tower crane and its
components, and the adequacy of such repairs and maintenance. This must include
documentation of compliance with all applicable manufacturer service notices
and recall bulletins; and
         (ix)   Copies of maintenance records and inspection reports for the
crane or derrick, and its components, upon request.
      (2)   Yard inspection. Upon approval of the application for the issuance
or renewal of a certificate of operation, the new or renewed certificate of
operation will only be issued after a satisfactory inspection of the crane or
derrick by a department inspector at a crane yard or other site acceptable to
the commissioner.
         Exceptions: 
            1.   For a rotating telehandler, or an articulating boom crane
attached to a commercial truck chassis, the inspection may be performed by a
crane inspection agency approved by the department and meeting the requirements
of 1 RCNY §
101-07.
            2.   For a mobile crane, other than a boom truck, with a
telescoping, hydraulic, articulating, or folding boom, including jibs and any
other extensions to the boom, not exceeding 50 feet (15 240 mm) in length with
a manufacturer's rated capacity of 3 tons (2.72 t) or less, the inspection may
be performed by a crane inspection agency approved by the department and
meeting the requirements of 1 RCNY §
101-07.
      (3)   Inspection for more than 250 feet of boom length. For a job site
configuration where the boom, including jibs and any other extensions to the
boom, will exceed 250 feet (76.2 m) in length, the certificate of operation
will be contingent upon the crane or derrick passing a subsequent satisfactory
inspection, performed on site by a department inspector, prior to the use of
crane or derrick for each configuration exceeding 250 feet (76.2 m) in length
at the site.
         Exceptions: 
            1.   Such inspection is not required for a crane with a telescopic,
hydraulic, articulating, or folding boom exceeding 250 feet (76.2 m) in length,
provided no jib is attached to the boom.
            2.   Such inspection is not required for a crane that does not
require a certificate of on-site inspection.
      (4)   Expiration for a tower crane and derrick. Provided no other
expiration threshold for the certificate of operation has already been met, the
certificate of operation for a tower crane, other than a self-erecting tower
crane, and for a derrick, is deemed to be expired when either:
         (i)   The certificate of on-site inspection with which the tower crane
or derrick was associated with expires; or
         (ii)   Notification of departure of the equipment in accordance with
subparagraph (iii) of paragraph 5 of subdivision (c) of this section has been
provided, or for a derrick permanently mounted to a structure, the work
associated with the certificate of on-site inspection has been completed.
      (5)   Amendments. A certificate of operation must be amended when any
information contained in the certificate of operation is no longer accurate, as
well as when otherwise provided in Section 3319.5 of the New York City Building
Code. When an amendment proposes to add, repair, replace, or modify a
component, or when the amendment indicates a condition that may, in the
judgement of the department, warrant inspection, the amended certificate of
operation will only be issued after a satisfactory inspection of the crane or
derrick in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (2) of this subdivision.
   (g)   Certificate of on-site inspection. 
      (1)   Conformity with the certificate of approval and certificate of
operation. No certificate of on-site inspection, or an extension, renewal, or
amendment to such certificate, will be granted for a crane or derrick which
requires, but does not possess, a certificate of approval or certificate of
operation, or which is not in conformance with the certificate of approval or
certificate of operation.
      (2)   Application for a certificate of on-site inspection. To apply for a
certificate of on-site inspection in accordance with Section 3319.6 of the New
York City Building Code, an engineer, licensed and registered to practice the
profession of engineering under the education law of the state of New York,
must file, on behalf of the equipment user, a crane or derrick notice
application with the department.
         (i)   Crane or derrick notice plans. The application must be
accompanied by one or more plans, as applicable, showing the following
information for each configuration for which crane or derrick notice
application approval is sought:
            (A)   Ground and subsurface elements. Elevations and sections
detailing all pertinent ground and subsurface elements, with dimensions,
slopes, estimated bearing values, loads imposed, and surcharges indicated,
including, as applicable:
               1.   Soil;
               2.   Streets, sidewalks, public plazas, and equivalent spaces;
               3.   Foundations;
               4.   Retaining walls;
               5.   Excavations;
               6.   Sheeting, shoring, and bracing;
               7.   Vaults;
               8.   Manholes;
               9.   Subways, stations, and entrances;
               10.   Tunnels; and
               11.   For a tower crane:
                  11.1.   Utilities impacted by the tower crane foundation; and
                  11.2.   The water table level.
            (B)   Site conditions. Elevations and sections detailing all
pertinent site conditions, with dimensions indicated, including, as applicable:
               1.   North arrow;
               2.   Buildings and structures at the site and adjacent to the
site, with projections, setbacks, and equipment and structures located on the
roof or setback indicated;
               3.   Temporary construction, such as platforms, runback
structures, scaffolds, mast climbers, hoists, horizontal netting, cocoon
systems, climbing formwork, sidewalk sheds, fences, and barricades;
               4.   Pedestrian and traffic control to be provided as per the
requirements of the Department of Transportation;
               5.   Other cranes or derricks at the site, with swing radii
indicated;
               6.   Trees and other natural obstructions; and
               7.   Above ground utilities and infrastructure, including but
not limited to, street lights, traffic lights, bollards, bus shelters, street
furniture, traffic signs, hydrants, electrical lines with voltage values
indicated, phone lines, bridges, viaducts, subway exits, elevated subways and
railroads, elevated transit platforms, and towers.
            (C)   Location and configuration. Elevations and sections detailing
the location and configuration of the crane or derrick at the site, in both
plan view and elevation view, with dimensions indicated, including, as
applicable:
               1.   The proposed location of the crane or derrick, including
areas where the crane or derrick will be assembled, disassembled, operate, or
travel;
               2.   The configuration of the crane or derrick;
               3.   Outrigger location and configuration;
               4.   The swing radius of the tail or counterweights;
               5.   The maximum and minimum swing radius and load path of the
boom and load;
               6.   Minimum clearances for the boom/jibs/ attachments and
counterweights. If necessary, operation restrictions necessary to prevent
contact must be clearly shown; and
               7.   Pick and landing zones.
            (D)   Footing, foundation, tie-ins, and supporting elements.
Elevations and sections detailing the footing or founding of the crane or
derrick and any foundations, tie-ins, or other structures supporting the crane
or derrick, with dimensions, materials, bearing values, loads imposed,
reactions, and concrete strengths to be obtained prior to installation
indicated, including, as applicable:
               1.   For a crane:
                  1.1.   Matting, dunnage, or equivalent;
                  1.2.   Ramps;
                  1.3.   Platforms, and all connections between the platform
and the base building or structure;
                  1.4.   Foundations and all connections between the
foundation, the base building or structure, and the crane; and
                  1.5.   Tie-in connections, including but not limited to the
tie-in, base building or structure, collar, pin, inner bracings or similar
reinforcement, and any rope or structure supporting the tie-in collar to the
tower leg.
               2.   For a derrick, platforms or dunnage, and all connections
between the platforms or dunnage, the base building or structure, and the
derrick.
               3.   For any crane or derrick:
                  3.1.   Bracing;
                  3.2.   Roofs, setbacks, or equivalent upon which the crane or
derrick is located;
                  3.3.   Modifications required to the base building or
structure, other structural elements, or to adjacent retaining walls,
excavations, or foundations; and
                  3.4.   Level or plumb tolerances, which may not exceed the
recommendations of the crane or derrick manufacturer.
            (E)   Bolted connections. For a bolted connection utilized in a
platform or dunnage that supports a crane or derrick, or utilized in the
footing, foundation, tie-ins, or supporting elements of a derrick or a tower
crane, details of such bolted connection, including elevations and sections,
with dimensions indicated, including, as applicable:
               1.   Bolts;
               2.   Bolt hole sizes;
               3.   Bolt grades and specifications;
               4.   Bolt torque values;
               5.   Re-torqueing schedule and procedures;
               6.   Plates;
               7.   Rods, with pre-tensioning information;
               8.   Dowels;
               9.   Clamping forces; and
               10.   Grout or steel bushings.
            (F)   Anchors. Elevations and sections detailing anchored
connections to a structure, with dimensions indicated, including, as
applicable:
               1.   Type of anchor;
               2.   Anchor size;
               3.   Anchor hole size;
               4.   Epoxy or grout specifications;
               5.   Installation instructions; and
               6.   Pull out testing criteria.
            (G)   Welded connections. For a welded connection utilized in a
platform or dunnage that supports a crane or derrick, or utilized in the
footing, foundation, tie-ins, or supporting elements of a derrick or a tower
crane, details of such welded connection, including elevations and sections,
with dimensions indicated, including, as applicable:
               1.   Material information;
               2.   Welding specifications; and
               3.   Welding procedures.
            (H)   Structural steel. Where the plans call for the use of
structural steel, for example in the foundation, platform, dunnage, or tie-in
connections, and such structural steel is not provided by the manufacturer of
the crane or derrick, or an entity authorized by the manufacturer, the shape,
size, and grade of the steel must be specified on the plans.
            (I)   Counterweights. Where a crane utilizes removable
counterweights, or where a derrick requires counterweights, the required
weight, dimensions, and acceptable materials for the counterweights must be
specified on the plans. Such information must be based on the requirements of
the manufacturer of the crane or derrick.
            (J)   Aviation hazards. Aircraft warning lights and markings must
be indicated on the plans when such lights and markings are required by the
Federal Aviation Administration.
            (K)   Electrical information. For a tower crane, other than a self-
erecting tower crane, the crane's electrical requirements must be indicated on
the plans, including voltage, amperage, phasing, grounding, and any other
electrical information specific to the tower crane.
            (L)   Special inspections. All materials, equipment, installation,
fabrication, erection, or placement of components and connections, as well as
construction operations subject to special inspection in accordance with
paragraph (6) of subdivision (k) of this section must be identified on the
plans.
            (M)   Range of tolerances. Where a plus or minus range of
tolerances is considered to be acceptable by the crane or derrick notice
engineer, specific values indicating the numerical range of tolerance must be
indicated.
         (ii)   Assembly/disassembly plan. For a crane or derrick that requires
components to be assembled or disassembled at the site, the application must
include an assembly/disassembly plan.
            (A)   Content. The assembly/disassembly plan must include the
following information:
               1.   All information listed in subparagraph (i) of paragraph (2)
of this subdivision for a crane or derrick notice plan that is relevant to the
assembly/disassembly operation, including but not limited to:
                  1.1.   Location where the crane or derrick will be assembled/
disassembled, including any areas of travel;
                  1.2.   Pertinent ground, subsurface, and site conditions,
including but not limited to pedestrian and traffic control to be provided as
per the requirements of the Department of Transportation; and
                  1.3.   The configuration of the crane or derrick at the start
and completion of the assembly/disassembly operation, and at all phases
throughout the work.
               2.   Procedures, including sequencing, for the assembly/
disassembly operation, including but not limited to counterweight placement or
removal;
               3.   Weight, dimensions, and center of gravity for components
that will be hoisted or lowered during the assembly/disassembly operation;
               4.   Location and configuration of assist cranes or derricks;
               5.   The maximum wind threshold at which assembly/disassembly
operations may occur; and
               6.   For the erection, climbing, jumping, or dismantling of a
tower crane, information required by Section 3319.8.1 of the New York City
Building Code.
            (B)   Self-contained document. The assembly/ disassembly plan must
be a complete, self-contained document.
            (C)   Maximum assembly/disassembly wind threshold. The maximum
assembly/ disassembly wind threshold listed in the assembly/disassembly plan
cannot exceed 30mph (3-second gust). This threshold must take into account the
wind action plans for each assist crane or derrick, and where such a threshold
is lower than that for the assembly/ disassembly operation generally, this
lower threshold must be listed as the threshold for the assembly/disassembly
operation.
            (D)   Specific to configurations. The assembly/ disassembly plan
must include all applicable information for each configuration for which crane
or derrick notice application approval is sought. Where multiple configurations
are included, the assembly/disassembly plan must clearly identify the
applicable procedures for each configuration.
            (E)   Able to be fully implemented based upon site conditions. The
assembly/disassembly plan must account for all site conditions and be able to
be fully implemented based upon site conditions. Where the manufacturer's
specifications can be fully implemented at the site, the plan must incorporate
this information. Where site conditions prevent full implementation of the
manufacturer's specifications, the engineer must contact the manufacturer and
develop alternate procedures, as appropriate, and incorporate them into the
assembly/disassembly plan.
         (iii)   Pre-operational test procedures, including load test. For a
tower crane and a derrick, the application must be accompanied by procedures
for the pre-operational test. The pick zones for the load test portion of the
pre-operational test must also be indicated. For a tower crane, the application
must also be accompanied by procedures for the setting of prelimiting and
limiting devices. The procedures required by this subparagraph must be in
accordance with the manufacturer's specifications and the following, and in no
case may the weight utilized during the load test exceed the manufacturer's
specifications:
            (A)   For a tower crane, other than a self-erecting tower crane,
ASME B30.3 (2016 edition) Section 3-1.7.
            (B)   For a self-erecting tower crane, ASME B30.29 (2012 edition)
Section 29-1.1.3.
            (C)   For a derrick, ASME B30.6 (2015 edition) Sections 6-2.2.1 and
6-2.2.2.
         (iv)   Loads imposed. Where the crane or derrick imparts a load on a
building or structure, the application must be accompanied by either:
            (A)   Crane or derrick notice plans that:
               1.   Are sealed and stamped "reviewed for loads imposed" by the
registered design professional of record for the project; and
               2.   Contain a note, signed and sealed by the registered design
professional of record for the project, indicating that all permanent
modifications or supporting elements required to be added to the base building
or structure, including but not limited to rebar, have been incorporated into
the plans and/or shop drawings for the base building or structure;
            (B)   A signed and sealed letter from the registered design
professional of record for the project that includes the following:
               1.   A statement that he or she has reviewed the submitted crane
or derrick notice plans for the loads imposed on the building or structure;
               2.   The drawing numbers and dates of the crane or derrick
notice plans indicating the bracing and modifications required for the building
or structure to support the loads imposed;
               3.   A statement attesting to the adequacy of the building or
structure to support the loads imposed; and
               4.   A statement that all permanent modifications or supporting
elements required to be added to the base building or structure, including but
not limited to rebar, have been incorporated into the plans and/or shop
drawings for the base building or structure; or
            (C)   For a project for which there is no registered design
professional of record for the project, a signed and sealed letter from the
crane or derrick notice engineer that includes the following:
               1.   A statement that he or she has investigated the design of
the building or structure;
               2.   The drawing numbers and dates of the crane or derrick
notice plans indicating the bracing and modifications required for the building
or structure to support the loads imposed;
               3.   A statement attesting to the adequacy of the building or
structure to support the loads imposed; and
               4.   A statement that he or she will verify that such bracing
and modifications have been completed in accordance with the approved crane or
derrick notice plans before loads are imposed by the crane or derrick.
         (v)   Wind action plan. The application must be accompanied by a wind
action plan.
            (A)   Content. The wind action plan must include the following
information:
               1.   Load reductions, if any, due to wind;
               2.   The maximum in-service wind threshold;
               3.   Wind thresholds, configurations, and procedures, including
angles and sequencing, for parking and securing the crane in each applicable
out-of-service position (e.g. retracted, parked, jackknifed, laid down, and/or
other special protective measures for wind); and
               4.   The communication protocol for safeguarding the crane or
derrick in the event of changes of forecasts over weekends or longer stoppage
periods.
            (B)   Self-contained document. The wind action plan must be a
complete, self-contained document.
            (C)   Maximum in-service threshold. The maximum in-service wind
threshold listed in the wind action plan cannot exceed 30 mph (3-second gust)
or the threshold specified by the manufacturer, whichever is lower.
            Exceptions: The 30 mph (3-second gust) criterion does not apply to:
               1.   A mobile crane where the crane is set up and operated
entirely within a safety zone, provided:
                  1.1.   The distance from the crane to the boundary of the
safety zone is equal to or greater than the length of the boom, jib, and any
other attachments; and
                  1.2.   All areas and structures within the safety zone are
closed to the public.
               2.   A tower crane, where the crane is set up and operated
entirely within a safety zone, provided:
                  2.1.   The distance from the crane to the boundary of the
safety zone is equal to or greater than the height of the mast and the length
of the boom, jib, and any other attachments; and
                  2.2.   All areas and structures within the safety zone are
closed to the public.
            (D)   Specific to configurations. The wind action plan must include
all applicable thresholds and procedures for each configuration for which crane
or derrick notice application approval is sought. Where multiple configurations
are included, the wind action plan must clearly identify the applicable
thresholds and procedures for each configuration.
            (E)   Able to be fully implemented based upon site conditions. The
wind action plan must account for all site conditions and be able to be fully
implemented based upon site conditions. Where the manufacturer's specifications
can be fully implemented at the site, the plan must incorporate this
information. Where site conditions prevent full implementation of the
manufacturer's specifications (e.g. site conditions make it impossible to point
the boom into the wind), the engineer must contact the manufacturer and develop
alternate procedures and/or thresholds, as appropriate, and incorporate them
into the wind action plan.
            (F)   Emergency action plan. Where load reductions are utilized in
accordance with Section 1618 of the Building Code, the emergency action plan
required by Section 1618.3 of the Building Code must also be included in the
wind action plan.
         (vi)   Certifications. The application must be accompanied by the
following certifications:
            (A)   Investigation of conditions. Certification from the crane or
derrick notice engineer that he or she has investigated the ground, subsurface,
and site conditions, and has accounted for them in the submitted plans and
procedures.
            (B)   Loads. Certification from the crane or derrick notice
engineer that:
               1.   The loads, surcharges, and values indicated in the crane or
derrick notice application account for all conditions of loading, including
wind.
               2.   The crane or derrick, including any footing, foundation,
tie-in, or supporting element, in all proposed conditions of loading, including
assembly/disassembly or traveling, will not exceed the bearing capacity of the
ground or subsurface elements, or any footing, foundation, tie-in, or
supporting element.
               3.   The crane or derrick, including any footing, foundation,
tie-in, or supporting element, when secured and stowed in accordance with the
submitted procedures will be able to sustain, without failure, the specified
wind loads.
            (C)   Clearances. Certification from the crane or derrick notice
engineer that the crane or derrick, in all proposed configurations, including
assembly/disassembly or traveling, will clear all site obstructions.
         (vii)   Calculations. The application must be accompanied by the
following calculations from the crane or derrick notice engineer, verifying:
            (A)   The stability of the crane if outriggers must be set at
asymmetrical positions.
            Exception: Calculations are not required if an analysis, conducted
by a computer program authorized by the crane manufacturer, verifies the
stability of the crane.
            (B)   Indicated loads imposed and surcharges.
            (C)   Indicated reaction forces.
            (D)   Any other supporting calculations upon request.
         (viii)   Power lines. When operating near overhead power lines,
including during assembly/disassembly or traveling, the crane or derrick notice
plan or the assembly/disassembly plan, as applicable, must indicate compliance
with the applicable provisions of paragraph (3) of subdivision (s) of this
section, and, where applicable, the application must be accompanied by the
determination and procedures required by paragraph (3) of subdivision (s) of
this section.
         (ix)   Direct and continuing supervision. Where the work will be
conducted under the direct and continuing supervision of a master rigger, the
application must comply with the provisions of subdivision (f) of 1 RCNY §
104-20.
         (x)   Critical pick. Where a critical pick will be performed in
accordance with a plan developed by a master rigger or professional engineer in
accordance with Section 3316.9.1 of the New York City Building Code, the
application must be accompanied by a letter, acceptable to the commissioner,
from the master rigger or engineer affirming there will be compliance with the
critical pick plan and on-site verification requirements of Section 3316.9.1 of
the New York City Building Code.
      (3)   Approval of the crane or derrick notice application. The crane or
derrick notice application will be approved in accordance with the provisions
of Article 104 of Chapter 1 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code.
         (i)   Transit authority approval. For a crane or derrick that requires
approval of the New York City Transit Authority, no crane or derrick notice
application will be approved by the department until a copy of the approval
from the Transit Authority has been filed with the department.
         (ii)   Site specific wind analysis for tower cranes. For a tower
crane, other than a self-erecting tower crane, no crane or derrick notice
application will be approved by the department until the information required
by subparagraph (iv) of paragraph (5) of subdivision (d) of this section has
been submitted to the department.
      (4)   Phased filings. Information required to be filed with the crane or
derrick notice application per paragraph (2) of subdivision (g) of this section
may be filed in phases, and approval of the crane or derrick notice application
per paragraph (3) of subdivision (g) of this section may be granted in phases,
provided all information filed for the phase is complete and covers all aspects
of the crane or derrick in such phase.
      (5)   Amendments. See Article 104 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code.
      (6)   Prohibition on arrival at the site. No crane or derrick that
requires a certificate of on-site inspection may be present at a site until the
department has approved the crane or derrick notice application.
      Exceptions: 
         1.   Tower crane foundation. Where a tower crane foundation needs to
be constructed, the foundation may be installed prior to the approval of a
crane or derrick notice application, provided:
            1.1.   Plans for the tower crane foundation, signed and sealed by
the crane or derrick notice engineer, are filed with and accepted by the
department prior to the installation of the tower crane foundation. Such plans
do not need to reference a specific crane or crane configuration, however, the
plans must indicate the dimensions, materials, and bearing value of the
foundation, along with anticipated loads imposed and reaction forces of the
tower crane on the foundation;
            1.2.   Special inspection reports for the installed foundation are
filed with the department prior to the approval of the crane or derrick notice
application; and
            1.3.   The foundation, as installed, and any subsequent
modifications required to account for the specific tower crane to be utilized,
is indicated on the crane or derrick notice plans.
         2.   Tower crane anchor stool and first mast section. The anchor stool
and first mast section of a tower crane, other than a self-erecting tower
crane, may be installed prior to the approval of a crane or derrick notice
application and the crane or derrick device application, provided:
            2.1.   The anchor stool and first mast section are indicated on the
plans filed and accepted under exception 1.1 above;
            2.2.   An inspection report for the anchor stool and first mast
section is accepted by the department prior to their installation;
            2.3.   A survey report, attesting that the anchor stool and first
mast section, as installed, is plumb, is submitted as part of the crane or
derrick notice application. Such survey report must be based upon a survey
performed by a surveyor who meets the definition of a qualified person, and
must be signed and dated as accepted by the licensed rigger who supervised the
installation of the anchor stool and first mast section;
            2.4.   Where a special inspection is required by paragraph (6) of
subdivision (k) of this section, the special inspection reports for the
foundation are submitted as part of the crane or derrick notice application;
            2.5.   Where the anchor stool is not provided by the manufacturer
of the crane, the crane or derrick notice engineer notes, on the crane or
derrick notice plans, his or her acceptance of the anchor stool; and
            2.6.   The anchor stool and first mast section, as installed, and
any subsequent modifications required to account for the specific tower crane
to be utilized, is indicated on the crane or derrick notice plans.
      (7)   Issuance, renewal, and continued validity of the certificate of on-
site inspection. 
         (i)   Issuance of the certificate of on-site inspection. Prior to the
initial use at the site of a crane or derrick that requires a certificate of
on-site inspection, the crane or derrick must be inspected and tested as
required by subparagraphs (i) and (ii) of paragraph (8) below. Upon successful
passage of such inspections and tests, and submittal of the inspection report
in accordance with subparagraph (iv) of paragraph (8) below, a certificate of
on-site inspection is deemed to be issued.
         (ii)   Continued validity of the certificate of on-site inspection for
a phase or jump. Where a crane or derrick project includes multiple phases or
jumps, the continued validity of the certificate of on-site inspection is
contingent upon the crane or derrick passing the inspection and tests required
by subparagraphs (i) and (ii) of paragraph (8) below for each phase or jump.
Upon successful passage of such inspections and tests, and submittal of the
inspection report in accordance with subparagraph (iv) of paragraph (8) below,
the certificate of on-site inspection is deemed to cover such phase or jump.
            Exception: A phase does not include the relocation of a mobile
crane to another location at the site, provided such relocation is indicated on
the approved crane or derrick notice plans, and provided such relocation does
not require the crane to be assembled or disassembled.
         (iii)   Renewal of the certificate of on-site inspection after one
year. Where the crane or derrick remains at the site for a period of one (1)
year or longer, the continued validity of the certificate of on-site inspection
is contingent upon the crane or derrick passing the inspections and tests
required by subparagraph (iii) of paragraph (8) below, and submittal of the
inspection report in accordance with subparagraph (iv) of paragraph (8) below,
at least eleven (11) months but no more than one (1) year following the last
inspection performed in accordance with subparagraphs (i) or (ii) above or this
subparagraph.
      (8)   Inspections and tests for a certificate of on-site inspection. 
         (i)   Inspections and tests required for the issuance of the
certificate of on-site inspection and the continued validity of the certificate
of on-site inspection for a phase. When required by subparagraphs (i) or (ii)
of paragraph (7) of subdivision (g) of this section, the following inspections
and tests must be performed.
            (A)   Engineer's inspection. Prior to and following the setup,
assembly, erection, jumping, or climbing of a crane or derrick, the crane or
derrick notice engineer, or a qualified person employed and supervised by such
engineer, must perform an inspection and verify compliance with the approved
crane or derrick notice plans, including but not limited to:
               1.   Ground, subsurface, and site conditions match the approved
crane or derrick notice plans;
               2.   Loads imposed conditions match those as indicated on the
approved crane or derrick notice plans;
               3.   Modifications, including bracing, required for the base
building or structure, other structural elements, or to adjacent retaining
walls, excavations, or foundations have been completed and are in accordance
with the approved crane or derrick notice plans;
               4.   Concrete elements that will sustain crane or derrick loads,
for example, foundations or tie-in floors, have obtained sufficient strength in
accordance with the approved crane or derrick notice plans; and
               5.   The footing, foundation, and supporting elements of the
crane or derrick, including but not limited to, ramps, platforms, matting,
dunnage, or installed tie-in connections are free from damage or deformation,
free from debris and standing water, and are in accordance with the approved
crane or derrick notice plans. This inspection may be accomplished by visual
observation. Where bolts, anchors, welds, or steel for such items are detailed
on such approved plans, this includes verification that such elements are in
accordance with the approved plans.
            Exceptions: 
               1.   The engineer's inspection is not required prior to the
installation of a tower crane foundation, anchor stool, or first mast section
installed in accordance with the provisions of the exceptions to paragraph (6)
of subdivision (g) of this section.
               2.   The engineer's inspection does not have to include items
required inspected by another entity, as indicated in the clauses below.
            (B)   Inspection of bolts, pins, links, and straps. 
               1.   Tower cranes. Where a tower crane was erected, climbed, or
jumped, the licensed rigger responsible for supervising such operation must
perform an inspection prior to and following such operation and verify that all
bolts and pins installed on the tower crane during the course of erection,
jumping, or climbing, including during previous such sessions, as well as all
tie-in collars, inner bracings or similar reinforcement for the tie-in
connection, and ropes or structures supporting the tie-in collar to the tower
leg:
                  1.1.   Are in place;
                  1.2.   Are free from damage or deformation. This inspection
may be accomplished by visual observation; and
                  1.3.   Meet the requirements and tolerances of the
manufacturer and, where applicable, the approved crane or derrick notice plans.
                  Exception: Bolts and pins located beyond the connection point
of the tie-in connection to the collar, or below the first mast section. Such
bolts and pins must instead be inspected as part of the engineer's inspection
per clause (A) above.
               2.   Self-erecting tower cranes. Following the setup of a self-
erecting tower crane, including any subsequent setup operations at the site, a
qualified person designated by the equipment user must verify that the pins and
interlocks have been placed and set in accordance with the manufacturer
specifications.
               Exception: Where the self-erecting tower crane was set up by or
under the direct and continuing supervision of a licensed master or tower crane
rigger, such licensed rigger must perform the inspection.
               3.   All other cranes and derricks. Prior to and following the
assembly of a crane or derrick, the assembly/disassembly director must perform
an inspection and verify that all bolts, pins, links, and straps installed on
the crane or derrick during the setup or assembly, including during previous
such sessions:
                  3.1.   Are in place (or, if applicable, removed, e.g. from
areas if luffing jib is not to be utilized);
                  3.2.   Are free from damage or deformation. This inspection
may be accomplished by visual observation; and
                  3.3.   Meet the requirements and tolerances of the
manufacturer and, where applicable, the approved crane or derrick notice plans.
               Exceptions: 
                  1.   Tower cranes and self-erecting tower cranes are subject
to the applicable provisions of items numbers 1 or 2 above.
                  2.   For a derrick, bolts, pins, links, and straps located at
or beyond the connection point to the base building or structure. Such bolts
and pins must instead be inspected as part of the engineer's inspection per
clause (A) above.
            (C)   Surveyor's inspection for a tower crane. Following the
erection, jumping, or climbing of a tower crane, other than a self-erecting
tower crane, a surveyor who meets the definition of a qualified person and who
is acceptable to the licensed rigger responsible for climbing or jumping the
tower crane must survey the tower crane and verify it is plumb within
tolerances specified on the approved crane or derrick notice plans.
            (D)   Pre-operational test, including load test. Following the
initial setup, assembly, or erection of a tower crane or a derrick, and
following any subsequent setup, assembly, erection, jumping, or climbing that
would necessitate a pre-operational test, the crane or derrick must pass a pre-
operational test in accordance with the approved pre-operational test
procedures submitted with the crane or derrick notice application. The pre-
operational test must be witnessed by, and verification that the crane or
derrick has passed the test made by either:
               1.   The crane or derrick notice engineer;
               2.   A qualified person employed and supervised by such
engineer;
               3.   A qualified person employed by the equipment owner;
               4.   A qualified person employed by the crane or derrick
manufacturer or a manufacturer authorized service center, distributor, or
service provider; or
               5.   A licensed master or tower crane rigger, or, for a derrick,
a licensed master rigger or a master rigging foreman.
            (E)   Special inspections. Special inspections must be completed in
accordance with paragraph (6) of subdivision (k) of this section. Prior to and
following the setup, assembly, erection, jumping, or climbing of a crane or
derrick, the crane or derrick notice engineer, or a qualified person employed
and supervised by such engineer, must verify required special inspections have
been successfully completed.
            (F)   Unassembled inspection. Prior to an assembly/disassembly
operation, the assembly/ disassembly director must perform an unassembled
inspection to verify that:
               1.   The components to be installed match those listed on the
Certificate of Operation; and
               2.   Structural components to be installed are free from damage
or deformation. This inspection may be accomplished by visual observation.
            (G)   Assembled inspection. Following an assembly/disassembly
operation, the assembly/ disassembly director must perform an assembled
inspection to verify that:
               1.   Mechanical, hydraulic, and electrical components of the
crane or derrick (e.g. rope reeving system, electrical and hydraulic
connections) are properly assembled and connected; and
               2.   Structural components, except for those inspected as part
of the engineer's inspection per clause (A) above, are free from damage or
deformation. This inspection may be accomplished by visual observation.
         (ii)   Inspection of tie-in connection to the base building or
structure. When required by subparagraphs (i) or (ii) of paragraph (7) of
subdivision (g) of this section, the crane or derrick notice engineer, or a
qualified person employed and supervised by such engineer, must observe the
tie-in installation during the installation of a tie-in connection for a tower
crane and verify that the tie-in is connected to the base building or structure
in accordance with the approved crane or derrick notice plans. This includes,
but is not limited to, the location and size of bolt holes, the condition of
the floor slab, the leveling of the tie-in, that bolts and threaded rods have
been pre-tensioned, and that specified bolts and plates have been installed.
         (iii)   Inspections and tests required for annual renewal. When
required by subparagraph (iii) of paragraph (7) of subdivision (g) of this
section, the following inspections and tests must be performed to renew the
certificate of on-site inspection.
            (A)   Engineer's inspection. The crane or derrick notice engineer,
or a qualified person employed and supervised by such engineer, must perform an
inspection and verify:
               1.   Continued compliance with the approved crane or derrick
notice plans, except for those items required to be inspected by another
entity, as indicated in the clauses below; and
               2.   Where a temporary load reduction is utilized per Section
1618 of the New York City Building Code, that the installation complies with
the requirements of the approved construction documents for the temporary
installation and the action required plan required by Section 1618.3 of the New
York City Building Code:
                  2.1.   Is still in effect;
                  2.2.   Has been revised to reflect current conditions of the
installation; or
                  2.3.   Is no longer required, as the installation has been
retrofitted to comply with the loads for new construction without any
reduction.
            (B)   Inspection of bolts, pins, links, and straps. Where the crane
or derrick was assembled at the site, a qualified person designated by the
equipment user must perform an inspection and verify the applicable items
listed in clause (B) of subparagraph (i) of paragraph (8) of subdivision (g) of
this section.
            Exception: For a tower crane that was erected, climbed, or jumped
by or under the direct and continuing supervision of a licensed master or tower
crane rigger, the inspection must be performed by a licensed master or tower
crane rigger, or a master rigging foreman.
            (C)   Surveyor's inspection for a tower crane. For a tower crane,
other than a self-erecting tower crane, a surveyor who meets the definition of
a qualified person and who is acceptable to the licensed rigger responsible for
inspecting the tower crane in accordance with clause (B) above must survey the
tower crane and verify it is plumb within tolerances specified on the approved
crane or derrick notice plans.
            (D)   Pre-operational test for a derrick, including load test. A
derrick must pass a pre-operational test in accordance with the approved pre-
operational test procedures submitted with the crane or derrick notice
application, or where the approved crane or derrick notice application did not
include specifications for the test, in accordance ASME B30.6 (2015 edition)
Sections 6-2.2.1 and 6-2.2.2, except that in no case may the weight of the load
exceed 100% of the rated capacity of the derrick. The pre-operational test must
be witnessed by, and verification that the crane or derrick has passed the test
made by either:
               1.   The crane or derrick notice engineer;
               2.   A qualified person employed and supervised by such
engineer;
               3.   A qualified person employed by the equipment owner;
               4.   A qualified person employed by the crane or derrick
manufacturer or a manufacturer authorized service center, distributor, or
service provider; or
               5.   A licensed master rigger or a master rigging foreman.
         (iv)   Certificate of on-site inspection report. The results of the
applicable inspections and tests required by subparagraphs (i) through (iii)
above must be documented in a certificate of on-site inspection report.
            (A)   Content. The report must, at a minimum:
               1.   Detail the results of the applicable inspections or tests
required by subparagraphs (i) through (iii) above, and contain a certification
of the results from the individual who performed the inspection; and
               2.   If the crane or derrick initially failed an inspection or
test, including but not limited to a deviation from the approved crane or
derrick notice plans, before passing a subsequent inspection or test, this
information must be detailed, along with a description of any adjustment,
modification, maintenance, repair, or other corrective action taken, including
amending the approved crane or derrick notice plans.
            (B)   Signing, dating, and sealing. The certificate of on-site
inspection report must be signed and dated by the individuals who performed the
inspection or witnessed the test. Where such individual is required to be
supervised or authorized by a professional engineer or a licensed rigger, such
licensed individual must also sign and date such sections of the report, and
for a professional engineer, affix his or her seal to such sections of the
report.
            (C)   Submitting and maintaining reports. After the crane or
derrick successfully passes the inspections and tests required by subparagraphs
(i) through (iii) above, the certificate of on-site inspection report must be
submitted to the department.
         (v)   Reporting a failed inspection or test. If the crane or derrick
fails an inspection or test required by subparagraphs (i) through (iii) above,
and the condition that led to the failure is not corrected by the end of the
inspection or test, such condition must be reported to the department at the
conclusion of the inspection or test.
         Exception: Issues that pose an immediate hazard to the safety of the
public or property must immediately be reported to the department.
      (9)   Deviation from approved plans. Where deviations from the approved
crane or derrick notice plans are identified, the crane or derrick may not
operate until it is brought into compliance with the approved plans, or an
amendment to the crane or derrick notice plans to reflect conditions at the
site has been approved by the department.
      (10)   Suspension or revocation of a certificate of on-site inspection.
The department may suspend or revoke a certificate of on-site inspection in
accordance with the provisions of § 28-105.10 of the New York City
Administrative Code.
      (11)   United States customary units. All calculations and measurements
submitted as part of a crane or derrick notice application, amendment,
inspection or test report, or similar documentation, must be in United States
customary units.
      (12)   Conformance with the Building Code. All loads, material strengths,
and calculations provided or utilized in connection with the crane or derrick
notice application, or an amendment to such application, must be in accordance
with the New York City Building Code.
         Exception: Loads, material strengths, and calculations provided by the
manufacturer of the crane or derrick.
      (13)   Peer review. Peer reviews for crane or derrick notice applications
must be in accordance with the requirements of subparagraphs (i) through (xiii)
below.
         (i)   Peer review required. A crane or derrick notice application is
subject to a peer review when the crane or derrick notice application proposes
any one of the following:
            (A)   The use of a mobile crane with a boom, including jibs and any
other extensions to the boom, equal to or greater than 300 feet (91.44 m) in
length.
            (B)   The use of a mobile crane in a configuration where the
manufacturer requires, at a wind speed of 20 mph (32.19 kph) or less (sustained
or gust):
               1.   The boom or boom/jib combination to be laid down;
               2.   The boom or boom/jib combination to be placed in a
jackknife position; or
               3.   Other special protective measures to be implemented.
            (C)   The placement of a mobile crane with a maximum manufacturer
rated capacity in excess of 10 tons (9.07 metric tons) on any elevation of a
building above grade.
         In addition, where other out of the ordinary or complex loading, load
paths, configurations, operations, or site conditions exist, or where the crane
application requires coordination among city agencies, the commissioner may
require peer review.
         (ii)   Peer reviewer. The peer review must be performed by a qualified
and independent New York State professional engineer who has been retained by
or on behalf of the equipment user.
            (A)   Peer reviewer to be acceptable to crane or derrick notice
engineer. The peer reviewer's qualifications must be acceptable to the crane or
derrick notice engineer.
            (B)   Department reserves right to reject peer reviewer. The
department reserves the right to reject a peer reviewer on the grounds of lack
of qualification or independence.
         (iii)   Responsibility of crane or derrick notice engineer. The crane
or derrick notice engineer retains sole responsibility for the crane or derrick
design indicated on the submitted crane or derrick notice application. The
activities and reports of the peer reviewer do not relieve the crane or derrick
notice engineer of any responsibility for the crane or derrick design indicated
on the submitted crane or derrick application.
         (iv)   Standard of care for of peer reviewer. The standard of care to
which the peer reviewer must be held in the performance of the peer review and
report must be equal to the level of skill and care required to prepare and
submit the crane or derrick notice application.
         (v)   Scope of the peer review. The peer reviewer must perform an
independent review and analysis of the crane or derrick design indicated on the
submitted crane or derrick notice application to confirm the design is in
general conformance with New York City Codes, rules, and regulations for cranes
and derricks. The review and analysis to determine general conformance shall
include but not be limited to the following:
            (A)   Confirm that drawings are complete, existing conditions and
base building construction loading have been accurately represented on the
drawings, and that any structures including, but not limited to, vaults,
adjacent buildings, overhead wires, transit structures, and utilities are
accurately represented on the drawings.
            (B)   Confirm that approved load charts have been included and
maximum picks represented correctly.
            (C)   Where applicable, review the project's geotechnical report
design recommendations and inspection reports to determine that appropriate
design criteria for dunnage or foundations has been utilized. If no design
criteria have been specified on the crane or derrick notice application design
drawings, the peer reviewer must state any assumptions or criteria utilized in
the analysis of the crane or derrick notice application design.
            (D)   Confirm the assembly/disassembly plan is complete, specific
to the configurations shown in the crane or derrick notice application, and
able to be fully implemented based upon site conditions.
            (E)   Confirm the wind action plan is complete, specific to the
configurations shown in the crane or derrick notice application, and able to be
fully implemented based upon site conditions.
            (F)   Where applicable, confirm that complete pre-operational test
procedures, including load test procedures, are included.
            (G)   Confirm that the crane or derrick has a complete load path
into the base building structure or ground.
            (H)   Perform independent calculations for all structural members,
connections and systems included in the load path determined in item vii above
and verify the foundation and structural elements' ability to support the crane
or derrick loads.
            (I)   Other items required by the commissioner.
         (vi)   Design criteria and assumptions not shown. If the design
criteria and design assumptions are not shown on the crane or derrick notice
application drawings or in the computations, the crane or derrick notice
engineer must provide a statement of these criteria and assumptions to the peer
reviewer. In addition, the crane or derrick notice engineer must provide other
information and/or calculations if requested by the peer reviewer.
         (vii)   Peer review report. The peer reviewer must submit a report to
the department stating his or her opinion regarding the design of the crane or
derrick proposed in the crane or derrick notice application and detailing
whether or not the crane or derrick design indicated on the submitted crane or
derrick notice application is in general conformance with New York City Codes,
rules, and regulations for cranes and derricks. The determination of general
conformance shall be based upon the review and analysis performed in accordance
with subparagraph (v) of this paragraph.
            (A)   Report contents. The peer review report must, at a minimum,
contain the following information:
               1.   Confirmation that the crane or derrick notice application:
                  A.   Complies with each of the items listed in subparagraph
(v) of this paragraph.
                  B.   All design loads and their combinations are adequate and
compliant with New York City codes, rules, and regulations for cranes and
derricks and specific project conditions.
                  C.   The crane and its supporting elements can safely sustain
the design loads.
               2.   In the introduction to the peer review report, the peer
reviewer must list his or her qualifications and include a statement that he or
she is independent from the crane or derrick notice engineer.
               3.   All calculations, specific conclusions and results of
verification calculations performed by the peer reviewer.
               4.   A listing of all drawings and reports used in verification
(including revision numbers and dates). Where the peer reviewer relied upon
reports or data prepared by others, including but not limited reports by
specialty consultants (e.g. geotechnical reports), or reports prepared by the
crane or derrick manufacturer, the reliance must be disclosed in the peer
review report. Such reports or data must be maintained by the peer reviewer for
a minimum of six years after the date of project completion, and must be
provided to the department upon request.
            (B)   Conclusions. The peer review report must provide a clear
conclusion either:
               1.   Accepting that the crane or derrick design indicated on the
submitted crane or derrick notice application is in general conformance with
New York City Codes, rules, and regulations for cranes and derricks; or
               2.   Rejecting the design.
            (C)   Positive statements to be unequivocal. Positive evaluations
with conclusions that contain exceptions will not be accepted by the
department.
            (D)   Basis of report. The peer review report must be based on and
reference only the set of documents submitted to the department with the crane
or derrick notice application; all drawings and the latest revision dates must
be clearly enumerated in the peer review report.
            (E)   Changes to be enumerated. Peer review reports must enumerate
the changes, if any, made by the crane or derrick notice engineer as a result
of discussions following an initial structural peer review evaluation.
            (F)   Cover statement. The peer review report must include a cover
letter provided by the department and completed by the peer reviewer.
            (G)   Signed and sealed. The peer review report and cover statement
must be signed and sealed by the peer reviewer.
         (vii)   Copy to be provided to equipment user. The peer reviewer must
provide a copy of submitted peer review reports and cover statements to the
equipment user.
         (viii)   [Reserved.]
         (ix)   Phased submission. If the crane or derrick notice application
is to be submitted in phases, the peer review and report must be phased. The
crane or derrick notice engineer must provide the peer reviewer with sufficient
information to make a peer review of the phased submission. The phased peer
review report submission must cover the documents submitted for that phase, and
must be without any exclusion that would make the review incomplete.
         (x)   Log of discussions. The peer reviewer must keep a log of any
discussions with the crane or derrick notice engineer. The log must be made
available to the commissioner upon request.
         (xi)   Modifications to the design. Amendments to the crane or derrick
notice application that include changes that substantially modify the basis of
the peer review evaluation will not be approved by the department until an
amended peer review report and cover statement is submitted to the department
by the peer reviewer. The report must provide a statement of acceptance that
the design indicated in the amended crane or derrick notice application is in
general conformance with New York City codes, rules, and regulations for cranes
and derricks. It is the responsibility of the crane or derrick notice engineer
to clearly identify on the plans the changes that are substantial and to notify
the peer reviewer of any such changes.
         (xii)   Disputes. When a dispute arises between the crane or derrick
notice engineer and the peer reviewer regarding compliance with New York City
Codes, rules, or regulations for cranes and derricks, and which cannot be
resolved by the parties, the dispute must be reported to the department in the
form of a letter from the crane or derrick notice engineer.
         (xiii)   Changes in designated peer reviewer. The peer reviewer cannot
be changed without the express consent of the department. The current peer
reviewer must submit a written request for withdrawal to the department
detailing the reason for the withdrawal request and a report of the peer review
findings to date.
      (14)   Special requirements for rotating telehandlers and articulating
boom cranes. This paragraph sets forth additional requirements for rotating
telehandlers and for articulating boom cranes attached to a commercial truck
chassis.
         (i)   Certificate of on-site inspection required. A certificate of on-
site inspection is required for the use of a rotating telehandler, or for the
use of an articulating boom crane attached to a commercial truck chassis, at
any site where at least one of the following occurs:
            1.   The boom, including jibs and any other extensions to the boom,
exceeds 135 feet (41.15 m) in length;
            2.   The rotating telehandler or articulating boom crane raises a
load to a height of more than 100 feet (30.48 m);
            3.   The rotating telehandler or articulating boom crane is set up
on a steel platform, excluding mats or dunnage at the street or ground level;
or
            4.   The rotating telehandler or articulating boom crane has a
manufacturer’s rated capacity in excess of 50 tons (45.36 t).
            Exception: Uses exempted from a certificate of on-site inspection
by Sections 3316.1, 3319.1, or 3319.3 of the New York City Building Code or
subdivision (c) of this section. This includes but is not limited to rotating
telehandlers when configured as excavating or earth-moving equipment, drilling
equipment, tree trimming equipment, demolition grapplers, or aerial work
platforms, provided all the conditions and restrictions in the applicable
exemption are met. A rotating telehandler equipped with forks is not considered
to be a powered industrial truck (forklift).
         (ii)   Permit required. Provided the rotating telehandler or
articulating boom crane does not otherwise require a certificate of on-site
inspection pursuant to subparagraph (i) of this paragraph, a temporary
construction equipment permit is required for the use of a rotating telehandler
at a site for which a construction superintendent is required, and for the use
of an articulating boom crane attached to a commercial truck chassis at a site
for which a construction superintendent is required.
            Exceptions: 
               1.   Uses exempted from a certificate of on-site inspection by
Sections 3316.1, 3319.1, or 3319.3 of the New York City Building Code or
subdivision (c) of this section. This includes but is not limited to rotating
telehandlers when configured as excavating or earth-moving equipment, drilling
equipment, tree trimming equipment, demolition grapplers, or aerial work
platforms, provided all the conditions and restrictions in the applicable
exemption are met. A rotating telehandler equipped with forks is not considered
to be a powered industrial truck (forklift).
               2.   At a major building site requiring a construction
superintendent where the site safety plan for the project is filed before
January 1, 2028, or at a non-major building site requiring a construction
superintendent where the application for construction document or demolition
submittal document approval for the underlying project is submitted before
January 1, 2028, a temporary construction equipment permit is not required to
perform any of the following activities:
                  2.1.   Install / remove HVAC, electrical, plumbing, telecom,
or similar equipment, and supporting dunnage, to/from a roof, setback, or other
location exterior to a building.
                  2.2.   Install / remove foundation or support of excavation
elements, provided the rotating telehandler or articulating boom crane is set
up and operated exclusively within the confines of the excavation or
foundation.
                  2.3.   Pick and carry material or equipment, provided the
material or equipment is not raised more than 12 feet (3658 mm) during the
picking and carrying operation and the area of the picking and carrying
operation is temporarily or permanently closed to the public during the
operation.
                  2.4.   A one-off delivery / removal of material or equipment
to/from one truck / trailer, provided that the material or equipment is not
arranged by the rotating telehandler or articulating boom crane in a particular
sequence for hoisting, with all loads promptly deposited and not held,
supported, nor stabilized by the rotating telehandler or articulating boom
crane while the load is being installed, uninstalled, or braced, including but
not limited to holding the load in place while it is bolted or affixed to a
structure, and further provided that when the rotating telehandler or
articulating boom crane is located outside of the property line of the site,
that the rotating telehandler or articulating boom crane does not remain
outside of the site beyond the time necessary to perform the delivery / removal
operation.
         (iii)   Scope of temporary construction equipment permit. A temporary
construction equipment permit for a rotating telehandler or an articulating
boom crane attached to a commercial truck chassis crane can be applicable to
multiple pieces of equipment, multiple makes and models of equipment, and
multiple setups and setup locations, provided the use of the equipment is under
the control of the permit holder. For a permit issued to an equipment owner or
vendor, control means the equipment is owned or leased by such owner or vendor.
For a permit issued to a contractor, control means the equipment is used to
advance the work of the contractor at the site, including that of any sub-
contractor engaged by the contractor. A permit may only be for articulating
boom cranes, or only for rotating telehandlers, and not both. Separate permits
are required when articulating boom cranes and rotating telehandlers are both
used at the site.
         (iv)   Content of construction documents. Construction documents filed
for a temporary construction equipment permit for a rotating telehandler or an
articulating boom crane attached to a commercial truck chassis must clearly
indicate acceptable makes and models of equipment, and must also clearly detail
equipment setup locations, swing and lifting radius, and pertinent obstacles,
restrictions, and site features.
         (v)   Permit made available to operator. The permit holder for the
temporary construction equipment permit must provide a copy of the permit and
construction documents to the operator of the rotating telehandler or
articulating boom crane prior to the operator setting up or using the
telehandler or crane at the site.
         (vi)   Other uses. Neither a certificate of on-site inspection, nor a
temporary construction equipment permit, is required for the use of a rotating
telehandler, or for the use of an articulating boom crane attached to a
commercial truck chassis, unless specifically required by subparagraphs (i) or
(ii) of this paragraph.
         (vii)   Requirements of other agencies. The requirements for, and
exemptions from, a certificate of on-site inspection or temporary construction
equipment permit do not alleviate the need to comply with the permit
requirements of other agencies, including but not limited to those of the New
York City Department of Transportation as referenced in paragraph (7) of
subdivision (s) of this section.
   (h)   Crane or derrick log. For a crane or derrick that requires a
certificate of on-site inspection, or that is used under the direct and
continuing supervision of a licensed master rigger, the equipment user must
maintain, for the duration of the job, a crane or derrick log. The log may be
maintained in an electronic format acceptable to the commissioner. The log
must, at a minimum, contain the following information:
      (1)   Equipment user custody of the crane or derrick, as evidenced by an
entry noting the corporate name of the equipment user and the date and time the
equipment user takes or relinquishes custody over the crane or derrick. Such
entry must be signed and dated by an authorized representative of the equipment
user;
      (2)   Records of inspections required by paragraphs (1) and (2) of
subdivision (k) of this section. Such records must be signed and dated by the
hoisting machine operator who performed the inspection;
      (3)   The meeting log for the erection, climbing, jumping, or dismantling
of a tower crane required by Section 3319.8.6 of the New York City Building
Code;
      (4)   The date and time of pre-shift meetings held in accordance with 1
RCNY §
3319-02(j), along with the names, titles, and company affiliations of those who
participated in the meeting; and
      (5)   The assembly/disassembly director for the assembly/ disassembly
operation, as evidenced by an entry noting the name and contact information of
the assembly/disassembly director. Such entry must be signed and dated by the
assembly/disassembly director. If the assembly/disassembly director changes
prior to the completion of the operation, this must be noted in the log, with
the name and contact information of the new assembly/disassembly director
entered, signed and dated by the new assembly/disassembly director.
   (i)   Personnel. 
      (1)   Operators. Operators of cranes and derricks must be licensed in
accordance with Article 405 of Chapter 4 of Title 28 of the Administrative
Code.
      Exceptions: 
         1.   Operators exempted by Article 405 of Chapter 4 of Title 28 of the
Administrative Code.
         2.   Operators of equipment exempted by Sections 3316.1 or 3319.1 of
the New York City Building Code. This includes but is not limited to rotating
telehandlers when configured as excavating or earth-moving equipment, drilling
equipment, tree trimming equipment, demolition grapplers, or aerial work
platforms, provided all the conditions and restrictions in the applicable
exemption are met. A rotating telehandler equipped with forks is not considered
to be a powered industrial truck (forklift).
         3.   Learners in the presence of and under the direct supervision of a
licensed operator in accordance with 1 RCNY §
104-23.
         4.   Operators of cranes described in exceptions 3 and 4 of Section
3319.3 of the New York City Building Code, provided the crane is used in
connection with the installation or maintenance of street lighting or public
utility overhead power distribution systems.
         5.   On or before November 6, 2024, operators of a mobile crane that
has a boom length of 135 feet (41.15 m) or less, and that is utilized at the
site to exclusively to:
            5.1.   Install, adjust, maintain, repair, or remove a sidewalk
shed; or
            5.2.   Install or dismantle the initial level of a single or dual
cab hoist, provided:
               5.2.1.   Such installation or dismantling is limited to the
hoist cars, counterweights, and initial mast sections needed for the car;
               5.2.2.   Car or motor components to be hoisted are equipped with
lifting lugs; and
               5.2.3.   No object is hoisted more than 20 feet (6.1 m) above
the bed of the delivery truck during such installation or dismantling
operation.
         6.   Operators of dedicated pile drivers, provided that such operator
possesses a valid certification for the operation of the pile driver issued by
an organization acceptable to the commissioner and accredited by the National
Commission for Certifying Agencies (NCCA) or the American National Standards
Institute (ANSI).
         7.   On or before November 6, 2024, operators of mobile cranes with
telescoping or hydraulic booms, including jibs and any other extensions to the
boom, not exceeding 50 feet (15.24 m) in length with a manufacturer's rated
capacity of 3 tons (2.72 t) or less, provided:
            7.1.   The work does not meet the definition of a critical pick as
set forth in Section 202 of the Building Code;
            7.2.   The work is not related to steel erection; and
            7.3.   The operator holds a valid certification for the operation
of the crane, acceptable to the commissioner, issued by the manufacturer of the
crane for the specific make and model of crane to be operated; or
            7.4.   The operator holds a valid certification for the operation
of a mini crane issued by an organization acceptable to the commissioner and
accredited by the National Commission for Certifying Agencies (NCCA) or the
American National Standards Institute (ANSI).
         8.   On or before November 6, 2024, operators of articulating boom
cranes that do not have an integral hoisting mechanism, and that are used
exclusively for loading and unloading of trucks or trailers, provided that the
length of boom does not exceed 135 feet (41.15 m) and that any material
transported thereon shall not be raised more than 100 feet (30.48 m) in the
unloading process.
         9.   On or before November 6, 2024, operators of telehandlers,
provided the telehandler is not equipped with a hoisting mechanism.
         10.   Operators of wheel mounted non-rotating ("fixed") telehandlers
with a telescoping boom, including jibs and any other extensions to the boom,
not exceeding 200 feet (60.96 m) in length and with a manufacturer's rated
capacity of 50 tons (45.36 t) or less, and not equipped with a hoisting
mechanism. However, where such telehandler is configured with a hook
attachment, jib attachment, concrete bucket attachment, or a vacuum or magnetic
lifting attachment, or otherwise moves a suspended load, the operator must
possess on and after November 7, 2024 a certification from the National
Commission for the Certification of Crane Operators ("NCCCO") for the operation
of such telehandler. However, even if otherwise required by this provision, a
license or certification is not required for the operator of a wheel mounted
non-rotating ("fixed") telehandler when the operation or configuration of the
telehandler meets another exemption in this paragraph for a crane or
telehandler.
         11.   Operators of mobile cranes described in exception number 3 of
Section 3319.3 of the New York City Building Code, where such operators are
employees of the New York City Department of Environmental Protection (“DEP”)
performing work in connection with DEP’s installation, maintenance, or removal
of water or sewer infrastructure, and maintenance of stormwater infrastructure
and coastal protection systems.
         12.   Operators who submitted an application for a Limited Hoisting
Machine Operator license for an articulating boom crane, mini crane, or
telehandler on or before November 6, 2024, may continue to operate equipment
within the scope of the application until their application is processed and a
decision made by the department to approve or deny such application.
      (2)   Rigging supervisor. Rigging work must be supervised in accordance
with Section 3316.9.1 of the New York City Building Code, and where required,
riggers must be licensed in accordance with Chapter 4 of Title 28 of the New
York City Administrative Code.
      (3)   Rigging crew. Members of the rigging crew, including signalpersons,
must be trained or certified in accordance with Section 3316.9.2 of the New
York City Building Code, or must work under the direct and continuing
supervision of a licensed rigger.
      (4)   Lift director. Where a lift director is designated, the lift
director will possess the responsibility and authority as indicated in 1 RCNY §
3319-02.
      (5)   Flagpersons and pedestrian traffic managers. Flagpersons and
pedestrian traffic managers must meet the requirements of the Department of
Transportation.
      (6)   Assembly/disassembly director. No crane or derrick that requires a
certificate of on-site inspection may be assembled or disassembled unless an
assembly/disassembly director provides continuous, onsite supervision of such
assembly/ disassembly operation, and ensures compliance with the approved
assembly/disassembly plan, and as applicable, relevant rigging plans.
         (i)   Designation and qualifications. The assembly/ disassembly
director must be designated by the equipment user and must be a person who
meets the criteria for both a competent person and a qualified person, or a
competent person who is assisted by one or more qualified persons; where the
assembly/ disassembly operation is to be supervised by a licensed master or
tower crane rigger or a master rigging foreman, such licensee or foreman must
be designated as the assembly/disassembly director.
         (ii)   Training and licensing. Where the assembly/ disassembly
operation involves the hoisting or lowering of articles, the assembly/
disassembly director must either be a licensed master or tower crane rigger, a
master rigging foreman, be trained or certified as a rigging supervisor in
accordance with Section 3316.9.2 of the New York City Building Code, or have
completed the training requirements of Section 3319.10 of the New York City
Building Code. Exception: For the erection, jumping, climbing, or dismantling
of a tower crane, the assembly/ disassembly director must be the licensed
master or tower crane rigger who is supervising the erection, jumping,
climbing, or dismantling work; such licensed rigger must be trained in
accordance with Section 3319.10 of the New York City Building Code.
         (iii)   Review of the assembly/disassembly plan. The assembly/
disassembly director must review the approved assembly/disassembly plan, and as
applicable, relevant rigging plans, immediately prior to the commencement of
the assembly/disassembly operation. It is the responsibility of the equipment
user to verify that the assembly/disassembly director has reviewed the
materials, as required above.
      (7)   Assembly/disassembly crew. Before beginning assembly/ disassembly
operations for a crane or derrick that requires a certificate of on-site
inspection, the assembly/disassembly director must ensure that all members of
the assembly/ disassembly crew, including signalpersons, understand their tasks
and hazards associated with their tasks. Where the assembly/disassembly
operation involves the hoisting or lowering of articles, the individuals who
attach or detach articles from the hook of hoisting equipment utilized in
conjunction with the assembly/disassembly operation, and signalpersons, must
either be trained or certified as a rigging crew member in accordance with
Section 3316.9.2 of the New York City Building Code, or have completed the
training requirements of Section 3319.10 of the New York City Building Code.
      Exception: Individuals who erect, jump, climb, or dismantle a tower crane
must be trained in accordance with Section 3319.10 of the New York City
Building Code.
      (8)   Specialty crews. Notwithstanding the foregoing, specialty crews
must comply with the requirements of 1 RCNY §
104-20.
   (j)   [Reserved.] 
   (k)   Inspections. Cranes and derricks must be inspected in accordance with
the following. 
      (1)   Frequent inspection. Prior to each shift the hoisting machine
operator must perform a frequent inspection. 
         (i)   Inspection items. The frequent inspection must include a check
of the following: 
            (A)   Mobile cranes and dedicated pile drivers, other than
articulating boom cranes. For mobile cranes and dedicated pile drivers, other
than articulating boom cranes: 
               1.   Items (a) - (c), (e) and (g) - (j) of Section 5-2.1.2 of
ASME B30.5 (2014 edition); 
               2.   Safety devices and operational aids for malfunction; 
               3.   Attachments for damage or deformation. This inspection may
be accomplished by observation from the ground without lowering the boom unless
deficiencies are suspected; 
               4.   Ground conditions around the equipment for proper support,
including ground settling under and around outriggers/ stabilizers and
supporting foundations, ground water accumulation, or similar conditions; 
               5.   The equipment for level position within the tolerances
specified in the approved crane or derrick notice plans, or, where plans are
not required, by the equipment manufacturer's recommendations. This inspection
must be performed both before each shift and after each move and setup; 
               6.   Operator cab windows for significant cracks, breaks, or
other deficiencies that would hamper the operator's view; 
               7.   For a dedicated pile driver, pile driving rig for cracks,
damage, deformation, or excessive wear; 
               8.   For a friction crane, deterioration or leakage in air
systems; and 
               9.   For a friction crane, hoist brakes, clutches, and operating
levers for proper functioning. 
            (B)   Tower cranes, other than a self-erecting tower crane. For a
tower crane, other than a self-erecting tower crane: 
               1.   Items (a) – (h) and (j) – (l) of Section 3-2.1.3 of ASME
B30.3 (2016 edition); and 
               2.   Operator cab windows for significant cracks, breaks, or
other deficiencies that would hamper the operator's view. 
            (C)   Derricks. For a derrick, items (a) – (e) and (g) – (i) of
Section 6-2.1.2 of ASME B30.6 (2015 edition). 
            (D)   Articulating boom cranes. For an articulating boom crane: 
               1.   Items (a) – (d) and (f) – (l) of Section 22-2.1.3 of ASME
B30.22 (2016 edition); and 
               2.   Items 3 through 6 in clause (A) above. 
            (E)   Self-erecting tower cranes. For a self-erecting tower crane: 
               1.   Items 1-4, 6-7, and 9 of Section 29-2.1.3(b) of ASME B30.29
(2012 edition); 
               2.   Items 3 through 6 in clause (A) above; 
               3.   Structural members for damage or deformation. This
inspection may be accomplished by observation from the ground without lowering
the mast/boom unless deficiencies are suspected; and 
               4.   Rope reeving for compliance with crane manufacturer's
specifications. 
         (ii)   Record of inspection. Where the crane or derrick requires a
certificate of on-site inspection, at the conclusion of the inspection, the
hoisting machine operator must record the results of the inspection in the
crane or derrick log required by subdivision (h) of this section. Any
deficiencies must be clearly noted. 
         (iii)   Defects. Any defects revealed by the inspection must be
corrected. Where such defects constitute a safety hazard, the crane or derrick
cannot be operated until such defects are corrected. 
      (2)   Parking/securing inspection. The hoisting machine operator must
perform a parking/securing inspection at the end of the shift, including the
end of an assembly/disassembly operation where the crane or derrick will not
immediately begin operation, and any other time the crane or derrick is taken
out of service and parked or secured, including but not limited due to
inclement weather. 
      Exceptions:
            1.   When the crane or derrick is removed from the site. 
            2.   When the telescopic or articulating boom is fully retracted. 
            3.   When the self-erecting tower crane has been fully broken
down. 
         (i)   Inspection items. The inspection must verify that the crane or
derrick is in a proper out of service configuration for occurring and
forecasted winds and weather conditions, and its controls have been secured. 
         (ii)   Record of inspection. Where the crane or derrick requires a
certificate of on-site inspection, at the conclusion of the inspection, the
hoisting machine operator must record the following information in the crane or
derrick log required by subdivision (h) of this section: 
            (A)   The out of service configuration in which the crane was left
(e.g. boomed up with boom and jib angles specified, boom or boom/jib
combination laid down, boom or boom/jib combination jackknifed, or other
special protective measures implemented); 
            (B)   A reference to the approved wind action plan drawing, or,
where such a plan is not required, the page of the manufacturer's manual that
specifies the indicated out of service configuration; and 
            (C)   The maximum wind speed allowed for such configuration as
indicated in the approved wind action plan, or, where such a plan is not
required, the manufacturer's manual. 
      (3)   Periodic inspection. A periodic inspection of the crane or derrick
must be performed at one to twelve month intervals, or as specifically
recommended by the manufacturer, depending upon its activity, severity of
service, and environment. 
         (i)   Inspection items. At a minimum, the periodic inspection must
include a check of all of the items listed for a frequent inspection by
paragraph (1) above, and a check for the following: 
            (A)   Deformed, cracked or corroded members in the crane or derrick
structure and boom. 
            (B)   Loose bolts or rivets. 
            (C)   Cracked or worn sheaves and drums. 
            (D)   Worn, cracked or distorted parts such as pins, bearings,
shafts, gears, rollers and locking devices. 
            (E)   Excessive wear on brake and clutch system parts, linings,
pawls and ratchets. 
            (F)   Load, boom angle and other indicators over their full range,
for any significant inaccuracies. 
            (G)   Gasoline, diesel, electric or other power plants for improper
performance or non-compliance with safety requirements. 
            (H)   Excessive wear of chain drive sprockets and excessive chain
stretch. 
            (I)   Crane or derrick hooks. Magnetic particle or other suitable
crack detecting inspection should be performed at least once each year by an
approved inspection agency retained by the owner. Certified inspection reports
are to be made available to the department upon request. 
            (J)   Travel steering, braking and locking devices, for
malfunction. 
            (K)   Excessively worn or damaged tires. 
            (L)   Derrick gudgeon pin for cracks, wear and distortion each time
the derrick is to be erected. 
            (M)   Foundation or supports must be inspected for continued
ability to sustain the imposed loads. 
         (ii)   Defects. Any defects revealed by inspection must be corrected.
Where such defects constitute a safety hazard the crane or derrick must not be
operated until such defects are corrected. 
      (4)   Cranes and derricks not in regular use.
         (i)   Where a crane or derrick has been idle for one month or more,
but less than six months, the equipment owner must perform an inspection that
meets the requirements of paragraph (1) of this subdivision and subparagraph
(i) of paragraph (1) of subdivision (m) of this section (a "frequent
inspection" for the crane or derrick and for the ropes) before submitting an
application for a certificate of on-site inspection in accordance with Section
3319.6 of the New York City Building Code. 
         (ii)   Where a crane or derrick has been idle for six months or
longer, the equipment owner must perform an inspection that meets the
requirements of paragraph (3) of this subdivision and subparagraph (ii) of
paragraph (1) of subdivision (m) of this section (a "periodic inspection" for
the crane or derrick and for the ropes) before submitting an application for a
certificate of on-site inspection in accordance with Section 3319.6 of the New
York City Building Code. 
      (5)   Inspections for a certificate of on-site inspection. See paragraph
(8) of subdivision (g) of this section. 
      (6)   Special inspections. Special inspections for cranes and derricks,
as well as special inspectors and special inspection agencies must meet the
requirements of Chapter 1 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code, Chapter 17 of
the New York City Building Code, and any rules thereunder promulgated by the
commissioner. 
         (i)   Special inspection required. The following special inspections
are required for cranes and derricks: 
            (A)   Inspection of fabricated steel. Fabricated steel, including
welds made at the fabricators facility, must be in accordance with Section
1704.2 of the New York City Building Code. 
            Exceptions:
               1.   Steel fabricated by the manufacturer of the crane or
derrick, or an entity authorized by the manufacturer. 
               2.   Fabricated steel for which the shop drawings for the steel
are signed, sealed, and stamped as reviewed by the crane or derrick notice
engineer, and such shop drawings are kept at the site and made available to the
commissioner upon request. 
            (B)   Tower crane foundations. Foundations for a tower crane are
subject to the following types of special inspection, as applicable: 
               1.   Steel welding of field welds; 
               2.   Structural steel high strength bolts, except for those
provided or authorized by the crane manufacturer; 
               3.   Concrete construction; 
               4.   Subsurface conditions; and 
               5.   Deep foundations. 
            (C)   Modifications to the base building or structure, other
structural elements, or to adjacent retaining walls, excavations, or
foundations. Modifications to the base building or structure, other structural
elements, or to adjacent retaining walls, excavations, or foundations,
including but not limited to reinforcing provided to sustain tie-in connection
loads, are subject to the following types of special inspection, as applicable:
 
               1.   Steel welding of field welds; 
               2.   Structural steel high strength bolts; 
               3.   Concrete construction; 
               4.   Subsurface conditions; 
               5.   Deep foundations; and 
               6.   Excavations. 
            (D)   Platforms, dunnage, or ramps. Platforms, dunnage, or ramps
that support a crane or derrick, and connections between such platform,
dunnage, or ramp and the base building or structure are subject to the
following types of special inspection, as applicable: 
               1.   Steel welding of field welds; 
               2.   Structural steel high strength bolts; and 
               3.   Concrete construction. 
         (ii)   Concrete placement less than 50 cubic yards. Concrete special
inspections are required even if the total concrete placement on the given
project is less than 50 cubic yards (38 m 3 ). 
         (iii)   Permanent elements. Special inspection of items listed in
subparagraph (i) above and that will remain as permanent construction with the
base building or structure, including but not limited to tower crane
foundations and rebar embedded in floors, must be performed by the special
inspector for the base building or structure. 
         (iv)   Providing copies of records to the crane or derrick notice
engineer. The special inspector must provide all documentation relating to the
special inspection, including but not limited to documentation of the
inspection results, to the crane or derrick notice engineer upon request by
such engineer. 
   (l)   Maintenance of Cranes and Derricks.
      (1)   Preventive maintenance. 
         (i)   A preventive maintenance program based on the crane or derrick
manufacturer's recommendations shall be established. Dated and detailed records
shall be readily available to the department.
         (ii)   It is recommended that replacement parts be obtained from the
original equipment manufacturer.
      (2)   Maintenance procedure. 
         (i)   Before adjustments and repairs are started on a crane or
derrick, the following precautions shall be taken as applicable:
            (A)   Crane or derrick placed or arranged where it will cause the
least interference with other equipment or operations in the area.
            (B)   All controls at the "off " positions.
            (C)   Starting means rendered inoperative.
            (D)   Warning or "out of order" signs placed on the crane or
derrick and hoist.
            (E)   Power plant stopped or disconnected at take-off.
            (F)   Boom lowered to the ground if possible or otherwise secured
against dropping.
            (G)   Lower load block lowered to the ground or otherwise secured
against dropping.
         (ii)   After adjustment and repairs have been made, the crane or
derrick shall not be operated until all guards have been reinstalled, safety
devices reactivated and maintenance equipment removed.
      (3)   Adjustments and Repairs.
         (i)   Any unsafe conditions disclosed by the inspection requirements
of subdivision (k) of this section shall be corrected before operation of the
crane or derrick is resumed. Adjustments and repairs shall be done only by a
competent person.
         (ii)   Adjustments shall be maintained to assure correct functioning
of components. The following are examples:
            (A)   All functional operating mechanisms.
            (B)   Safety devices.
            (C)   Control systems.
            (D)   Power plants.
            (E)   Tie downs or anchorages.
            (F)   Signal system.
            (G)   Guys.
         (iii)   Repairs or replacements shall be provided promptly as needed
for safe operation. The following are examples:
            (A)   All critical parts of functional operating mechanisms which
are cracked, broken, corroded, bent or excessively worn.
            (B)   All critical parts of the crane or derrick structure which
are cracked, bent, broken or excessively corroded.
            (C)   Crane or derrick hooks showing defects described in 15.3.5
shall be discarded. Repairs by welding or reshaping are not acceptable unless
written approval of the department is obtained.
            (D)   Pitted or burned electrical contacts should be corrected only
by replacement and in sets. Controller parts should be lubricated as
recommended by the manufacturer.
         (iv)   All replacement parts or repairs shall have at least the
original safety factor and be in accordance with the specifications of the
manufacturer. Approval of the department shall be required for the replacement
or repair of main structural members as listed below, for which no fee will be
required:
            (A)   Boom or mast;
            (B)   Jib or extensions;
            (C)   Gantries;
            (D)   Counterweight supports and attachments;
            (E)   Rope; and
            (F)   Overturning stability.
               Exception: Only clauses (A), (B) and (E) above apply to
derricks.
      (4)   Lubrication of Cranes and Derricks. 
         (i)   All moving parts of the crane or derrick and hoist for which
lubrication is specified, including rope and chain, shall be regularly
lubricated. Lubricating systems shall be checked for proper delivery of
lubricant. Particular care should be taken to follow manufacturer's
recommendations as to point and frequency of lubrication, maintenance of
lubricant levels and types of lubricants to be used. Lubrication shall be
performed under the supervision of the crane operator, oiler or maintenance
engineer.
         (ii)   Machinery shall be stationary while lubricants are being
applied and protection provided as called for in clauses (B) through (E) of
subparagraph (i) of paragraph (2) of subdivision (1) of this section inclusive,
unless such machinery is equipped for automatic lubrication.
   (m)   Rope Inspection, Replacement and Maintenance by Owner for Cranes and
Derricks. 
      (1)   Rope Inspection. 
         (i)   Frequent Inspection. 
            (A)   All ropes in continuous service shall be visually inspected
once every working day. A visual inspection shall consist of observation of all
rope that can reasonably be expected to be in use during the day's operation.
This visual inspection shall be directed towards discovering gross damage that
may be an immediate hazard, including the following:
               1.   Distortion of the rope such as kinking, crushing,
unstranding, birdcaging, main strand displacement, or core protrusion. Loss of
rope diameter in a short rope length or unevenness of outer strands should
provide evidence that the rope or ropes must be replaced.
               2.   General corrosion
               3.   Broken or cut strands
               4.   Number, distribution and type of visible broken wires (See
subparagraph (ii) of paragraph (2) of subdivision (m) of this section for
further guidance)
               5.   Core failure in rotation-resistant ropes. When such damage
is discovered, the rope shall be either removed from service or given an
inspection as detailed in subparagraph (ii) of paragraph (1) of subdivision (m)
of this section.
            (B)   Care shall be taken when inspecting sections of rapid
deterioration such as flange points, crossover points, and repetitive pickup
points.
            (C)   Care shall be taken when inspecting the following types of
rope:
               1.   Rotation-resistant rope.
               2.   Boom hoist rope.
         (ii)   Periodic Inspection. 
            (A)   There shall be periodic inspections performed at least
annually. The inspection frequency shall be determined by a qualified person
and shall be based on such factors as expected rope life as determined by
experience on the particular installation or similar installations, severity of
the environment, percentage of capacity lifts, frequency rates of operation,
and exposure to shock loads. Inspections need not be at equal calendar
intervals and should be more frequent as the rope approaches the end of its
useful life.
            (B)   In the event a periodic inspection is not feasible within a
12-month period due to existing set-up and configuration of the equipment or
due to site conditions, such periodic inspection shall be performed as soon as
it becomes feasible but no longer than an additional 6 months for running ropes
and, for standing ropes, at the time of disassembly. Written notification and
approval of the commissioner must be obtained prior to extending the use of the
rope beyond the 12-month inspection period.
            (C)   Periodic inspections shall be performed by a qualified
person. This inspection shall cover the entire length of rope. Only the surface
wires of the rope shall be inspected. Any deterioration resulting in an
appreciable loss of original strength shall be noted and determination made as
to whether further use of the rope would constitute a hazard. The periodic
inspection shall include examination of the following:
               1.   Points listed in clause (A) of subparagraph (i) of
paragraph (1) of subdivision (m) of this section.
               2.   Reduction of rope diameter below nominal diameter due to
loss of core support, internal or external corrosion, or wear of outside wires.
               3.   Severely corroded or broken wires at end connections.
               4.   Severely corroded, cracked bent, worn or improperly applied
end connections.
            (D)   Care shall be taken when inspecting sections of rapid
deterioration, such as the following:
               1.   Sections in contact with saddles, equalizer sheaves, or
other sheaves where rope travel is limited.
               2.   Sections of the rope at or near terminal ends where
corroded or broken wires may protrude.
            (E)   All rope that has been idle for a period of six months or
more shall be given a periodic inspection before it is placed into service.
      (2)   Rope Replacement. 
         (i)   When a rope reaches any one of the specified removal criteria,
it may be allowed to operate to the end of the work shift, based on the
judgment of a qualified person. The rope shall be replaced after that work
shift, at the end of the day, or at the latest time prior to the equipment
being used by the next work shift.
         (ii)   Removal criteria for rope replacement shall meet manufacturer's
specification or as follows:
            (A)   Broken Wires:
               1.   In running ropes, six randomly distributed broken wires in
one lay or three broken wires in one strand in one lay.
               2.   In rotation-resistant ropes, two randomly distributed
broken wires in six diameters or four randomly distributed broken wires in 30
rope diameters.
               3.   One outer wire broken at the point of contact with the core
rope that has worked its way out of the rope structure and protrudes or loops
out from the rope structure. Additional inspection of this section is required.
               4.   Kinking, crushing, birdcaging, or any other damage
resulting in distortion of the rope structure.
               5.   Evidence of heat damage from any cause.
               6.   Reductions from nominal diameter of more than the
following:
                  A.   1/64 in. for diameters up to and including 5/16 in.
                  B.   1/32 in. for diameters up to and including 1/2 in.
                  C.   3/64 in. for diameters up to and including 3/4 in.
                  D.   1/16 in. for diameters up to and including 1 1/8 in.
                  E.   3/32 in. for diameters up to and including 1 1/2 in.
               7.   In standing ropes, more than two broken wires in one lay in
sections beyond end connections or more than one broken wire at an end
connection.
         (iii)   Replacement rope shall have strength rating at least as great
as the original rope furnished or recommended by the crane manufacturer. Any
deviation from the original size, grade, or construction shall be specified by
the rope manufacturer, the crane manufacturer, or a qualified person.
         (iv)   Discarded rope shall not be used for slings.
      (3)   Rope Maintenance. 
         (i)   Rope shall be stored to prevent damage or deterioration.
         (ii)   Unreeling or uncoiling of rope shall be done as recommended by
the rope manufacturer and with extreme care to avoid kinking or inducing a
twist.
         (iii)   Before cutting a rope, seizings shall be placed on each side
of the place where the rope is to be cut to prevent unlaying of the strands. On
preformed rope, one seizing on each side of the cut is required. On non-
preformed ropes of 7/8 inch diameter or smaller, two seizings on each side of
the cut are required, and for non-preformed rope of one inch diameter or
larger, three seizings on each side of the cut are required.
         (iv)   During installation care shall be observed to avoid dragging of
the rope in dirt or around objects which will scrape, nick, crush, or induce
sharp bends in it.
         (v)   Rope should be maintained in a well lubricated condition. It is
important that lubricant applied as part of a maintenance program shall be
compatible with the original lubricant and to this end the rope manufacturer
should be consulted. Those sections of rope which are located over sheaves or
otherwise hidden during inspection and maintenance procedures require special
attention when lubricating rope. The object of rope lubrication is to reduce
internal friction and to prevent corrosion. Periodic field lubrication is
particularly important for non-rotating rope.
   (n)   Safety Devices Required. All cranes and derricks shall be equipped
with safety devices as provided herein, except equipment used exclusively for
pile driving, clamshell and dragline used for excavation. The commissioner
shall approve these safety devices.
      (1)   Indicators or Limiters. All mobile cranes with a maximum rated
capacity of 3 tons or more shall be equipped with a load indicator, load moment
indicator, or a load moment limiter.
         (i)   Cranes with a total boom length including jibs and any other
extensions not exceeding 150 feet shall be exempt.
         (ii)   Cranes manufactured before December 30, 1993 shall be exempt.
The margin of stability for determination of load ratings of these cranes shall
be established at 75 percent of the load, which will produce a condition of
tipping or balance with the boom in the least stable direction relative to the
mounting where overturning stability governs the lifting performance.
         (iii)   Cranes shall have a radius or boom angle indicator provided in
conjunction with a load indicator.
      (2)   Anti-Two Blocking Features. All mobile cranes with a maximum rated
capacity exceeding one ton manufactured after February 28, 1992, shall be
equipped with anti-two-blocking features as follows:
         (i)   Telescopic Boom Cranes shall have an anti-two-block device for
all points of two-blocking that automatically prevents damage from contact
between the load block, overhaul ball, or similar component, and the boom and/
or jib tip.
         (ii)   Lattice Boom Cranes shall have an anti-two-block device for all
points of two-blocking that either automatically prevents damage from contact
between the load block, overhaul ball, or similar component, and the boom and/
or jib tip or warns the operator in time for the operator to prevent two-
blocking.
      (3)   Additional Safety Devices Required. All mobile cranes with a
maximum rated capacity exceeding one ton shall be equipped with the following
additional safety devices:
         (i)   A deadman control on the control levers in the cab or crane
operator's station, where the crane is electrically powered.
         (ii)   An effective audible warning and operating signal on the
outside of the cab.
         (iii)   Boom stops and boom hoist safety shutoffs. However, boom stops
shall not be required for telescopic booms.
         (iv)   An indicator for leveling the crane.
         (v)   Hoist drum rotation indicator if the drum is not visible from
the operator's station.
      (4)   Malfunctioning Safety Devices. The load indicator, load moment
indicator, load moment limiter, hoist drum rotation indicator, and the anti-two
blocking devices shall also be known as operational aids, which provide
information to facilitate the operation of a crane or that take control of
particular functions without action of the operator when a limiting condition
is sensed. When any of these operational aids are inoperative or
malfunctioning, the following alternative measures shall be implemented to
allow continued use of the crane:
         (i)   Load indicator, load moment indicator, or load moment limiter:
The weight of the load shall be determined from a reliable source (such as the
manufacturer's equipment specification), by a reliable calculation method (such
as calculating a steel beam from measured dimensions and a known per foot
weight) or by other equally reliable means before the load is hoisted. To
ensure that the weight of the load does not exceed the crane ratings at the
maximum radius at which the load is to be handled, the radius shall be
determined through the use of a boom angle indicator, radius indicator or by
measurement.
         (ii)   Hoist drum rotation indicator: Mirrors and/or remote video
cameras and displays shall be provided so that the operator can see the drum.
         (iii)   Anti-two-block device: The cable shall be clearly marked (so
that it can easily be seen by the operator) at a point mat will give the
operator sufficient time to stop the hoist to prevent two-blocking or an
additional signal person shall be utilized to monitor the position of the load
block or overhaul ball.
         (iv)   Recalibration or repair of the safety device shall be
accomplished as soon as is reasonably possible, as determined by a qualified
person.
      (5)   Tower Cranes and Climber Cranes. All tower cranes and climber
cranes excluding truck-mounted tower cranes shall have the following:
         (i)   Warning light activated at 100% allowable overturning moment,
         (ii)   Acoustic signal sounding at 105% allowable overturning moment,
         (iii)   Automatic stop if 110% allowable overturning moment is
reached,
         (iv)   Automatic stop if load exceeds maximum rated load in high gear,
         (v)   Automatic stop if load exceeds maximum rated load in
intermediate gear,
         (vi)   Automatic stop if load exceeds maximum rated load in low gear,
         (vii)   Predeceleration before top position of the hook.
         (viii)   Limit switch for top position of the hook,
         (ix)   Predeceleration before low position of the hook,
         (x)   Limit switch for the trolley traveling out,
         (xi)   Limit switch for the trolley traveling in,
         (xii)   Acceleration limit on the hoisting movement,
         (xiii)   Acceleration limit on the swing movement,
         (xiv)   Acceleration limit on the trolley movement, and
         (xv)   Deadman control on both control levers in box.
      (6)   Derricks. Safety devices for derricks shall be approved by the
commissioner and shall be installed within six months after said devices are
accepted. However, where electrically powered, a deadman control on control
levers shall be installed prior to applying for a certificate of operation
pursuant to Section 3319.5 of the New York City Building Code.
   (o)   Characteristics and Special Requirements for Derricks. 
      (1)   Rated load marking. 
         (i)   For derricks, a substantial, durable and clearly legible load
rating chart shall be provided for each particular installation. The rating
chart shall be securely affixed where it is visible to personnel responsible
for the operation of, the equipment. The chart shall include but not be limited
to the following data:
            (A)   Manufacturer's load ratings as approved by the department at
corresponding ranges of boom angle or operating radii.
            (B)   Specific lengths of components on which the load ratings are
based.
            (C)   Required parts for hoist reeving.
            (D)   Size and construction of all ropes shall be shown either on
the rating chart or in the operating manual.
         (ii)   For all other derricks, the manufacturer shall provide
sufficient information from which capacity charts can be prepared and approved
by the department for the particular installation. The capacity charts shall be
located either at the derrick or the job site office.
      (2)   Construction. 
         (i)   General. Derricks shall be constructed to adequately meet all
stresses imposed on all members and components.
         (ii)   Guy derricks. 
            (A)   The minimum number of guys is six. Preferably, the guys
should be equally spaced around the mast.
            (B)   The manufacturer shall furnish complete information
recommending:
               1.   The number of guys:
               2.   The spacing around the mast;
               3.   The maximum vertical slope and initial tension or sag of
all guys;
               4.   The size and construction of rope to be used in each.
            (C)   The mast base shall permit free rotation of the mast with
allowance for slight tilting of the mast caused by guy slack.
            (D)   The mast cap shall:
               1.   Permit free rotation of the mast:
               2.   Adequately withstand tilting and cramping action imposed by
the guy loads;
               3.   Be secured to the mast to prevent disengagement during
erection; and
               4.   Be provided with means for attachment of guy ropes. Stiff
leg derrick.
            (A)   The mast shall be supported in the vertical position by two
stiff legs one end of each being connected to the top of the mast and the other
end securely anchored. The stiff legs shall be capable of withstanding the
loads imposed by the boom at any point within its range of swing.
            (B)   The mast base shall:
               1.   Permit free rotation of mast;
               2.   Permit slight inclination of the mast without binding; and
               3.   Provide means to prevent the mast from lifting out of its
socket when the mast is in tension.
            (C)   The stiff leg connecting member at the top of the mast shall:
               1.   Permit free rotation of the mast;
               2.   Adequately withstand the loads imposed by the action of the
stiff legs; and
               3.   Be so secured as to oppose lift off forces at all times.
      (3)   Ropes and reeving accessories. 
         (i)   Guy ropes. 
            (A)   Guy ropes shall be of suitable size, grade and construction
to withstand the maximum load imposed.
            (B)   The nominal breaking strength of each rope shall be no less
than three times the load applied to the rope.
            (C)   Tie downs or kicker devices which may be easily loosened
shall have locknuts or other suitable provision to prevent loosening.
         (ii)   Boom hoist ropes. 
            (A)   Boom hoist ropes shall be of suitable size, grade and
construction to withstand the maximum load imposed.
            (B)   The live rope reeving system in a boom suspension shall
withstand the maximum load imposed and be of sufficient length to permit
lowering the boom point to horizontal position with at least three full wraps
of rope remaining on the hoist drum.
            (C)   The nominal breaking strength of the most heavily loaded rope
in a system shall be no less than three and a half times the loads applied to
that rope.
         (iii)   Main hoist ropes. 
            (A)   Main hoist ropes shall be of a suitable size and construction
to withstand the maximum load imposed.
            (B)   Ropes in the main hoisting system shall be of sufficient
length for the entire range of movement specified for the application with at
least three full wraps of rope on the hoist drum at all times.
            (C)   The nominal breaking strength of the most heavily loaded rope
in a system shall be no less than three and a half times the load applied to
that rope.
         (iv)   Reeving accessories. 
            (A)   Socketing shall be done in the manner specified by the
manufacturer of the assembly.
            (B)   Rope end shall be anchored securely to the drum.
            (C)   Eves shall be made in an approved manner and rope thimbles
should be used in the eye.
            (D)   U-bolt clips shall have the U-bolt on the dead or short end,
and the saddle on the live or long end of the rope. Spacing and number of all
types of clips shall be in accordance with the clip manufacturer's
recommendation and submitted to the department-Clips shall be drop-forged steel
in all sizes manufactured commercially. When a newly installed rope has been in
operation for an hour, all nuts on the clip bolts shall be retightened. and
they should be checked for tightness at frequent intervals thereafter. 
            (E)   Swaged, compressed, or wedge-socket fittings shall be applied
as recommended by the rope, derrick, or fitting manufacturer.
            (F)   Where a half wedge socket is used it shall be of a positive
locking type.
            (G)   If a load is supported by more than one rope, the tension in
the parts shall be equalized.
         (v)   Sheaves. 
            (A)   Sheave grooves shall be smooth and free from surface defects
which could cause rope damage. The cross sectional radius at the bottom of the
groove should be such as to form a close fitting saddle for the size rope used
and the sides of the groove should be tapered outwardly to facilitate entrance
of the rope into the groove. Flange corners should be rounded and the rims
should run true about the axis of rotation.
            (B)   Sheaves carrying ropes which can be momentarily unloaded
shall be provided with close fitting guards or other suitable devices to guide
the rope back into the groove when the load is applied again.
            (C)   The sheaves in the lower load block shall be equipped with
close-fitting guards that will prevent ropes from becoming fouled when the
block is lying on the ground with ropes loose.
            (D)   Means should be provided, if necessary, to prevent chafing of
the ropes.
            (E)   All running sheaves shall be equipped with means for
lubrication. Permanently lubricated, sealed and/or shielded bearings shall be
acceptable.
            (F)   Boom and hoisting sheaves shall have pitch diameters not less
than eighteen times the nominal diameter of the rope used.
            (G)   Boom point sheaves should be provided with suitable guides to
limit the offlead angle of the rope when entering the grooves from either side.
      (4)   Anchoring and guying. 
         (i)   Guy derricks. 
            (A)   The mast base shall be securely anchored. Maximum horizontal
and downward vertical thrusts encountered when handling rated loads with the
particular guy slope and spacing stipulated for the application are among the
design factors for which provision must be made.
            (B)   The guys shall be secured to the ground or other firm
anchorage. Maximum horizontal and vertical pulls encountered while handling
rated loads with the particular guy slope and spacing stipulated for the
application are among the factors for which provision must be made.
         (ii)   Stiff leg derricks. 
            (A)   The mast base shall be securely anchored. Maximum horizontal
and upward and downward vertical thrusts encountered while handling rated loads
stipulated for the application with the particular stiff-leg spacing and slope
are among the factors for which provision must be made.
            (B)   The stiff legs shall be securely anchored. Maximum horizontal
and vertical upward and downward thrusts encountered while handling rated loads
with the particular stiff-leg arrangement stipulated for the application are
among the factors for which provision must be made.
      (5)   Hoist. The hoist shall be suitable for the derrick work intended
and shall be securely anchored to prevent displacement from the imposed loads.
   (p)   Operation of Cranes and Derricks. 
      (1)   Operators. 
         (i)   Cranes and derricks shall be operated only by the following
persons:
            (A)   Persons licensed as operators by the department of buildings
in accordance with § 28-405 of the Administrative Code of the City of New York.
            (B)   Learners in the presence of and under the direct supervision
of a licensed operator.
         (ii)   No person other than those listed under subparagraph (i) of
paragraph (1) of subdivision (p) of this section and persons such as oilers and
supervisors, whose duties require them to do so, shall enter the cab of a crane
and then only in the performance of his duties and with knowledge and consent
of the operator.
      (2)   Operating practices. 
         (i)   The operator shall not engage in any practice which will divert
his attention while actually engaged in operating the crane or derrick hoist.
         (ii)   The operator shall respond to signals only from the appointed
signal men.
         (iii)   The operator shall be responsible for the operation of the
crane or derrick hoist.
         (iv)   For mobile cranes, the warning signal shall be sounded each
time before on-site traveling and intermittently during such travel,
particularly when approaching workmen.
         (v)   Before leaving his crane or derrick unattended, the operator
shall:
            (A)   Land any attached load, bucket, lifting magnet, or other
device.
            (B)   Disengage clutches.
            (C)   Set travel, swing, boom brakes and other locking devices.
            (D)   Put controls in the "off " position.
            (E)   Stop the engine.
            (F)   Secure mobile cranes against accidental travel.
            (G)   Lock and secure the equipment against unauthorized operation.
         (vi)   On leaving a mobile crane overnight, ground chocks shall be set
and crane booms shall be lowered to ground level or otherwise fastened securely
against displacement by wind loads or other external forces.
         (vii)   If there is a warning sign on the switch or engine starting
controls, the operator shall not close the switch or start engine until the
warning sign has been removed by the person placing it there.
         (viii)   Before closing the switch, or starting the engine, the
operator shall see to it that all controls are in the "off" position and all
personnel are in the clear.
         (ix)   If power fails during operation, the operator shall:
            (A)   Set all brakes and locking devices.
            (B)   Move all clutch or other power controls to the "off"
position.
            (C)   Communicate with the appointed individual in charge of
operations.
            (D)   If practical, the suspended load should be landed under brake
control.
         (x)   The operator shall familiarize himself with the equipment and
its proper care. If adjustments or repairs are necessary, or any defects are
known he shall report the same promptly to his employer or other person
responsible for the equipment and shall also notify the next operator of the
defects upon changing shifts.
         (xi)   All controls shall be tested by the operator at the start of a
new shift. If any controls do not operate properly, they shall be adjusted or
repaired before operations are begun.
         (xii)   Booms of mobile cranes which are being assembled or
disassembled on the ground with or without support of the boom harness
(equalizing sheaves, bridal and boom pendants) should be securely supported by
proper blocking to prevent dropping of the boom sections.
      (3)   Load rating chart for tower and climber cranes. A substantial,
durable and clearly legible rating chart must be provided with each tower and
climber crane and securely affixed in the cab. The chart must include load
ratings approved by the department for specific lengths of components,
counterweights, swing, and radii.
   (q)   Handling the Load. No crane or derrick shall be loaded beyond the
rated load.
      (1)   Size of load. On all operations involving cranes or derricks which
are not equipped with those safety devices which make use of load measuring
systems, there shall be a competent appointed individual assigned on a full-
time basis to be responsible for determining the magnitude of loads to be
lifted or lowered. The operator shall not make a lift unless he has first
determined the weight of the load or is informed of such weight by the
appointed person responsible for the operation.
      (2)   Attaching the load. 
         (i)   The hoist rope shall not be wrapped around the load.
         (ii)   The load shall be attached to the hook by means of slings or
other approved devices.
      (3)   Moving the load. 
         (i)   The appointed individual directing the lift shall see that:
            (A)   In the case of a mobile crane, the crane is level and where
necessary, chocked properly.
            (B)   The load is well secured and properly balanced in the sling
or lifting device before it is lifted more than a few inches.
         (ii)   Before starting to hoist, he shall take care that:
            (A)   Hoist ropes are not kinked.
            (B)   Multiple part lines are not twisted around each other.
            (C)   The hook is brought over the load in such a manner as to
prevent swinging.
            (D)   If there is a slack rope condition, the rope is properly
seated on the drum and in the sheaves.
         (iii)   During hoisting, care should be taken that:
            (A)   There is no sudden acceleration or deceleration of the moving
load.
            (B)   The load does not contact any obstructions.
         (iv)   Side loading of booms shall be limited to freely suspended
loads. Cranes shall not be used for dragging loads sideways. Derricks shall not
be used for side loading.
         (v)   The operator shall not lift, lower, swing or travel while any
person is on the load or hook unless notification is filed with the Department
pursuant to paragraph (6) of subdivision (q) of this section. The operator
shall not carry loads over people or over any occupied building unless the top
two floors are vacated or overhead protection with a design live load of 300
psf is provided.
         (vi)   On truck cranes, loads shall be lifted over the front area only
as recommended by the manufacturer and submitted to the department of
buildings.
         (vii)   The operator shall test the brakes each time a load
approaching the rated load is handled by raising it a few inches and applying
the brakes.
         (viii)   For mobile cranes, outriggers shall be used when the load to
be handled at that particular radius exceeds the rated load without outriggers
as given by the manufacturer for that crane and approved by the department of
buildings.
         (ix)   Neither the load nor the boom shall be lowered below the point
where less than three full wraps of rope remain on their respective drums.
         (x)   When two or more cranes are used to lift one load, one appointed
person shall be responsible for the operation. He shall analyze the operation
and instruct all personnel involved in the proper positioning, rigging of the
load, and the movements to be made.
         (xi)   In transit, the following additional precautions for mobile
cranes shall be exercised:
            (A)   The boom shall be carried in line with the direction of
motion.
            (B)   The superstructure shall be secured against rotation. When
negotiating turns or when the boom is supported on a dolly, the superstructure
may be rotated by a licensed crane operator only.
            (C)   The empty hook shall be lashed or otherwise restrained so
that it cannot swing freely.
         (xii)   Before traveling a crane with a load, proposed travel should
be shown on a plan of operation and approved by the department. Such data shall
be filed with an application for on-site inspection.
         (xiii)   A crane shall not be traveled with the boom so high that it
may bounce back over the cab.
         (xiv)   When rotating the crane or derrick, sudden stops shall not be
made. Rotational speed shall be such that the load does not swing out beyond
the radii at which it can be controlled. A tag or restraint line shall be used
when rotation of the load is hazardous.
         (xv)   When a crane is to be operated at a fixed radius, the boom
hoist pawl or other positive locking device shall be engaged.
         (xvi)   Use of winch heads:
            (A)   Ropes shall not be handled on a winch head without knowledge
of the operator.
            (B)   While a winch is being used, the operator shall be within
convenient reach of the power unit control lever.
      (4)   Holding the load. 
         (i)   The operator shall not leave his position at the controls while
the load is suspended.
         (ii)   People shall not be permitted to stand or pass under a load.
         (iii)   If the load must remain suspended for any considerable length
of time, the operator shall hold the drum from rotating in the lowering
direction by activating the positive controllable means at the operator's
station.
         (iv)   In all cases, when booms are raised or lowered from the
horizontal, load blocks including hooks and weight balls shall be left on the
ground or deposited to the ground before raising or lowering booms.
      (5)   Securing derrick booms. 
         (i)   Dogs, pawls, or other positive braking mechanism on the hoist
shall be engaged. When not in use, the derrick boom shall:
            (A)   Be laid down;
            (B)   Be secured to a stationary member, as nearly under the head
as possible, by attachment of a sling to the load block; or
            (C)   Hoisted to a vertical position and secured to the mast.
      (6)   Hoisting Personnel. Written notification shall be submitted to the
commissioner at least three (3) business days prior to the date the hoisting
equipment may be used to move personnel. In addition to the requirements of
this section, the applicant shall also comply with all applicable OSHA
requirements.
         (i)   The applicant shall be an engineer or a licensed master rigger.
However, where the boom length, including jibs and any other extensions, is
greater than 250 ft, the applicant shall be an engineer.
         (ii)   The notification shall include the following:
            (A)   A description of work,
            (B)   The start date and duration of the work,
            (C)   Manufacturer's information on the personnel platform used to
perform the work,
            (D)   The number of people who will be on the platform,
            (E)   The actual pick load and the maximum radius of the pick,
            (F)   The allowable pick load for maximum radius from load chart
approved by the commissioner,
            (G)   Description of how the person/people on the platform and the
hoisting machine operator will communicate,
            (H)   Designation of Site Safety coordinator,
            (I)   Equipment user's company name, and address, and
            (J)   The name and title of principal from the equipment user
company.
         (iii)   Where the applicant is an engineer, the request shall also
include a copy of the Certificate of On-Site Inspection.
         (iv)   Where the applicant is a master rigger, the request shall also
include:
            (A)   The make, model number and Certificate of Operation of the
Hoisting Machine.
            (B)   A sketch or description of the foundation for the hoisting
machine.
         (v)   Exception: If the boom length, including jibs and any other
extensions, is less than 100 ft and the lift is supervised by a master rigger,
written notification is not required.
   (r)   Signals. 
      (1)   Requirements. Signals must comply with the following:
         (i)   Mobile cranes, other than an articulating boom crane, and
dedicated pile drivers. For a mobile crane, other than an articulating boom
crane, and for dedicated pile drivers, ASME B30.5 (2014 edition) Section 5-3.3,
except for Sections 5-3.3.3 and 5-3.3.7.
         (ii)   Tower cranes, other than a self-erecting tower crane. For a
tower crane, other than a self-erecting tower crane, ASME B30.3 (2016 edition)
Section 3-3.3, except for Section 3-3.3.3;
         (iii)   Derricks. For a derrick, ASME B30.6 (2015 edition) Section 6-
3.4;
         (iv)   Articulating boom crane. For an articulating boom crane, ASME
B30.22 (2016 edition) Section 22-3.3, except for Section 22-3.3.3.
         (v)   Self-erecting tower crane. For a self-erecting tower crane, ASME
B30.29 (2012 edition) Section 29-3.2, except for Section 29-3.2.3.
      (2)   Qualifications. All signalpersons must complete the training or
certification required by Section 3316.9.2 of the New York City Building Code,
or, where working under the direct and continuing supervision of a licensed
rigger or sign hanger, have been deemed by the licensee to be knowledgeable as
to the operations to be undertaken and the signals to be utilized.
   (s)   Miscellaneous. 
      (1)   Ballast or counterweight. No crane may be assembled, operated, or
disassembled without the amount and position of counterweight and/or ballast in
place as specified by the approved crane or derrick notice plans, or the
approved assembly/disassembly plan, or, where such plans are not required, by
the specifications of the crane or derrick manufacturer.
         (A)   Labeling or stenciling of removable counterweight modules. Where
counterweight modules can be removed, each counterweight module must be labeled
or stenciled in a format acceptable to the commissioner to indicate the weight
of the module. The label or stencil must be visible when the module is in its
assembled state.
         (B)   Certified weight for removable counterweight modules. A
certified weight for each removable counterweight module must be provided to
the department upon request. The certified weight must be determined by the
manufacturer, an entity authorized by the manufacturer, or an entity acceptable
to the commissioner.
         Exception: Removable counterweight modules provided by the crane
manufacturer, or a manufacturer authorized service center, distributor, or
service provider.
         (C)   Enclosing concrete counterweights. Concrete counterweights must
be enclosed to protect against damage and spalling.
      (2)   [Reserved.] 
      (3)   Operating near electric power lines. Operations near overhead power
lines, including during assembly or disassembly, must be in accordance with the
following.
         (i)   Power line safety (up to 350 kV) – assembly and disassembly. 
            (A)   Options. Before assembling or disassembling equipment, the
equipment user must determine if any part of the equipment, load line, or load
(including rigging and lifting accessories) could get, in the direction or area
of assembly/ disassembly, closer than 20 feet (6.1 m) to a power line during
the assembly/disassembly process. If so, the equipment user must meet the
requirements in Option (1), Option (2), or Option (3), as follows:
               1.   Option (1) – Deenergize and ground. Confirm from the
utility owner/operator that the power line has been deenergized and visibly
grounded at the site.
               2.   Option (2) – 20 foot clearance. Ensure that no part of the
equipment, load line or load (including rigging and lifting accessories), gets
closer than 20 feet (6.1 m) to the power line by implementing the measures
specified in clause (B) below.
               3.   Option (3) – Table A clearance. 
                  3.1.   Determine the line's voltage and the minimum clearance
distance permitted under Table A of this paragraph; and
                  3.2.   Determine if any part of the equipment, load line, or
load (including rigging and lifting accessories), could get closer than the
minimum clearance distance to the power line permitted under Table A of this
paragraph. If so, then the equipment user must follow the requirements in
clause (B) below to ensure that no part of the equipment, load line, or load
(including rigging and lifting accessories), gets closer to the line than the
minimum clearance distance.
            (B)   Preventing encroachment/electrocution. Where encroachment
precautions are required under Option (2), or Option (3) of this subparagraph,
all of the following requirements must be met:
               1.   Conduct a planning meeting with the assembly/disassembly
director, hoisting machine operator, assembly/disassembly crew and the other
workers who will be in the assembly/disassembly area to review the location of
the power line(s) and the steps that will be implemented to prevent
encroachment/electrocution.
               2.   If tag lines are used, they must be nonconductive.
               3.   At least one of the following additional measures must be
in place. The measure selected from this list must be effective in preventing
encroachment. The additional measures are:
                  3.1.   Use a dedicated spotter who is in continuous contact
with the equipment hoisting machine operator. The dedicated spotter must:
                     3.1.1.   Be equipped with a visual aid to assist in
identifying the minimum clearance distance. Examples of a visual aid include,
but are not limited to: A clearly visible line painted on the ground; a clearly
visible line of stanchions; a set of clearly visible line-of-sight landmarks
(such as a fence post behind the dedicated spotter and a building corner ahead
of the dedicated spotter);
                     3.1.2.   Be positioned to effectively gauge the clearance
distance;
                     3.1.3.   Where necessary, use equipment that enables the
dedicated spotter to communicate directly with the hoisting machine operator;
and
                     3.1.4.   Give timely information to the hoisting machine
operator so that the required clearance distance can be maintained.
                  3.2.   [Reserved.]
                  3.3.   A device that automatically warns the hoisting machine
operator when to stop movement, such as a range control warning device. Such a
device must be set to give the hoisting machine operator sufficient warning to
prevent encroachment.
                  3.4.   A device that automatically limits range of movement,
set to prevent encroachment.
                  3.5.   An elevated warning line, barricade, or line of signs,
in view of the hoisting machine operator, equipped with flags or similar high-
visibility markings.
            (C)   Assembly/disassembly below power lines prohibited. No part of
a crane or derrick, load line, or load (including rigging and lifting
accessories), whether partially or fully assembled, is allowed below a power
line unless the equipment user has confirmed that the utility owner/operator
has deenergized and (at the site) visibly grounded the power line.
            (D)   Assembly/disassembly inside Table A clearance prohibited. No
part of a crane or derrick, load line, or load (including rigging and lifting
accessories), whether partially or fully assembled, is allowed closer than the
minimum approach distance under Table A of this paragraph to a power line
unless the equipment user has confirmed that the utility owner/operator has
deenergized and (at the site) visibly grounded the power line.
            (E)   Voltage information. Where Option (3) of this subparagraph is
used, the utility owner/operator of the power lines must provide the requested
voltage information within two working days of the equipment user's request.
            (F)   Power lines presumed energized. The equipment user must
assume that all power lines are energized unless the utility owner/operator
confirms that the power line has been and continues to be deenergized and
visibly grounded at the site.
            (G)   Posting of electrocution warnings. There must be at least one
electrocution hazard warning conspicuously posted in the hoisting machine
operator's cab or at the operator's station so that it is in view of the
operator and (except for overhead gantry and tower cranes) at least two on the
outside of the equipment.
         (ii)   Power line safety (up to 350 kV) – equipment operations. 
            (A)   Hazard assessments and precautions inside the work zone.
Before beginning equipment operations, the equipment user must:
               1.   Identify the work zone by either:
                  1.1.   Demarcating boundaries (such as with flags, or a
device such as a range limit device or range control warning device) and
prohibiting the hoisting machine operator from operating the equipment past
those boundaries; or
                  1.2.   Defining the work zone as the area 360 degrees around
the equipment, up to the equipment's maximum working radius.
               2.   Determine if any part of the equipment, load line or load
(including rigging and lifting accessories), if operated up to the equipment's
maximum working radius in the work zone, could get closer than 20 feet (6.1 m)
to a power line. If so, the equipment user must meet the requirements in Option
(1), Option (2), or Option (3), as follows:
                  2.1.   Option (1) – Deenergize and ground. Confirm from the
utility owner/operator that the power line has been deenergized and visibly
grounded at the site.
                  2.2.   Option (2) – 20 foot clearance. Ensure that no part of
the equipment, load line, or load (including rigging and lifting accessories),
gets closer than 20 feet (6.1 m) to the power line by implementing the measures
specified in clause (B) below.
                  2.3.   Option (3) – Table A clearance.
                     2.3.1.   Determine the line's voltage and the minimum
approach distance permitted under Table A of this paragraph; and
                     2.3.2.   Determine if any part of the equipment, load line
or load (including rigging and lifting accessories), while operating up to the
equipment's maximum working radius in the work zone, could get closer than the
minimum approach distance of the power line permitted under Table A of this
paragraph. If so, then the equipment user must follow the requirements in
clause (B) below to ensure that no part of the equipment, load line, or load
(including rigging and lifting accessories), gets closer to the line than the
minimum approach distance.
            (B)   Preventing encroachment/electrocution. Where encroachment
precautions are required under Option (2) or Option (3) of this subparagraph,
all of the following requirements must be met:
               1.   Conduct a planning meeting with the hoisting machine
operator and the other workers who will be in the area of the equipment or load
to review the location of the power line(s), and the steps that will be
implemented to prevent encroachment/ electrocution.
               2.   If tag lines are used, they must be non-conductive.
               3.   Erect and maintain an elevated warning line, barricade, or
line of signs, in view of the hoisting machine operator, equipped with flags or
similar high-visibility markings, at 20 feet (6.1 m) from the power line (if
using Option (2) of this subparagraph) or at the minimum approach distance
under Table A of this paragraph (if using Option (3) of this subparagraph). If
the hoisting machine operator is unable to see the elevated warning line, a
dedicated spotter must be used as described in 4.2 below in addition to
implementing one of the measures described in 4.3 or 4.4 below.
               4.   Implement at least one of the following measures:
                  4.1.   [Reserved.]
                  4.2.   A dedicated spotter who is in continuous contact with
the hoisting machine operator. Where this measure is selected, the dedicated
spotter must:
                     4.2.1.   Be equipped with a visual aid to assist in
identifying the minimum clearance distance. Examples of a visual aid include,
but are not limited to: A clearly visible line painted on the ground; a clearly
visible line of stanchions; a set of clearly visible line-of-sight landmarks
(such as a fence post behind the dedicated spotter and a building corner ahead
of the dedicated spotter);
                     4.2.2.   Be positioned to effectively gauge the clearance
distance;
                     4.2.3.   Where necessary, use equipment that enables the
dedicated spotter to communicate directly with the hoisting machine operator;
and
                     4.2.4.   Give timely information to the hoisting machine
operator so that the required clearance distance can be maintained.
                  4.3.   A device that automatically warns the hoisting machine
operator when to stop movement, such as a range control warning device. Such a
device must be set to give the hoisting machine operator sufficient warning to
prevent encroachment.
                  4.4.   A device that automatically limits range of movement,
set to prevent encroachment.
                  4.5.   [Reserved.]
                  Exception: The requirements of item number 4, above, do not
apply to electric power transmission and distribution work.
            (C)   Voltage information. Where Option (3) of this subparagraph is
used, the utility owner/ operator of the power lines must provide the requested
voltage information within two working days of the equipment user's request.
            (D)   Operations below power lines. No part of the equipment, load
line, or load (including rigging and lifting accessories) is allowed below a
power line unless the hoisting machine operator has confirmed that the utility
owner/ operator has deenergized and (at the site) visibly grounded the power
line.
            Exceptions: 
               1.   Electric power transmission and distribution work.
               2.   For equipment with non-extensible booms: The uppermost part
of the equipment, with the boom at true vertical, would be more than 20 feet
(6.1 m) below the plane of the power line or more than the Table A of this
paragraph minimum clearance distance below the plane of the power line.
               3.   For equipment with articulating or extensible booms: The
uppermost part of the equipment, with the boom in the fully extended position,
at true vertical, would be more than 20 feet (6.1 m) below the plane of the
power line or more than the Table A of this paragraph minimum clearance
distance below the plane of the power line.
               4.   The equipment user determines that compliance is infeasible
and meets the requirements of subparagraph (iv) of this paragraph; except that
where the crane or derrick requires a certificate of on-site inspection, the
determination must be made by an engineer, licensed and registered to practice
the profession of engineering under the education law of the state of New York,
who is also a qualified person with respect to electrical power transmission
and distribution. Such determination must be filed with the crane or derrick
notice application.
            (E)   Power lines presumed energized. The equipment user must
assume that all power lines are energized unless the utility owner/ operator
confirms that the power line has been and continues to be deenergized and
visibly grounded at the site.
            (F)   Working near transmitter/communication towers. When working
near transmitter/ communication towers where the equipment is close enough for
an electrical charge to be induced in the equipment or materials being handled,
the transmitter must be deenergized or the following precautions must be taken:
               1.   The equipment must be provided with an electrical ground;
and
               2.   If tag lines are used, they must be non-conductive.
            (G)   [Reserved.] 
            (H)   Manufacturer specifications. Devices originally designed by
the manufacturer for use as a safety device, operational aid, or a means to
prevent power line contact or electrocution, when used to comply with this
paragraph, must meet the manufacturer's procedures for use and conditions of
use.
Table A – Minimum Clear Distances 
Voltage                             Minimum clearance distance
(nominal, kV, alternating current)1 (feet)
up to 50                            10
over 50 to 200                      15
over 200 to 350                     20
over 350 to 500                     25
over 500 to 750                     35
over 750 to 1,000                   45
                                    (as established by the utility owner/
                                    operator or an engineer, licensed and
                                    registered to practice the profession of
over 1,000                          engineering under the education law of the
                                    state of New York, who is also a qualified
                                    person with respect to electrical power
                                    transmission and distribution)
 
1  Note: The value that follows "to" is up to and includes that value. For
example, over 50 to 200 means up to and including 200kV.
         (iii)   Power line safety (over 350 kV). The requirements of
subparagraphs (i) and (ii) of this paragraph apply to power lines over 350 kV.
         Exceptions: 
            1.   For power lines at or below 1,000 kV, wherever the distance
"20 feet (6.1 m)" is specified in subparagraphs (i) or (ii) above, the distance
"50 feet" (15.24 m) must be substituted.
            2.   For power lines over 1,000 kV, the minimum clearance distance
must be established by the utility owner/operator or an engineer, licensed and
registered to practice the profession of engineering under the education law of
the state of New York, who is also a qualified person with respect to
electrical power transmission and distribution.
         (iv)   Power line safety (all voltages) – equipment operations closer
than the Table A zone. Equipment operations in which any part of the equipment,
load line, or load (including rigging and lifting accessories) is closer than
the minimum approach distance under Table A of this paragraph to an energized
power line is prohibited, except where the equipment user demonstrates that all
of the following requirements are met:
            (A)   The equipment user determines that it is infeasible to do the
work without breaching the minimum approach distance under Table A of this
paragraph.
            Exception: Where the crane or derrick requires a certificate of on-
site inspection, the determination must be made by an engineer, licensed and
registered to practice the profession of engineering under the education law of
the state of New York, who is also a qualified person with respect to
electrical power transmission and distribution. Such determination must be
filed with the crane or derrick notice application.
            (B)   The equipment user determines that, after consultation with
the utility owner/operator, it is infeasible to deenergize and ground the power
line or relocate the power line.
            Exception: Where the crane or derrick requires a certificate of on-
site inspection, the determination must be made by an engineer, licensed and
registered to practice the profession of engineering under the education law of
the state of New York, who is also a qualified person with respect to
electrical power transmission and distribution. Such determination must be
filed with the crane or derrick notice application.
            (C)   The power line owner/operator or an engineer, licensed and
registered to practice the profession of engineering under the education law of
the state of New York, who is also a qualified person with respect to
electrical power transmission and distribution, determines the minimum
clearance distance that must be maintained to prevent electrical contact in
light of the on-site conditions. The factors that must be considered in making
this determination include, but are not limited to: Conditions affecting
atmospheric conductivity; time necessary to bring the equipment, load line, and
load (including rigging and lifting accessories) to a complete stop; wind
conditions; degree of sway in the power line; lighting conditions, and other
conditions affecting the ability to prevent electrical contact.
            Exception: Electric power transmission and distribution work.
            (D)   A planning meeting with the equipment user and utility owner/
operator (or an engineer, licensed and registered to practice the profession of
engineering under the education law of the state of New York, who is also a
qualified person with respect to electrical power transmission and
distribution) is held to determine the procedures that will be followed to
prevent electrical contact and electrocution; except that where the crane or
derrick requires a certificate of on-site inspection, such procedures must be
developed by an engineer, licensed and registered to practice the profession of
engineering under the education law of the state of New York, who is also a
qualified person with respect to electrical power transmission and
distribution. Where a crane or derrick requires a certificate of on-site
inspection, such procedures must be filed with the crane or derrick notice
application. At a minimum these procedures must specify the following:
               1.   If the power line is equipped with a device that
automatically reenergizes the circuit in the event of a power line contact,
before the work begins, the automatic reclosing feature of the circuit
interrupting device must be made inoperative if the design of the device
permits.
               2.   A dedicated spotter who is in continuous contact with the
hoisting machine operator. The dedicated spotter must:
                  2.1.   Be equipped with a visual aid to assist in identifying
the minimum clearance distance. Examples of a visual aid include, but are not
limited to: A line painted on the ground; a clearly visible line of stanchions;
a set of clearly visible line-of-sight landmarks (such as a fence post behind
the dedicated spotter and a building corner ahead of the dedicated spotter);
                  2.2.   Be positioned to effectively gauge the clearance
distance;
                  2.3.   Where necessary, use equipment that enables the
dedicated spotter to communicate directly with the hoisting machine operator;
and
                  2.4.   Give timely information to the hoisting machine
operator so that the required clearance distance can be maintained.
               3.   An elevated warning line, or barricade (not attached to the
crane), in view of the hoisting machine operator (either directly or through
video equipment), equipped with flags or similar high-visibility markings, to
prevent electrical contact. However, this provision does not apply to electric
power transmission and distribution work.
               4.   An insulating link/device installed at a point between the
end of the load line (or below) and the load; except that an insulating link/
device is not required for electric power transmission and distribution work.
               5.   Nonconductive rigging if the rigging may be within the
Table A of this paragraph distance during the operation.
               6.   If the equipment is equipped with a device that
automatically limits range of movement, it must be used and set to prevent any
part of the equipment, load line, or load (including rigging and lifting
accessories) from breaching the minimum approach distance established under
clause (C) above.
               7.   If a tag line is used, it must be of the nonconductive
type.
               8.   Barricades forming a perimeter at least 10 feet (3.05 m)
away from the equipment to prevent unauthorized personnel from entering the
work area. In areas where obstacles prevent the barricade from being at least
10 feet (3.05 m) away, the barricade must be as far from the equipment as
feasible.
               9.   Workers other than the hoisting machine operator must be
prohibited from touching the load line above the insulating link/ device and
crane. Hoisting machine operators remotely operating the equipment from the
ground must use either wireless controls that isolate the hoisting machine
operator from the equipment or insulating mats that insulate the hoisting
machine operator from the ground.
               10.   Only personnel essential to the operation are permitted to
be in the area of the crane and load.
               11.   The equipment must be properly grounded.
               12.   Insulating line hose or cover-up must be installed by the
utility owner/operator except where such devices are unavailable for the line
voltages involved.
            (E)   The procedures developed to comply with clause (D) above are
documented and immediately available on-site.
            (F)   The equipment user and utility owner/operator (or an
engineer, licensed and registered to practice the profession of engineering
under the education law of the state of New York, who is also a qualified
person with respect to electrical power transmission and distribution) meet
with the hoisting machine operator and the other workers who will be in the
area of the equipment or load to review the procedures that will be implemented
to prevent breaching the minimum approach distance established in clause (C)
above and prevent electrocution.
            (G)   The procedures developed to comply with clause (D) above are
implemented.
            (H)   The utility owner/operator (or an engineer, licensed and
registered to practice the profession of engineering under the education law of
the state of New York, who is also a qualified person with respect to
electrical power transmission and distribution) and all employers of employees
involved in the work must identify one person who will direct the
implementation of the procedures. The person identified in accordance with this
clause must direct the implementation of the procedures and must have the
authority to stop work at any time to ensure safety.
            (I)   [Reserved.]
            (J)   If a problem occurs implementing the procedures being used to
comply with clause (D) above, or indicating that those procedures are
inadequate to prevent electrocution, the equipment user must safely stop
operations and either develop new procedures to comply with clause (D) above or
have the utility owner/ operator deenergize and visibly ground or relocate the
power line before resuming work.
            (K)   Devices originally designed by the manufacturer for use as a
safety device, operational aid, or a means to prevent power line contact or
electrocution, when used to comply with this paragraph, must comply with the
manufacturer's procedures for use and conditions of use.
            (L)   [Reserved.]
            (M)   [Reserved.]
         (v)   Power line safety – while traveling under or near power lines. 
            (A)   Traveling with a load. When traveling under or near a
powerline with a load, the traveling operation must comply with the applicable
requirements of subparagraphs (ii), (iii), or (iv) of this paragraph. In
addition the requirements of subparagraph (xii) of paragraph (3) of subdivision
(q) of this section also apply.
            (B)   Traveling without a load. When traveling under or near a
powerline without a load, the equipment user must ensure that:
               1.   The boom/mast and boom/mast support system are lowered
sufficiently to meet the requirements of this subparagraph.
               2.   The clearances specified in Table T of this paragraph are
maintained.
               3.   The effects of speed and terrain on equipment movement
(including movement of the boom/mast) are considered so that those effects do
not cause the minimum clearance distances specified in Table T of this
paragraph to be breached.
               4.   If any part of the equipment while traveling will get
closer than 20 feet (6.1 m) to the power line, the equipment user must ensure
that a dedicated spotter who is in continuous contact with the driver/ operator
is used. The dedicated spotter must:
                  4.1.   Be positioned to effectively gauge the clearance
distance;
                  4.2.   Where necessary, use equipment that enables the
dedicated spotter to communicate directly with the driver/operator; and
                  4.3.   Give timely information to the driver/operator so that
the required clearance distance can be maintained.
               5.   When traveling at night, or in conditions of poor
visibility, in addition to the measures specified in items 1 through 4 above,
the equipment user must ensure that:
                  5.1.   The power lines are illuminated or another means of
identifying the location of the lines is used; and
                  5.2.   A safe path of travel is identified and used.
Table T – Minimum Clearance Distances While Traveling with No Load 
 
Voltage                   While traveling – minimum clearance distance
(nominal, kV, alternating (feet)
current)1
up to 0.75                4
over 0.75 to 50           6
over 50 to 345            10
over 345 to 750           16
over 750 to 1,000         20
                          (as established by the utility owner/operator
                          or an engineer, licensed and registered to
                          practice the profession of engineering under
over 1,000                the education law of the state of New York,
                          who is also a qualified person with respect to
                          electrical power transmission and
                          distribution)
 
1  Note: The value that follows "to" is up to and includes that value. For
example, over 50 to 200 means up to and including 200kV.
      (4)   Electrical equipment. 
         (i)   General. 
            (A)   Wiring and equipment shall comply with the Electrical Code of
the City of New York.
            (B)   The voltage used on control circuits shall not exceed 750
volts.
         (ii)   Equipment. 
            (A)   Electric equipment shall be so located or enclosed that live
parts will not be exposed to accidental contact.
            (B)   All motor, controller and switch frames shall be grounded.
            (C)   Electric equipment shall be thoroughly protected from dirt,
grease and oil, and where exposed to the weather, shall be thoroughly protected
therefrom.
            (D)   Guards for live parts shall be substantial and so located
that they cannot be deformed so as to make contact with the live parts.
            (E)   Name plates shall not be removed.
         (iii)   Controllers. 
            (A)   Each cage operated crane and derrick shall be provided with a
device which will disconnect all motors from the line on failure of power and
will not permit any motor to be restarted until the controller handle is
brought to the "off " position, or a reset switch or button is operated.
            (B)   Lever operated controllers shall be provided with a notch or
latch which in the "off position prevents the handle from being inadvertently
moved to the "on" position.
            (C)   The controller operating handle shall be located within
convenient reach of the operator.
            (D)   As far as practicable, the movement of each controller handle
shall be in the same general directions as the resultant movements of the load.
            (E)   For floor operated cranes and derricks, the controller or
controllers, if rope operated, shall automatically return to the "off "
position when released by the operator.
      (5)   Demolition. Where a crane or derrick is utilized to facilitate the
mechanical demolition of a building or structure, the requirements of Section
3306 of the New York City Building Code will apply.
      (6)   Footing. Mobile cranes must be provided with adequate footing,
including but not limited timber, cribbing, plates, mats, or other structural
members, in order to distribute the load so as not to exceed the allowable
bearing capacity the ground, subsurface elements, or structure.
      (7)   Special provisions for cranes operating on a sidewalk or roadway.
Where a crane is operated on the sidewalk or roadway, a permit from the New
York City Department of Transportation must be obtained. The pressure on such
surface must not exceed 3,500 psf (167.85 kPa).
      (8)   Storage. 
         (i)   Necessary clothing and personal belongings must be stored in or
about the crane or derrick in such a manner as to not interfere with access or
operation.
         (ii)   Tools, oil cans, waste, extra fuses, and other necessary
articles must be stored in a tool box and must not be permitted to lie loose in
or about the cab or cage.
      (9)   Refueling. 
         (i)   Refueling must comply with Section 3320.3.2 of the New York City
Building Code. For the purposes of satisfying this requirement, the term
"material handling equipment" in such section must be read to mean "crane or
derrick."
         (ii)   Machines must not be refueled with the engine running.
      (10)   Fire Extinguishers. 
         (i)   A carbon dioxide, dry chemical or equivalent fire extinguisher
must be kept in the cab or in the vicinity of the crane or derrick.
         (ii)   Operating and maintenance personnel must be familiar with the
use and care of the fire extinguishers provided.
   (t)   Wind and weather. Cranes and derricks are subject to the following
wind and weather restrictions.
      (1)   Wind action plan and manufacturer procedures. The hoisting machine
operator must follow the approved wind action plan, where a wind action plan is
required, and the applicable manufacturer procedures related securing the crane
or derrick against wind and weather.
      (2)   Hoisting machine operator to review wind action plan and
manufacturer procedures. The hoisting machine operator must review the approved
wind action plan, where a wind action plan is required, and the applicable
manufacturer procedures related to securing the crane or derrick against wind
and weather prior to the operator's initial commencement of work with the crane
or derrick at the job, each time the crane or derrick enters into a new phase,
and each time the wind action plan is amended. It is the responsibility of the
equipment user to verify that the hoisting machine operator has reviewed the
approved wind action plan and the applicable manufacturer procedures, as
required above, and to notify the hoisting machine operator each time the wind
action plan is amended.
      (3)   Start of work. No hoisting machine operator may start a pick when:
         (i)   The wind speed exceeds the threshold specified in the approved
wind action plan, or where such a plan is not required, 30 mph (3-second gust)
or the threshold specified by the manufacturer, whichever is lower; or
         (ii)   As otherwise warranted by weather conditions or weather
forecasts.
      (4)   In-service. The following must be observed at all times the crane
or derrick is in service.
         (i)   During picks, it is the responsibility of the hoisting machine
operator to safely bring the pick to a stop and safely land the load:
            (A)   When the wind speed exceeds the threshold specified in the
approved wind action plan, or where such a plan is not required, 30 mph (3-
second gust) or the threshold specified by the manufacturer, whichever is
lower; or
            (B)   As otherwise warranted by weather conditions or weather
forecasts.
         (ii)   At the end of the shift, or as weather conditions otherwise
warrant, the hoisting machine operator must properly park or secure the crane
or derrick for occurring or forecasted winds in accordance with the approved
wind action plan, or where such plan is not required, in accordance with the
manufacturer's specifications.
      (5)   Assembly/disassembly operations. Assembly/ disassembly operations
may not begin if the wind speed exceeds the thresholds specified in the
approved assembly/ disassembly plan, or if winds are forecast to exceed the
thresholds specified in the approved assembly/disassembly plan before the crane
or derrick that is to assembled/ disassembled, and all assist cranes or
derricks involved in such operation, can be parked or secured. The provisions
of paragraphs (3) and (4) of this subdivision above also apply to all hoisting
machine operators engaged in the assembly/ disassembly operation; except that
the term "approved wind action plan" means "approved assembly/disassembly
plan."
      Exception: Where an assembly/disassembly plan is not required, the
thresholds established by the manufacturer will govern.
      (6)   Inspection to verify the crane or derrick has been secured. An
inspection must be performed when required by, in accordance with, the
requirements of paragraph (2) of subdivision (k) of this section.
      (7)   Measuring wind. For the purposes of this subdivision, wind speed
must be determined in accordance with one of the options listed in
subparagraphs (i) through (iii) of this paragraph.
      Exceptions: 
            1.   For a crane, other than a pile driver or clamshell, that
requires a certificate of on-site inspection and that utilizes a lattice boom,
lattice jib, or lattice mast at the site, only the option listed in
subparagraph (i) of this paragraph may be utilized; except, however, should the
anemometer on the crane malfunction, the option listed in subparagraph (ii) of
this paragraph may be utilized.
            2.   For a derrick that requires a certificate of on-site
inspection, only the options listed in subparagraphs (i) or (ii) of this
paragraph may be utilized.
         (i)   Anemometer on the crane or derrick. An anemometer provided by
the crane or derrick manufacturer, or an entity acceptable to the manufacturer,
and installed at the top of the boom or other location specified by the
manufacturer. The anemometer must measure a 3-second gust wind. A real time
display of the anemometer must be available to the hoisting machine operator at
the operator's station.
         (ii)   Anemometer at the site. An anemometer located at a high point
of the site approximate to the height and location of the crane or derrick
boom/jib, freely exposed to the wind, and calibrated in accordance with ASTM D
5096-02. The anemometer must measure a 3-second gust wind. A real time display
of the anemometer must be available to the hoisting machine operator at the
operator's station, or a person designated by the hoisting machine operator
must be provided to monitor the display and alert the hoisting machine operator
when measurements near, meet, or exceed the thresholds specified in the
approved wind action plan.
         (iii)   Nearest weather station. The most recent gust wind speed
reported at the nearest National Weather Service weather station. The equipment
user must establish a system to ensure the hoisting machine operator is
notified when reported wind gusts near, meet, or exceed the thresholds
specified in the approved wind action plan. An acceptable system may include
engaging a metrological service to provide a text or similar alert to a person
designated by the equipment user when wind thresholds are neared, met, or
exceeded, and have such designated person notify the hoisting machine operator.
         (iv)   Anemometer as operational aid. The anemometer required by
subparagraphs (i) and (ii) of this paragraph is to be considered an operational
aid and must be checked prior to each shift as part of the frequent inspection
required by paragraph (1) of subdivision (k) of this section.
   (u)   Documents to be maintained at the site. Where this section requires
construction or submittal documents, drawings, plans, calculations, inspection
or meeting records, manufacturer specifications, or similar documents, copies
of such must be maintained at the site, including in an electronic format
acceptable to the commissioner, for the duration of the job and made available
to the commissioner upon request.
      (1)   Plans to be available to hoisting machine operators. The equipment
user must ensure that a copy of the approved crane or derrick notice plan, the
approved assembly/disassembly plan, and the approved wind action plan are kept
in the hoisting machine cab or at the operator's station at all times, easily
accessible to the hoisting machine operator.
      (2)   Plans to be available to the lift director and the assembly/
disassembly director. The equipment user must ensure that a copy of the
approved crane or derrick notice plan, the approved assembly/disassembly plan,
and the approved wind action plan are separately kept at the site at all times,
easily accessible to the lift director and the assembly/disassembly director,
as appropriate.
   (v)   [Reserved.] 
   (w)   Enforcement. See Chapter 2 of Title 28 of the New York City
Administrative Code.
   (x)   Waiver or modifications. Variations to the provisions of this section
may be granted by the commissioner in accordance with the requirements of § 28-
103.3 of the Administrative Code.
   (y)   Referenced standards. The standards referenced in this section are
considered part of the requirements of this section to the prescribed extent of
each such reference. Where differences occur between provisions of this section
and referenced standards, the provisions of this section shall apply.
Standard Name Year
Standard       Name                               Year
American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE)
ASCE 7         Minimum Design Loads for Buildings 2005
               and Other Structures
American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME)
ASME B30.3     Tower Cranes                       2004, 2009, 2012, & 2016
ASME B30.5     Mobile Cranes                      1968, 1982, 1989, 1994, 2000,
                                                  2004, 2007, 2011, & 2014
ASME B30.6     Derricks                           2003, 2010, & 2015
ASME B30.22    Articulating Boom Cranes           2005, 2010, & 2016
ASME B30.29    Self-Erecting Tower Cranes         2012
European Standards (EN)
EN 996         Piling Equipment                   2009 & 2014
EN 13000       Mobile Cranes                      2004, 2010, & 2014
EN 14439       Tower Cranes                       2006 & 2009
EN 16228       Drilling and foundation equipment  2014
American Society for the Testing of Materials
               Standard Test Method for
ASTM D 5096-02 Determining the Performance of a   2011
               Cup Anemometer or Propeller
               Anemometer
International Organization for Standardization (ISO)
ISO 9001                                         2008
SAE International (SAE)
SAE J765       Crane Load Stability Test Code     1990
SAE J987       Lattice Boom Cranes - Method of    1967 & 2003
               Test
SAE J1063      Cantilevered Boom Crane Structures 1993
               - Method of Test
 
(Added City Record 11/30/2015, eff. 1/1/2016; amended City Record 4/24/2017,
eff. 5/24/2017; amended City Record 9/6/2017, eff. 10/6/2017; amended City
Record 12/6/2017, eff. 1/5/2018; amended City Record 6/23/2020, eff. 7/23/2020;
amended City Record 6/25/2024, eff. 7/25/2024; amended City Record 8/21/2025,
eff. 9/20/2025)
Editor's note: Section 31 of the amending rule (City Record 4/24/2017, eff. 5/
24/2017) provides: "These amendments shall take effect 30 days after the final
version is published, except that (i) the notification requirements in
paragraph (5) of subdivision (c) of Section
3319-01 of Chapter 3300 of Title 1 of the Rules of the City of New York
(Section 6 of this rule) shall not take effect until May 1, 2018, (ii) the
requirements of paragraphs (7) and (8) of subdivision (g) of Section
3319-01 of Chapter 3300 of Title 1 of the Rules of the City of New York
(Section 11 of this rule) shall not take effect until May 1, 2018, and (iii)
the requirement in paragraph (7) of subdivision (t) of Section
3319-01 of Chapter 3300 of Title 1 of the Rules of the City of New York
(Section 24 of this rule) for certain cranes to be equipped with an anemometer
shall not apply to a crane that is not a crawler crane and whose certificate of
on-site inspection was issued before such effective date."
§ 3319-02 Lift Directors.
   (a)   Applicability. This rule applies to the designation of a lift director
and to the responsibility and authority of any person designated as a lift
director.
   (b)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, terms defined in
Chapter 33 of the New York City Building Code and 1 RCNY §
3319-01 will have the same meaning here.
   (c)   Designation of lift director. The equipment user must designate a lift
director and ensure a lift director is present at the site when required as
specified in paragraph (1) of this subdivision.
      (1)   Lift directors required. It shall be unlawful for a crane or
derrick that requires or possesses a certificate of on-site inspection, or
which, in accordance with rules promulgated by the commissioner, is subject to
supervision by a licensed master rigger in lieu of a certificate of on-site
inspection, to perform any of the following tasks unless a lift director is
present at the site during all times when:
         (i)   The crane or derrick is picking a load;
         (ii)   The crane is traveling at the site, including but not limited
to being moved onto or off of cribbing or up or down a ramp;
         (iii)   The crane or derrick is being placed into a parked condition
or otherwise being taken out of service;
         (iv)   The crane's or derrick's boom/jib is being laid down or
jackknifed;
         (v)   The crane's or derrick's boom/jib is being raised from a laid
down or jackknifed position; or
         (vi)   Other special protective measures for wind are being installed
or removed.
      Exception. The requirement for a lift director does not apply to the
assembly or disassembly of a crane or derrick, nor to the use of an assist
crane or derrick during assembly/disassembly, provided an assembly/disassembly
director is supervising the assembly/disassembly operation in accordance with
rules promulgated by the commissioner.
      (2)   Qualified and competent. The equipment user may only designate a
qualified and competent person to serve as the lift director.
      (3)   Jobs supervised by a master rigger. Where a crane or derrick that
requires a lift director is supervised by a licensed master rigger, the
equipment user must designate as the lift director either:
         (i)   The licensed master rigger; or
         (ii)   A master rigging foreman who is designated as a rigging foreman
by the licensed rigger in accordance with 1 RCNY §
104-20.
      (4)   Designation of existing personnel. Personnel at the site who
perform other tasks, including but not limited to the rigging supervisor
required by Section 3316.9 of the New York City Building Code, may be
designated to serve as the lift director, provided they meet the qualification
requirements for a lift director and can fulfill the responsibilities of a lift
director.
      Exceptions: 
         1.   Hoisting machine operators may not serve as the lift director at
the same time they are operating a hoisting machine or supervising the
operation of a hoisting machine by a trainee.
         2.   A site safety manager, site safety coordinator, registered
construction superintendent, concrete safety manger, or construction site fire
safety manager who is serving in such role at the site may not serve as the
lift director.
   (d)   Notification to the department of the lift director. The equipment
user must notify the department of the designated primary lift director prior
to the commencement of work. If a designated alternate lift director will be
acting in the place of the primary lift director for a period longer than two
consecutive weeks, the department must be so notified by the equipment user.
The equipment user must immediately notify the department of any permanent
change of the primary lift director.
   Exception: For a crane or derrick whose crane or derrick notice application
was submitted prior to July 1, 2018, notification to the department is not
required. A letter designating the lift director, signed and dated by the
equipment user, must be kept at the site and available for inspection by the
commissioner upon request.
   (e)   Responsibilities of the lift director. The primary lift director, or a
designated alternate lift director, must be present at the site at all times
when required by paragraph (1) of subdivision (c). The primary lift director,
or in the event that an alternate lift director will be acting in the place of
the primary lift director, the alternate lift director, is responsible for
ensuring the following, either by personally performing the task, or directly
overseeing and assigning personnel to perform the task:
      (1)   That the crane or derrick is located and configured in accordance
with the approved crane or derrick notice plans prior to the start of each
shift and whenever the crane or derrick is relocated or reconfigured;
      (2)   That site conditions match the approved crane or derrick notice
plans prior to the start of each shift and whenever the crane or derrick is
relocated or reconfigured;
      (3)   That traffic and pedestrian controls are in place, prior to the
start of and throughout:
         (i)   The work shift;
         (ii)   Any crane or derrick relocation;
         (iii)   Any laying down or jackknifing of the crane's or derrick's
boom/jib;
         (iv)   Any raising of the crane's or derrick's boom/jib from a laid
down or jackknifed position; or
         (v)   Any other special protective measures for wind are being
installed or removed.
      (4)   That the hoisting machine operator, rigging supervisor, and rigging
crew members, including signalpersons, possess the proper license, foreman
card, certification card, or training card, as appropriate, prior to their
commencement of work at the site;
      (5)   That the hoisting machine operator and rigging supervisor are
present throughout the shift;
      (6)   That weather conditions and forecasts are monitored as warranted;
      (7)   That, in coordination with the hoisting machine operator and the
rigging supervisor, operations cease when warranted by weather conditions or
forecasts and an evaluation of current crane or derrick operations, anticipated
pick times, and the lead time required to stop picks and park or secure the
crane or derrick in accordance with the approved wind action plan, or where a
wind action plan is not required, in accordance with the specifications of the
crane or derrick manufacturer;
      (8)   That, at the end of the shift, or as weather conditions warrant,
the hoisting machine operator has ceased operations;
      (9)   That, where required by 1 RCNY §
3319-01(k)(2), the hosting machine operator has completed a written record
prior to leaving the site;
      (10)   That, when warranted during out of service periods, appropriate
personnel return to the site and take further steps to secure the crane or
derrick;
      (11)   That, when carrying loads over an occupied building, the top two
floors are vacated or proper roof protection is in place prior to the start of
such operation in accordance with 1 RCNY §
3319-01(q)(3)(v);
      (12)   That, prior to a critical pick as defined in Section 3302.1 of the
New York City Building Code, a master rigger or registered design professional
verified compliance with the critical pick plan in accordance with Section
3316.9.1 of the New York City Building Code;
      (13)   That, prior to operating near overhead power lines, there is
compliance with 1 RCNY §
3319-01(s)(3);
      (14)   That, prior to hoisting personnel with a crane or derrick, there
is compliance with 1 RCNY §
3319-01(q)(6);
      (15)   That required frequent inspections of the crane, derrick, and
rigging equipment are performed prior to the start of the shift;
      (16)   That the crane operator is informed of the weight of loads to be
lifted, as well as the lifting, moving, and placing locations for these loads;
      (17)   That the crane operator's verification has been obtained that this
weight does not exceed the crane's rated capacity;
      (18)   That constant communication is maintained between the operator,
rigging supervisor, and signalpersons; and
      (19)   That the load is properly rigged for the lifting conditions before
it is lifted more than a few inches.
   (f)   Ordering corrective action and notification to the department. If the
lift director discovers a violation of one or more of the items identified in
subdivision (e) of this section, the lift director must immediately notify the
appropriate personnel to correct the condition, and if necessary, order the
crane or derrick and rigging operations to stop. If the violation is not
promptly corrected, the lift director must notify the department of the
violation. Upon the condition being corrected, or where it is not corrected,
upon the lift director notifying the department of the violation, any
responsibility the lift director has, as it pertains to their role as the lift
director, arising out of, or as a result of the existence of that condition,
will cease.
   (g)   Authority to stop operations. The lift director has the authority to
stop crane or derrick and rigging operations. When the lift director orders
operations to stop, the hoisting machine operator and rigging supervisor must
take appropriate action to safely implement the directive. The hoisting machine
operator and rigging supervisor each separately possess authority to stop crane
or derrick and rigging operations; the lift director may not overrule the
hoisting machine operator or rigging supervisor when the hoisting machine
operator or rigging supervisor orders operations to stop.
   (h)   Does not diminish responsibility. The presence of the lift director
does not relieve, alter, or diminish any responsibility or obligation of any
other party, including but limited to the equipment user, hoisting machine
operator, rigging supervisor, site safety manager, site safety coordinator, or
construction superintendent.
   (i)   Ensuring personnel understand duties. The lift director is responsible
for ensuring that personnel involved in crane or derrick operations understand
their responsibilities, assigned duties, and the associated hazards.
   (j)   Pre-shift meeting. Prior to the start of every shift the lift director
must lead a pre-shift meeting with the hoisting machine operator, rigging
supervisor, signalpersons, and the supervisor of the flagpersons and pedestrian
traffic managers. This meeting may be conducted via radio or phone.
      (1)   The following topics must be discussed at every meeting:
         (i)   The day's planned operations;
         (ii)   Pedestrian and traffic controls;
         (iii)   Current weather conditions and forecasts; and
         (iv)   As applicable, signaling/communication protocols for tandem
picks, multiple crane or derrick operations, and operating in the blind.
      (2)   The following topics must also be discussed at the initial meeting,
and at any subsequent meeting where tasks, personnel, or crane or derrick
configurations have changed:
         (i)   Roles of personnel;
         (ii)   Objects to be lifted/lowered, including a review of their
weights, lifting points, and any special considerations;
         (iii)   Rigging equipment to be used;
         (iv)   Site conditions;
         (v)   Pick and landing zones;
         (vi)   Fall, crush, electrical, and other hazards;
         (vii)   In-service and out-of-service wind thresholds for the crane or
derrick; and
         (viii)   Permit validity.
      (3)   Record of meeting. See 1 RCNY §
3319-01(h)(4).
   (k)   Review of plans. Prior to the lift director's initial commencement of
work with the crane or derrick at the site, each time the crane or derrick
enters into a new phase, and each time relevant sections of plans are amended,
the lift director must review the applicable sections of the approved crane or
derrick notice plan in relation to site conditions, crane or derrick location
and configuration, and traffic and pedestrian control; the applicable sections
of the approved wind action plan with regard to the wind speed thresholds for
the crane or derrick; and, as applicable, relevant rigging plans. It is the
responsibility of the equipment user to verify that the lift director has
reviewed the relevant materials, as required, and to notify the lift director
each time the crane or derrick notice plans, the wind action plan, or rigging
plans, are amended.
   Exception: Where a certificate of on-site inspection is not required, all of
the above requirements apply, except that in lieu of the above requirement to
review the applicable sections of the approved crane or derrick notice plan and
the applicable sections of the wind action plan, the lift director must instead
review the applicable sections of the crane or derrick manual with regards to
the setup, founding, lift or swing restrictions, and the wind speed threshold
for the crane or derrick configuration to be utilized, as well as, where
prepared, any plans or drawings with regards pertinent site features,
obstacles, and restrictions, the location and configuration of the crane or
derrick at the site, and matting or dunnage.
(Added City Record 4/24/2017, eff. 5/24/2017)
Editor's note: Section 2 of the enacting rule (City Record 4/24/2017, eff. 5/
24/2017) provides: "This rule shall take effect 30 days after the final version
is published, except that this rule shall not apply to the use of a mobile
crane at a construction site where a certificate of on-site inspection for the
use of such crane at such site is issued prior to July 1, 2017; provided that
this exception shall not apply to a mobile crane that is a crawler crane. As
used in this section the terms certificate of on-site inspection, mobile crane
and crawler crane are as defined in Chapter 33 of the New York city building
code."
§ 3320-01 Cableways
   (a)   Applicability. Cableways subject to the jurisdiction of the department
must conform to the requirements in this section and in ASME B30.19.
   (b)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, terms defined in
Chapter 33 of the New York City Building Code and 1 RCNY §
3319-01 will have the same meaning here.
   (c)   Permit. No cableway may be installed until a permit has been issued by
the commissioner on the basis of construction documents prepared by an
engineer. Such construction documents must, at a minimum, include all the items
required to be submitted as part of an application for a crane or derrick
notice.
   (d)   Inspection report. Following an installation or reinstallation, no
cableway may be used until the engineer who prepared the construction documents
required by Subdivision (c) of this section, or a registered design
professional working under the direct and continuing supervision of such
engineer, has performed an inspection to verify that the cableway was installed
in accordance with the construction documents, and such engineer files a
report, acceptable to the commissioner, with the Department, attesting to such
satisfactory inspection.
   (e)   Special inspections. Cableways are subject to the same special
inspection requirements as cranes and tower cranes in Paragraph (6) of
Subdivision (k) of 1 RCNY §
3319-01.
   (f)   Licensed operator required. Cableways must be operated by a person
holding a Class B hoisting machine operator's license.
   (g)   Rigging. Individuals who attach and detach articles from a cableway,
supervisors of such individuals, and signalpersons involved in cableway
operations must be trained or certified in accordance with the provisions of
Section 3316.9 of the New York City Building Code. The requirements applicable
to hoisting equipment set forth in Section 3316.9 of the New York City Building
Code are applicable to cableways under this section.
   (h)   Lift director. A lift director is required for the use of a cableway.
Cableways are subject to the same lift director requirements as cranes and
derricks in 1 RCNY §
3319-02. The requirements applicable to certificates of on-site inspection in 1
RCNY §
3319-02 shall apply to permits issued under this section.
   (i)   Assembly/disassembly. Cableways are subject to the same assembly/
disassembly requirements as cranes and derricks in Paragraphs (6) and (7) of
Subdivision (i) of 1 RCNY §
3319-01. The requirements applicable to certificates of on-site inspection in
Paragraphs (6) and (7) of Subdivision (i) of 1 RCNY §
3319-01 shall apply to permits issued under this section.
   (j)   Transporting personnel. In addition to the provisions of Section 19-
3.2.2 of ASME B30.19, the hoisting and transporting of personnel with a
cableway must also comply with the requirements of 1 RCNY §
3319-01(q)(6).
   (k)   Referenced standards. The standards referenced in this section are
considered part of the requirements of this section to the prescribed extent of
each such reference. Where differences occur between provisions of this section
and referenced standards, the provisions of this section will apply.
 
Standard    Name      Year
American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME)
ASME B30.19 Cableways 2011
 
(Added City Record 10/24/2017, eff. 11/23/2017)
§ 3321-01 Construction Site Safety Training (SST). [Repealed]
(Added City Record 12/20/2019, eff. 1/19/2020; amended City Record 11/10/2020,
eff. 12/10/2020; repealed City Record 5/20/2025, eff. 6/19/2025)
Chapter 3500: Referenced Standards
§ 3500-01 American Concrete Institute (ACI) 318 – Building Code Requirements
for Structural Concrete amendment. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 11/15/2023, eff. 12/15/2023)
§ 3500-02 American National Standards Institute (ANSI) A10.4 – Safety
Requirements for Personnel Hoists Amendment. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 11/15/2023, eff. 12/15/2023)
§ 3500-03 Referenced Standards.
Pursuant to § 28-103.19 of the New York City Administrative Code, delete and
replace the following reference standards as follows:
Reference standards ANSI A118.1 and ANSI A118.4 as added by Section BC 3502 of
the New York City Building Code, are hereby deleted and new ANSI A118.1 and
ANSI A118.4 are added to read as follows:
 
                   American National Standards Institute
ANSI               25 West 43rd Street, Fourth Floor
                   New York, NY 10036
Standard Reference Title                                 Referenced in code
Number                                                   section number
                   American National Standard
A118.1—12        Specifications for Dry-Set Cement     2103.2.3.1
                   Mortar
                   American National Standard
A118.4—12        Specifications for Modified Dry-Set   2103.2.3.2, 2103.3.2.4
                   Cement Mortar
 
Reference standard ASABE EP 559.1 as added by Section BC 3502 of the New York
City Building Code, is hereby deleted and a new ASBE EP 559.1 is added to read
as follows:
 
                   American Society of Agricultural and
ASABE              Biological Engineers
                   2950 Niles Road
                   St. Joseph, MI 49085
Standard Reference Title                                 Referenced in code
Number                                                   section number
                   Design Requirements and Bending
EP 559.1-2010      Properties for Mechanically-Laminated 2306.1
                   Wood Assemblies
 
Reference standards ASCE/SEI 8, ASCE/SEI 29, and ASCE/SEI 32 as added by
Section BC 3502 of the New York City Building Code, are hereby deleted and new
ASCE/SEI 8, ASCE/SEI 29, and ASCE/SEI 32 are added to read as follows:
 
                   American Society of Civil Engineers
ASCE/SEI           Structural Engineering Institute
                   1801 Alexander Bell Drive
                   Reston, VA 20191-4400
Standard Reference Title                               Referenced in code
Number                                                 section number
                   Specification for the Design of
8—02             Cold-formed Stainless Steel         1604.3.3, 2210.1, 2210.2
                   Structural Members
29—05            Standard Calculation Methods for    722.1
                   Structural Fire Protection
32—01            Design and Construction of Frost-   1809.3.1
                   Protected Shallow Foundations
 
Reference standard ASME 17.5 as added by Section BC 3502 of the New York City
Building Code, is hereby deleted and a new ASME 17.5 is added to read as
follows:
 
                   American Society of Mechanical Engineers
ASME               Two Park Avenue
                   New York, NY 10016-5990
Standard Reference Title                                    Referenced in code
Number                                                      section number
A17.5—2011       Elevator and Escalator Electrical        3001.2
                   Equipment
 
Reference standard AWPA M4 as added by Section BC 3502 of the New York City
Building Code is hereby deleted and a new AWPA M4 is added to read as follows:
 
                   American Wood Protection Association
AWPA               P.O. Box 361784
                   Birmingham, AL 35236-1784
Standard Reference Title                                  Referenced in code
Number                                                    section number
M4—15            Standard for the Care of Preservative- 1811.5.2, 2303.1.9
                   Treated Wood Products
 
Reference standard AWS D1.4/D1.4M as added by Section BC 3502 of the New York
City Building Code is hereby deleted and a new AWS D1.4/D1.4M is added to read
as follows:
 
             American Welding Society
AWS          8669 NW 36 Street, #130
             Doral, FL 33166
Standard                                                   Referenced in
Reference    Title                                         code
Number                                                     section number
                                                           Table 1705.2,
D1.4/D1.4M - Structural Welding Code — Steel Reinforcing 1705.2.1.3, Table
2018         Bars                                          1705.3, 1903.6.2,
                                                           2107.3
 
Reference standard CPA A208.1 as added by Section BC 3502 of the New York City
Building Code is hereby deleted and a new CPA A208.1 is added to read as
follows:
 
                   Composite Panel Association
CPA                19465 Deerfield Avenue, Suite 306
                   Leesburg, VA 20176
Standard Reference Title                             Referenced in code
Number                                               section number
A208.1 - 16        Particleboard                     2303.1 8, 2303.1.8.1
 
Reference standard DASMA 115 as added by Section BC 3502 of the New York City
Building Code is hereby deleted and a new DASMA 115 is added to read as
follows:
 
                   Door and Access Systems Manufacturers
DASMA              Association International
                   1300 Summer Avenue
                   Cleveland, OH 44115-2851
Standard Reference Title                                    Referenced in code
Number                                                      section number
                   Standard Method for Testing Sectional
                   Doors, Rolling Doors and Flexible Doors:
115 - 17           Determination of Structural Performance  1609.1.2.3
                   Under Missile Impact and Cyclic Wind
                   Pressure
 
Reference standard FM 4474 as added by Section BC 3502 of the New York City
Building Code is hereby deleted and a new FM 4474 is added to read as follows:
 
                    Factory Mutual Global Research
FM                  Standards Laboratories Department
                    1301 Atwood Avenue, P.O. Box 7500
                    Johnston, RI 02919
Standard Reference  Title                                Referenced in code
Number                                                   section number
                    American National Standard for
                    Evaluating the Simulated Wind Uplift
4474 - 2004 (R2010) Resistance of Roof Assemblies Using  1504.3.1, 1504.3.2
                    Static Positive and/or Negative
                    Differential Pressures
 
Reference standard NAAMM FP 1001 as added by Section BC 3502 of the New York
City Building Code is hereby deleted and a new NAMM FP 1001 is added to read as
follows:
 
                   National Association of Architectural
NAAMM              Metal Manufacturers
                   800 Roosevelt Road, Bldg. C, Suite 312
                   Glen Ellyn, IL 60137
Standard Reference Title                                    Referenced in code
Number                                                      section number
FP 1001—07       Guide Specifications for Design of Metal 1609.1.1
                   Flagpoles
 
Reference standard TIA-222-H as added by Section BC 3502 of the New York City
Building Code is hereby deleted and a new TIA-222-H is added to read as
follows:
 
                       Telecommunications Industry
TIA                    Association
                       1320 N. Courthouse Road
                       Arlington, VA 22201-3834
Standard Reference     Title                          Referenced in code
Number                                                section number
                       Structural Standard for
TIA-222-H—2017 (R2018Antenna Supporting Structures, 1609.1.1, 3108.1, 3108.2,
                       Antennas and Small Wind        3108.4
                       Turbine Support Structures
 
Reference standard TMS 216 as added by Section BC 3502 of the New York City
Building Code is hereby deleted.
(Added City Record 11/15/2023, eff. 12/15/2023)
Chapter 3600: Appendices
Subchapter G: Flood-Resistant Construction
§ 3606-01 Alteration Applications; Determinations of Market Value and
Substantial Improvement.
   (a)   Scope. This rule provides application submission requirements for
alterations to structures located in areas of special flood hazard, provides
the method for determining the market value of a structure, and provides the
method for determining whether repairs, reconstructions, rehabilitations,
additions or improvements constitute a substantial improvement.
   (b)   References. See Section BC G201.2 (definitions of market value of
structure, substantial damage, and substantial improvement) and § 28-104.7.11.
   (c)   Applicant's statement. Applicants shall include in every alteration
application the statement: "Work proposed in this application (is/is not)
included in a substantial improvement as defined by Section BC G201.2 and 1
RCNY §
3606-01."
   (d)   Calculation of market value. To determine the market value of a
structure, the applicant shall use either of the two calculation methods below:
      (1)   Assessment roll option. Applicants shall utilize dollar amounts
provided by the Department of Finance's most recent "Final Assessment Roll" by
multiplying the total market value by the ratio (market value of structure to
total market value):
 
 
   Market Value of   Estimated Market   Actual AV (Total) -
   Structure       = Value (Total)    ×Actual AV (Land)    (See Example 1)
                                        Actual AV (Total)
or
                                        6-20% Limitation
   Market Value of   Estimated Market   (Total) - 6-20%
   Structure       = Value (Total)    ×Limitation (Land)   (See Example 2)
                                        6-20% Limitation
                                        (Total)
or
                                        8-30% Limitation
   Market Value of   Estimated Market   (Total) - 8-30%
   Structure       = Value (Total)    ×Limitation (Land)   (See Example 3)
                                        8-30% Limitation
                                        (Total)
 
or, at the option of the owner, or where the assessment roll method would not
reflect the market value of structure because more than one building occupies a
single tax lot,
      (2)   Appraisal option. Applicants shall utilize dollar amounts obtained
from an appraisal performed by a New York State licensed Real Estate Appraiser
and performed within one year of the filing of the alteration application:
 
 
Market Value of Structure = Appraised Market Value  = Appraised Market Value
                            (Land and Structure)      (Land)
 
   (e)   Calculation of cost. To determine the cost of repairs,
reconstructions, rehabilitations, additions or improvements of a building or
structure, the applicant shall add together:
      (1)   The costs for the given application, regardless of the time it
takes to complete the work, plus
      (2)   The cost of all other work to be performed during the same period,
including work filed under separate application(s) and including any minor
alterations and ordinary repairs.
   (f)   Determination of substantial improvement. Work shall be deemed a
substantial improvement if the cost as calculated in paragraph (e) equals or
exceeds 50% of the market value of structure as calculated in paragraph (d). A
substantial improvement shall also include work performed to a structure that
has sustained substantial damage, as such term is defined in Section BC G201.2.
In determining whether a structure has sustained substantial damage, the market
value shall be calculated in accordance with paragraph (d) of this rule.
   (g)   Application for construction document approval. For an alteration that
is not a substantial improvement with a cost exceeding the greater of (1)
$40,000 or (2) 25% of the market value of the structure as calculated in
subdivision (d) of this section, the applicant shall include calculations of
the market value of the structure and costs as outlined in this rule, and shall
include any relevant backup documentation including either the online printout
of the Department of Finance Final Assessment Roll or a copy of the real estate
appraisal.
   (h)   Examples of calculation of market value. The Assessment Information
for the following examples is based on information from the Final Assessment
Roll as provided by the Department of Finance.
      (1)   Example 1; Actual A/V. For the purposes of this example, the
assessed values for both the land and the total for the property are indicated
as follows:
 
 
DESCRIPTION            LAND    TOTAL 
ESTIMATED MARKET VALUE         814,000
ACTUAL AV              135,000 366,300
ACTUAL EX AV           0       136,080
TRANS AV               135,000 363,150
TRANS EX AV            0       136,080
 
The example property assessment roll indicates that the ESTIMATED MARKET VALUE
is $814,000 for both the land and the structure. Using the values in the
prescribed formula, the market value of only the structure is calculated as
follows:
 
 
                            Estimated Market Value    Actual AV (Total) -
Market Value of Structure = (Total)                 ×Actual AV (Land)
                                                      Actual AV (Total)
Market Value of Structure = $814,000                ×366,300 - 135,000
                                                      366,300
                          = $814,000                ×63.15%
                          = $514,041
 
      (2)   Example 2; 6-20% Limitation. For the purposes of this example, the
assessed values for both the land and the total for the property are indicated
as follows:
 
 
DESCRIPTION            LAND  TOTAL 
ESTIMATED MARKET VALUE       144,000
6-20% LIMITATION       2,040 5,702
ACTUAL EX AV           1,570 1,570
 
The example property assessment roll indicates that the ESTIMATED MARKET VALUE
is $144,000 for both the land and the structure. Using the values in the
prescribed formula, the market value of only the structure is calculated as
follows:
 
 
                            Estimated Market Value    6-20% Limitation (Total)
Market Value of Structure = (Total)                 ×- 6-20% Limitation (Land)
                                                      6-20% Limitation (Total)
Market Value of Structure = $144,000                ×5,702 - 2,040
                                                      5,702
                          = $144,000                ×64.22%
                          = $92,481
 
      (3)   Example 3; 8-30% Limitation. For the purposes of this example, the
assessed values for both the land and the total for the property are indicated
as follows:
 
 
DESCRIPTION            LAND   TOTAL 
ESTIMATED MARKET VALUE        391,000
8-30% LIMITATION       13,050 30,427
ACTUAL EX AV           0      0
 
The example property assessment roll indicates that the ESTIMATED MARKET VALUE
is $391,000 for both the land and the structure. Using the values in the
prescribed formula, the market value of only the structure is calculated as
follows:
 
 
                                                      8-30% Limitation (Total)
Market Value of Structure = Estimated Market Value  ×- 8-30% Limitation (Land)
                            (Total)
                                                      8-30% Limitation (Total)
Market Value of Structure = $391,000                ×30,427 - 13,050 30,427
                          = $391,000                ×57.11%
                          = $223,302
 
(Amended City Record 6/30/2015, eff. 7/30/2015)
§ 3606-02 Letters of Map Change.
   (a)   Scope. This section establishes procedures for processing letters of
map change, including Letters of Map Amendment and Letters of Map Revision
based on Fill.
   (b)   References. See §§ BC G102.3, G106.5, and G201.2 (definitions of
letter of map amendment (LOMA) and letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-
F)) and § 28-104.7.11.
   (c)   Letters of Map Amendment (LOMAs). Where the FEMA FIRMs 360497 indicate
that a tax lot or structure is located within an area of special flood hazard,
but the owner has obtained an approved LOMA from FEMA removing such tax lot or
structure from areas of special flood hazard, the applicant shall nonetheless
indicate on the application for construction document approval that the work is
located within an area of special flood hazard. However, the work need not
conform to the requirements of Appendix G of the Building Code provided (i) the
applicant submits the approved LOMA with the application for construction
document approval and (ii) the proposed work does not alter the grades on the
site to be lower than those elevations specified in the LOMA. The examiner
shall waive any required items relating to flood zones. Certificates of
occupancy shall comply with Section BC G106.5.
   (d)   Letters of Map Revisions based on Fill (LOMR-Fs). The following
procedures shall be followed where the owner requests that the Department sign
a FEMA "Community Acknowledgment Form" in support of an application to FEMA for
a LOMR-F (see 44 C.F.R. § 65.5). In no case shall fill be placed so as to raise
the level of grade higher than curb level within a required yard or rear yard
equivalent (see Zoning Resolution §§ 23-42, 33-22, and 43-22). The applicant
shall undertake the following steps in the following order:
      (1)   Submit application for construction document approval. Work to re-
grade a site in an A-Zone in order to remove land from an area of special flood
hazard shall be performed pursuant to a work permit issued by the Department.
Such work shall be allowed as either a separate earthwork application or as
part of a new building or alteration application. The application for
construction document approval shall include (i) through (v) below:
         (i)   The check-off in the box on the application that the work is
located in an area of special flood hazard;
         (ii)   An "Initial Survey" of existing conditions showing 1'-0"
contour lines;
         (iii)   No fewer than three sections traversing the entire parcel
showing the base flood elevation, any proposed structures (including elevation
of lowest floor), required yards and rear yard equivalents, levels of existing
natural grade, levels of grade to be removed, final levels of compacted fill,
and final levels of uncompacted topsoil. Additional sections shall be required
when necessary to adequately depict that the work proposed complies with the
code. All levels shall be indicated in NGVD with borough datum in parentheses;
         (iv)   An "Initial LOMR-F Flood Zone Certification" by the registered
design professional who is the applicant, stating:
            "In accordance with FEMA's Technical Bulletin 10-01 and in
accordance with accepted professional practice, I, ________, certify that the
design for the aforementioned development is reasonably safe from flooding and
that the design of the development will not increase the risk of flooding to
surrounding areas. Additionally, I certify that the design complies with the
requirements of Appendix G of the Building Code, and that the level of
compacted fill adjacent to all structures in the development, exclusive of
uncompacted topsoil, is proposed to be at or above the base flood elevation.
Further, I certify that no fill is proposed to be placed in the regulatory
floodway or in an area designated as a V-Zone. Further I certify that all
applicable Federal, State, and local laws shall be complied with, and all
Federal, State, and local permits required for the proposed work have been
obtained and submitted into the folder for this job" and
         (v)   Identification of special inspection for fill placement and of
evaluation of in-place density in accordance with Sections BC 1704.7.2 and
1704.7.3 (to be certified prior to sign-off). Compaction standards shall be as
referenced in FEMA Technical Bulletin 10-01.
      (2)   Obtain approval of construction documents.
      (3)   Submit application to FEMA for Conditional LOMR-F (CLOMR-F)
(optional). While the CLOMR-F is an optional step, it provides preconstruction
assurance that FEMA will approve the Final LOMR-F if constructed in accordance
with the approved plans. At any time after construction document approval, the
applicant may present to the Borough Commissioner for the Borough
Commissioner's review and signature a FEMA "Community Acknowledgement Form"
(which shall indicate "Conditional LOMR-F" in the "Community Comments"
section), along with the approved construction documents. The owner may submit
this signed Community Acknowledgement Form to FEMA. If the owner elects not to
undertake the actions specified in this paragraph three, the owner must
nonetheless follow the procedures and take the actions specified in paragraphs
four through eight of this subdivision, however, in such case, there will be no
preconstruction assurance that FEMA will ultimately approve the Final LOMR-F.
      (4)   Obtain work permit.
      (5)   Complete all grading, fill, and foundation work.
      (6)   Present Community Acknowledgement Form to Borough Commissioner.
After the completion of all grading, fill and foundation work, the applicant
shall present to the Borough Commissioner for review and signature a FEMA
Community Acknowledgement Form, along with the approved plans and following
list of additional required items:
         (i)   A "Final Survey" of completed conditions showing 1'-0" contour
lines;
         (ii)   Certification of completion for the special inspections for
fill placement and of evaluation of in-place density. Compaction standards
shall be as referenced in FEMA Technical Bulletin 10-01; and
         (iii)   A "Final LOMR-F Flood Zone Certification" by the registered
architect or professional engineer who is the applicant on the PW-1, stating:
"In accordance with FEMA's Technical Bulletin 10-01 and in accordance with
accepted professional practice, I, __________________________, certify that all
grading, fill and foundation work is complete, that the design for and
construction of the aforementioned development is reasonably safe from flooding
and that the design for and construction of the development will not increase
the risk of flooding to surrounding areas. I have thoroughly reviewed the
annexed "Initial Survey", "Final Survey" and the special inspection reports for
fill placement and evaluation of in-place density. Further, I certify that all
the work complies with the requirements of Appendix G of the Building Code, and
that the level of compacted fill adjacent to all structures in the development,
exclusive of uncompacted topsoil, is at or above the base flood elevation.
Additionally, I certify that no fill has been placed in the regulatory floodway
or in a designated V-Zone. Further, I certify that all applicable Federal,
State, and local laws have been complied with, and all Federal, State, and
local permits required for the work have been obtained and submitted into the
folder for this job".
      (7)   Apply to FEMA for Final LOMR-F. After the Borough Commissioner
signs the Community Acknowledgement Form, the owner shall submit such signed
form to FEMA.
      (8)   Submit to the Department the approved LOMR-F and either a signed
elevation certificate or dry floodproofing certificate as required pursuant to
Section BC G105.3. No certificate of occupancy or other final signoff shall be
issued by the Department unless and until the applicant submits to the
Department the Final LOMR-F approved by FEMA and either a signed elevation
certificate or dry floodproofing certificate, and until all documents and
submissions required by this rule are microfilmed into the permanent records of
the Department. Certificates of occupancy shall comply with Section BC G106.5.
§ 3606-03 Federal Emergency Management Agency ("FEMA") Letters of Map Revision.
Pursuant to § 28-103.19 of the Administrative Code, the reference standard FEMA
FIRMs 360497, as identified in Section BC G402 of the Building Code, is
modified for New York City to read as follows:
 
             Flood Insurance Rate Map,
             Community Number 360497, Panel
             Numbers 1 through 0457, Revised
             September 5, 2007;
             Federal Emergency Management
             Agency, with the following Letters
             of Map Revision:
             Letter of Map Revision effective
             September 29, 2008, FEMA case #
             08-02-0948P, revising FIRM panel
             0111,
             Letter of Map Revision effective
FEMA         April 18, 2018, FEMA case # 17-02- G102.2, G102.3, G102.3.1,
FIRMs 360497 1503P, revising FIRM panels 0092F, G102.3.2, G103.3, G201.2
             0094F, 0111F, and 0113F,
             Letter of Map Revision effective
             June 2, 2021, FEMA case # 20-02-
             1119P, revising FIRM panel 0116F,
             Letter of Map Revision effective
             June 16, 2021, FEMA case # 20-02-
             1564P, revising FIRM panel 0314F,
             and
             Letter of Map Revision effective
             November 17, 2022, FEMA case # 21-
             02-1113P, revising FIRM panels
             0313F and 0451F.
 
(Amended City Record 2/28/2018, eff. 3/30/2018; amended City Record 5/4/2021,
eff. 6/3/2021; amended City Record 12/5/2022, eff. 1/4/2023)
§ 3606-04 American Society of Civil Engineers ("ASCE") 24 Amendments Relating
to Mandatory Freeboard. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 7/13/2016, eff. 8/12/2016)
Subchapter K: Modified Industry Standards For Elevators and Conveying Systems
§ 3610-01 Safety Code for Existing Elevators and Escalators. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 7/24/2015, eff. 8/23/2015)
§ 3610-02 Safety Code for Machine-room-less Elevators. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 7/24/2015, eff. 8/23/2015)
§ 3610-03 Emergency Operation and Signaling Devices.
Pursuant to § 28-103.19 of the New York City Administrative Code, Section 2.27
of American Society of Mechanical Engineers A17.1-2013, as modified by Chapter
K1 of Appendix K of the New York City Building Code, is hereby amended to read
as follows:
SECTION 2.27
EMERGENCY OPERATION AND SIGNALING DEVICES
2.27.3 Firefighters' Emergency Operation: Automatic elevators.
Revise Section 2.27.3.1.6(m) to read as follows:
   (m)   No device that measures load shall prevent Phase I Emergency Recall
Operation of the elevator.
Revise Section 2.27.3.3.1(l) to read as follows:
   (l)   No device that measures load shall prevent Phase II Emergency In-car
Operation of the elevator.
Revise Section 2.27.3.3.7 to read as follows:
2.27.3.3.7 The "FIRE OPERATION" switch (2.27.3.3), the "CALL CANCEL" button
(2.27.3.3.1(h)), and the visual signal (2.27.3.1.6(h)), shall be grouped
together exposed and accessible, on the cover of the main car operating panel
and shall be located more than 1 220 mm (48 in.) and less than 1 830 mm (72
in.) above the floor as measured to the centerline of the "CALL CANCEL" button,
"FIRE OPERATION" switch and visual signal.
Delete Figure 2.27.3.3.7.
2.27.4 Firefighters' Emergency Operation: Nonautomatic elevators.
Revise the last sentence of Section 2.27.4.1 Phase I Emergency Recall Operation
to read as follows:
* * *
No device, that measures load, shall prevent Firefighters' Emergency Operations
for Non-automatic Elevators
(Added City Record 7/24/2015, eff. 8/23/2015; amended City Record 10/6/2022,
eff. 11/7/2022)
§ 3610-04 Multicompartment Elevators. [Repealed]
(Added City Record 9/24/2015, eff. 10/24/2015; repealed City Record 10/6/2022,
eff. 11/7/2022)
§ 3610-05 Capacity and Loading.
   (a)   New and altered elevator devices must comply with the requirements of
this rule.
   (b)   Pursuant to § 28-103.19 of the New York City Administrative Code,
Section 2.16.10 of American Society of Mechanical Engineers A17.1-2013, as
modified by Chapter K1 of Appendix K of the New York City Building Code, is
amended to read as follows:
SECTION 2.16
CAPACITY AND LOADING
Revise Section 2.16.10 to read as follows:
2.16.10 Detection of Overload on Passenger Elevators and Freight Elevators
Permitted by 2.16.4 to Carry Passengers.
Passenger elevators and freight elevators permitted by 2.16.4 to carry
passengers must be designed with the means to detect if the load exceeds the
rated capacity of the elevator. If an overload is detected, the elevator doors
shall reopen and remain open and a voice notification and visual signal must
indicate that the car is overloaded.
   Exception: If Firefighters' Emergency Operations required in Sections 2.27.3
or 2.27.4 are initiated, the elevator shall operate in accordance with 2.27.3
or 2.27.4.
(Added City Record 8/28/2018, eff. 9/27/2018; amended City Record 10/6/2022,
eff. 11/7/2022)
§ 3610-06 Maintenance, Repair, Replacement and Testing.
Pursuant to § 28-103.19  of the New York City Administrative Code, Section
8.6.4.20 of American Society of Mechanical Engineers A17.1-2013, as modified by
Chapter K1 of Appendix K  of the New York City Building Code, is amended to
read as follows: 
SECTION 8.6
MAINTENANCE, REPAIR, REPLACEMENT, AND TESTING
8.6.4 Maintenance and testing of electric elevators.
Add a new Section to 8.6.4.20 Periodic Test Requirements – Category 5
8.6.4.20.12 Rated Load Performance.
In order to successfully complete the periodic tests specified in 8.6.4.20.1
through 8.6.4.20.11, passenger elevators and freight elevators permitted by
2.16.4 to carry passengers shall perform with loads up to 100% of the rated
load. When loads exceed 100% of the rated load by not more than 25%, the
passenger elevators and freight elevators shall operate in accordance with
2.16.8. The entity performing the Category 5 test must verify compliance with
2.16.10, where required.
(Added City Record 10/6/2022, eff. 11/7/2022)
Subchapter Q: Modified National Standards For Automatic Sprinkler, Standpipe,
and Fire Alarm Systems
§ 3616-01 National Fire Protection Association ("NFPA") 13 Amendment Relating
to Elevator Hoistways and Machine Rooms. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 9/8/2015, eff. 10/8/2015)
§ 3616-02 National Fire Protection Association ("NFPA") 13 Amendment Relating
to Closets and Pantries. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 9/8/2015, eff. 10/8/2015)
§ 3616-03 National Fire Protection Association ("NFPA") 14 Amendment Relating
to Hydrostatic Tests. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 9/8/2015, eff. 10/8/2015)
§ 3616-04 National Fire Protection Association ("NFPA") 72 Amendment Relating
to the National Fire Alarm and Signaling Code.
Pursuant to § 28-103.19 of the New York City Administrative Code, NFPA 72 (2016
edition) is hereby amended as follows:
18.11 Delete and replace with the following: Standard Emergency Service
Interface. Where required by the enforcing authority; governing laws, codes, or
standards; or other parts of this Code, annunciators, information display
systems, and controls for portions of a system provided for use by emergency
service personnel must be designed, arranged, and located in accordance with
the requirements of Sections 18.11.1 through 18.11.3.
Add 18.11.1 Fire Service Access Elevators Annunciator Location. The Fire
Service Access Elevator (FSAE) annunciator panel must be located at the Fire
Command Center (FCC) and installed in such a way that the control switches are
protected against tampering by unauthorized individuals. Location of the FCC
must be approved by FDNY. Where a building contains more than one FCC, one FSAE
annunciator panel must be installed at each FCC.
Add 18.11.2 Listing. All FSAE annunciator panels must be listed to UL Standard
864 (Standard for Control Units and Accessories for Fire Alarm Systems).
Add 18.11.3 Display. FSAE annunciator panels must include a green LED
indicating POWER ON, a yellow or amber LED indicating SYSTEM TROUBLE, and a
LAMP TEST feature. All LEDs and switches must be arranged to graphically
represent the spatial relationship between floors and associated system
components. Each individual floor must be labeled with the corresponding floor
number. Where marketing floor designations are used, only the marketing floor
designation must be displayed on the FSAE annunciator panel. Where approved by
FDNY, designs may utilize touchscreen or similar graphic annunciator
technologies in lieu of a physical cabinet containing LEDs and switches.
21.5 Delete and replace with the following: Fire Service Access Elevators.
Where one or more elevators are specifically designated and marked as FSAE,
elevator status, power, and temperature and presence of smoke in elevator
lobbies, machine rooms, control rooms, machinery spaces, or control spaces must
be continuously monitored and displayed on a building fire alarm system
annunciator(s) complying with Section 18.11 and the requirements of Section
21.5.1 through 21.5.5.
21.5.1 Delete and replace with the following: Elevator Status. Status of the
elevator(s), including elevator location within the hoistway, direction of
travel, position of landing doors, and occupied/unoccupied status of each such
elevator car must be indicated on the annunciator panel or represented on a
separate panel(s) provided it is also located at the FCC.
21.5.2 Delete and replace with the following: Power. Availability of main and
emergency power to operate the elevator(s), elevator controller(s) and machine
room ventilation must be displayed on a building fire alarm system annunciator.
Individual yellow or amber LEDs for fault condition monitoring must be provided
for the following:
   (A)   Elevator Normal Power Fault – upon loss of normal power source
supplying the FSAE(s), the associated yellow or amber LED must activate and
remain lit until such power source is restored.
   (B)   Elevator Emergency Power Fault – upon loss of the emergency power
source that serves supply to the FSAE(s), the associated yellow or amber LED
must activate and remain lit until such power source is restored.
   (C)   Elevator Hoistway Ventilation Power Fault – where elevator hoistway
ventilation is provided, either through passive or active/mechanical means,
loss of power to the associated equipment must activate the yellow or amber LED
and the LED must remain lit until such power source is restored.
21.5.3 Delete and replace with the following: Temperature and Smoke.
Temperature and presence of smoke in associated lobbies and machine rooms must
be monitored and displayed as follows:
   (A)   Temperature Monitoring: Three separate LEDs for each machine room and
for each floor/elevator bank utilized for FSAEs must be provided to indicate
associated temperatures in the elevator lobby or elevator landing served by the
FSAE. These LEDs must be provided under the headings NORMAL <100°F (for green),
MONITORING 100°F< > 135°F (for yellow), and UNSAFE >135°F (for red). These
temperatures must be monitored utilizing a heat detector or temperature
monitoring device listed by a Nationally Recognized Testing Lab (See UL
Standard 521 (Heat Detectors for Fire Protective Signaling Systems)).
      (1)   When said device in an elevator machine room, lobby, or landing
reaches 100°F, it must send a supervisory signal to the FCC and must light the
associated yellow LED.
      (2)   When said device in an elevator machine room, lobby, or landing
reaches 135°F, it must send an alarm signal to the FCC and must light the
associated red LED. Activation of any red LED must be latching and must only
clear upon reset initiated from the fire alarm control panel.
      (3)   The associated green LED must be lit at all other times when no
heat condition at or above 100°F has been detected in the corresponding
elevator lobby or elevator landing.
   (B)   Smoke Monitoring: Activation of an elevator machine room, elevator
lobby or elevator landing smoke detector must send an alarm signal to the FCC
and must light a red LED indicating the associated floor/elevator bank and
indicating the device type that activated. Activation of any red LED must be
latching and must only clear upon reset initiated from the fire alarm control
panel.
      (1)   Where hoistway smoke detection is required by the NYC Construction
Codes, the status of the hoistway smoke detector must be displayed on this
panel.
      (2)   Where cross-zoning of multiple smoke detectors is used, the
activation of the second smoke detector in that corresponding area must light
the red LED.
      (3)   Where alarm verification for a single smoke detector is used, the
activation of the detector in verified alarm mode must light the red LED.
Add 21.5.3.1 Machine Room-less Elevator. Where a machine room-less (MRL)
elevator is provided, smoke and temperature monitoring from the elevator
hoistway must be displayed on this panel in the same manner as requirements
applicable to a traditional elevator machine room.
Add 21.5.4 Hoistway Lighting. Activation of the FSAE hoistway lighting controls
to either on or off must generate a supervisory signal reported to the
buildings' fire alarm system.
Add 21.5.5 Occupant Evacuation Elevator. Where a building is provided with both
FSAE(s), and Occupant Evacuation Elevator(s), a single graphic annunciator may
be provided to indicate all required signals.
(Amended City Record 9/8/2015, eff. 10/8/2015; amended City Record 1/20/2023,
eff. 2/19/2023)
§ 3616-05 National Fire Protection Association ("NFPA") 13R Amendment Relating
to Exemption from Fire Department Connection Requirements in One- and Two-
family Residential Buildings. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 9/8/2015, eff. 10/8/2015)
§ 3616-06 National Fire Protection Association (“NFPA”) 715 Amendment Relating
to the Installation and Location of Natural Gas Alarms.
Pursuant to § 28-103.19 of the New York City Administrative Code, NFPA 715
(2023 edition) is hereby amended as follows:
4.14.1 and 4.14.1.1 through 4.14.1.5 Delete and replace with the following:
   Approval and Acceptance. The design and installation of natural gas
detecting systems and components must be subject to the applicable permit
requirements established in the Administrative Code and the New York City
Electrical Code.
9.5.1.2 Delete and replace with the following:
   Electrically powered fuel gas warning equipment must be provided with a
primary ac power source in accordance with 9.5.2.1 and a secondary power source
in accordance with 9.5.4, unless otherwise permitted by the following:
      (1)   Detectors may be powered by a monitored dc circuit of a control
unit where power for the control unit meets the requirements of Section 9.5 and
the circuit remains operable upon loss of primary ac power.
      (2)   A detector and a wireless transmitter that serves only that
detector may be powered from a monitored battery primary source where part of a
listed, monitored, low-power radio wireless system.
      (3)   A monitored battery primary power source in accordance with 9.5.3
may be installed in existing buildings, as defined in § 28-101.5 of the
Administrative Code, that were completed before January 1, 2025.
(Added City Record 2/14/2024, eff. 3/15/2024; amended City Record 12/24/2024,
eff. 1/23/2025)
§ 3616-07 National Fire Protection Association (“NFPA”) 855 Amendment Relating
to the Standard for the Installation of Stationary Energy Storage Systems.
Pursuant to § 28-103.19 of the New York City Administrative Code, NFPA 855
(2020 edition) is hereby amended as follows:
1.1 Delete and replace with the following: Scope. This standard applies to the
design, construction, installation, commissioning, operations, maintenance, and
decommissioning of indoor stationary energy storage systems (ESS), including
mobile and portable ESS installed in a stationary situation and the storage of
lithium metal and lithium ion batteries. Outdoor and rooftop ESS are regulated
by the New York City Fire Code (Fire Code) and the New York City Fire
Department (FDNY) rules, and as indicated in section 1.3.2.
1.3 Delete and replace with the following: Application. This standard applies
to indoor ESS exceeding the values shown in Table 1.3 and mobile installations
in accordance with section 4.5.
1.3.2 Delete and replace with the following: Indoor and outdoor ESS
installations associated with one- and two-family dwellings must comply with
Chapter 15 of this title, the Fire Code and the FDNY rules.
1.3.3 Delete and replace with the following: DELETED.
Table 1.3 Delete and replace with the following:
Table 1.3 Threshold Quantities
                                            Aggregate Capacity a
ESS Technology                              kWh MJ
Battery ESS
Lead-acid, all types                        70  252
Nickel including Ni-Cad, Ni-MH, and Ni-Zn b 70  252
Lithium-ion, all types                      1   3.6
Sodium nickel chloride                      20  72
Flow batteries c                            20  72
Other battery technologies                  1   3.6
Batteries in one- and two-family dwellings  1   3.6
 
a For ESS units rated in amp-hrs, kWh equals maximum rated voltage multiplied
by amp-hr rating divided by 1000.
b Nickel battery technologies include nickel cadmium (Ni-Cad), nickel metal
hydride (Ni-MH), and nickel zinc (Ni-Zn).
c Includes vanadium, zinc-bromine, polysulfide-bromide, and other flowing
electrolyte-type technologies.
2.1 Delete and replace with the following: General. The documents or portions
thereof listed in this chapter are referenced within this standard and shall be
considered part of the requirements of this standard. Reference the New York
City Building Code (Building Code) for applicable modifications to documents.
2.2 Delete and replace the item containing NFPA 70 with the following:
***
   NFPA 70®, National Electrical Code®, 2020 edition, including the amendments
made by the New York City Electrical Code.
***
2.3.7 Delete and replace with the following: UL Publications. Underwriters
Laboratories Inc., 333 Pfingsten Road, Northbrook, IL 60062-2096.
   UL 263, Fire Tests of Building Construction and Materials, 14th edition
dated June 21, 2011, with revisions through August 5, 2021.
   UL 790, Standard Test Methods for Fire Tests of Roof Coverings, 8th edition
dated April 22, 2004, with revisions through October 19, 2018.
   UL 1012, Power Units Other Than Class 2, 8th edition dated November 9, 2010,
with revisions through March 30, 2021
   UL 1741, Inverters, Converters, Controllers and Interconnection System
Equipment for Use With Distributed Energy Resources, 1st edition dated January
20, 2010.
   UL 1778, Uninterruptible Power Systems, 5th edition dated June 13, 2014,
with revisions through October 12, 2017.
   UL 1973, Batteries for Use in Stationary, Vehicle Auxiliary Power and Light
Electric Rail (LER) Applications, 2nd edition dated February 7, 2018.
   UL 1974, Evaluation for Repurposing Batteries, 1st edition dated October 25,
2018.
   UL 2900-1, Software Cybersecurity for Network-Connectable Products, Part 1:
General Requirements, 2nd edition dated December 13, 2023.
   UL 9540, Energy Storage Systems and Equipment, 2nd edition dated February
27, 2020, with revisions through April 9, 2021.
   UL 9540A, Test Method for Evaluating Thermal Runaway Fire Propagation in
Battery Energy Storage Systems, 4th edition dated November 12, 2019.
2.4 Delete and replace with the following: References for Extracts in Mandatory
Sections
   NFPA 30, Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code, 2018 edition.
   NFPA 70®, National Electrical Code®, 2020 edition, including the amendments
made by the New York City Electrical Code.
   NFPA 72®, National Fire Alarm and Signaling Code®, 2016 edition, as modified
by Appendix Q of the New York City Building Code.
   NFPA 101®, Life Safety Code®, 2018 edition.
3.2.2* Delete and replace with the following: Authority Having Jurisdiction
(AHJ). An organization, office, or individual responsible for enforcing the
requirements of a code or standard, or for approving equipment, materials, an
installation, or a procedure. In New York City, the AHJ for ESS is the New York
City Department of Buildings (DOB) and/or FDNY.
3.3.3 Delete and replace with the following: Battery Management System (BMS). A
system that monitors performance of one or more battery modules in an ESS. Such
system may also control and optimize the operation of the ESS, including the
ability to control the disconnection of module(s) from the system in the event
of abnormal conditions.
3.3.5 Delete and replace with the following: Dwelling Unit. See section 202 of
the Building Code for the definition of “Dwelling Unit.”
3.3.7* Delete and replace with the following: Reserved.
A.3.3.7 Delete and replace with the following: Reserved.
3.3.8* Energy Storage Management System (ESMS). A system that monitors,
controls, and optimizes the performance of an ESS and has the ability to
control the disconnection of the energy storage system in the event of abnormal
conditions. This system can control one or more individual management systems
such as battery management systems.
A.3.3.8 Delete and replace with the following: Reserved.
A.3.3.9 Delete and replace with the following: Energy Storage Systems (ESS).
ESS include but are not limited to the following categories:
   (1)   Chemical: hydrogen storage
   (2)   Thermal: thermal energy storage
   (3)   Electrochemical:
      (a)   Batteries
      (b)   Flow batteries
   (4)   Mechanical:
      (a)   Flywheel
      (b)   Pumped hydro
      (c)   Compressed air energy storage (CAES)
   (5)   Electrical:
      (a)   Capacitors
      (b)   Superconducting magnetic energy storage (SMES)
These systems can have ac or dc output for utilization and can include
inverters and converters to change stored energy into electrical energy. It is
not the intention for ESS to include energy generation systems. It is the
intention for ESS to include backup systems facility standby power, emergency
power or uninterrupted power supply (UPS).
3.3.10 Delete and replace with the following: Fire Area. An area of a building
separated from the remainder of the building by construction having a fire
resistance as required in 4.3.6 and having all communicating openings properly
protected by an assembly having a fire resistance rating as required by code.
3.3.13 Delete and replace with the following: Large-Scale Fire Testing. Testing
of a representative ESS that induces a significant cascading thermal runaway
into the device under test and evaluates whether fire will spread to adjacent
energy storage system units, surrounding equipment, or through an adjacent
fire-resistance-rated barrier and hazards associated with off-gassing such as
explosion control and toxic gas requiring ventilation.
3.3.15 Delete and replace with the following: Maximum Stored Energy. The
quantity of energy storage, expressed in kWh, permitted in a fire area.
Add 3.3.16.1 Deflagration. Propagation of a rapid combustion zone creating
over-pressure at a velocity that is less than the speed of sound in the
unreacted medium, which may be caused by a thermal runaway condition.
3.3.20 Delete and replace with the following: Thermal Runaway. The condition
when an electro-chemical battery cell increases its temperature through self-
heating in an uncontrollable fashion and progresses when the cell’s heat
generation is at a higher rate than it can dissipate, potentially leading to
off-gassing, fire, or deflagration.
Add 3.3.22 Maximum Aggregate Rated Energy Capacity. The quantity of energy
storage, expressed in kWh, permitted in a control area in accordance with the
Fire Code.
Add 3.3.23 Module. A subassembly that is a component of a battery ESS that
consists of a group of cells connected together either in a series and/or
parallel configuration.
Add 3.3.24 Unit. A cabinet or enclosure that contains a functional battery ESS
including components and subassemblies such as cells, modules, battery
management systems, ventilation devices and other ancillary equipment.
4.1 Delete and replace with the following: General. The design, construction,
and installation of ESS and related equipment shall comply with this Chapter
and as supplemented or modified by the technology-specific provisions in
Chapter 9.
4.1.2.1.1 Delete and replace with the following: The plans and specifications
associated with an ESS and its intended installation, replacement or renewal,
commissioning, and use shall be submitted to the AHJ for approval and include,
but not be limited to, the following:
   (1)   Location and layout diagram of the room or area in which the ESS is to
be installed.
   (2)   Details on hourly fire-resistant-rated assemblies provided or relied
upon in relation to the ESS.
   (3)   The quantities and types of ESS units.
   (4)   Manufacturer's specifications, ratings, and listings of ESS.
   (5)   Description of energy storage management systems and their operation.
   (6)   Location and content of required signage.
   (7)   Details on fire suppression, smoke or fire detection, gas detection,
thermal management, ventilation, exhaust, and deflagration venting systems, if
provided.
   (8)   Support arrangement associated with the installation, including any
required seismic support.
4.1.2.1.2 Delete and replace with the following: Utility installations are
subject to approval of FDNY and must comply with the Fire Code including any
exemptions and other applicable law, rules, and regulations.
4.1.2.1.3 Delete and replace with the following: The following test data,
evaluation information, and calculations shall be provided in addition to the
plans and specifications in 4.1.2.1.1 where required elsewhere in this
standard:
   (1)   Large-scale fire test data in accordance with 4.1.5.
   (2)   Hazard mitigation analysis in accordance with 4.1.4.
   (3)   Calculations or modeling data to determine compliance with NFPA 68 and
NFPA 69 in accordance with 4.12.
   (4)   Other test data, evaluation information, or calculations as required
elsewhere in this standard.
   (5)   Peer review as required by 1 RCNY §
101-19.
4.1.2.3.1 Delete and replace with the following: The operations and maintenance
manual shall be prepared prior to final approval of the ESS and be readily
accessible to personnel responsible for the ESS, including the Certificate of
Fitness holder.
Add 4.1.2.5. Decommissioning Plan. A decommissioning plan meeting the
provisions of Chapter 8 shall be provided to the building owner or their
authorized agent and the AHJ.
4.1.3 Delete and replace with the following: Emergency Management Plan.
4.1.3.1* Delete and replace with the following: General. In accordance with the
Fire Code and the FDNY rules, the owner, manufacturer and/or installer of an
ESS shall develop and maintain for each ESS installation an emergency
management plan that includes the following:
   (1)   Identification of the remote monitoring facility and contact
information for such facility;
   (2)   Procedures or protocols by which notifications are made to FDNY, the
Certificate of Fitness holder who will be responsible for the installation, and
a subject matter expert to provide technical assistance to FDNY in the event
the system exceeds or appears likely to exceed thresholds at which fire,
explosion or other serious adverse consequences may result;
   (3)   Procedures or protocols by which notifications are made to the
building owner and/or building occupants in the event of such an emergency,
unless the ESS is also monitored by an attended on-site monitoring station;
   (4)   Procedures or protocols by which the ESS will be safeguarded after the
emergency has been abated, pending repair or removal of the energy storage
system from the premises; and
   (5)   The manner in which any damaged or defective storage batteries or
equipment must be removed from the premises and lawfully disposed.
A.4.1.3.1 Delete and replace with the following: Pre-Incident Planning. Owners
of ESS should develop pre-incident plans to coordinate their own response to
emergencies, consistent with the emergency management plan. NFPA 1620 provides
criteria for developing pre-incident plans for use by personnel responding to
emergencies. NFPA 1620 can be a useful resource to help in the development of
pre-incident plans to assist personnel in effectively managing incidents and
events for the protection of occupants, responding personnel, property, and the
environment. Additional information is published in the FDNY Emergency
Management Plan Preparation Guide. Contact FDNY for more information.
The requirement of an emergency management plan is intended to ensure that the
various parties who will be installing, owning, operating or maintaining an ESS
have agreed upon their respective responsibilities and have made the necessary
arrangements to implement those responsibilities in advance of the
commissioning of the system.
Timely notification and accurate reporting of the nature of the incident and
access to the installer or other subject matter expert will assist FDNY in
managing the emergency.
4.1.3.2 through 4.1.3.2.2.2 Delete and replace with the following: DELETED.
4.1.4.1* Delete and replace with the following: A hazard mitigation analysis
shall be provided to the AHJ for review and approval when any of the following
conditions are present:
   (1)   When technologies not specifically addressed in Table 1.3 are
provided.
   (2)   More than one ESS technology is provided in a room or indoor area
where adverse interaction between the technologies is possible.
   (3)   When required to support a request to increase the maximum aggregate
rated energy capacity.
4.1.5.1 Delete and replace with the following: Large-scale fire testing in
accordance with 4.1.5 shall be conducted on a representative ESS in accordance
with UL 9540A or equivalent test standard approved by DOB and FDNY. Large scale
testing shall not be required for vented lead acid and nickel cadmium batteries
used in standby and emergency applications. Large scale testing shall not be
required for valve regulated lead acid and nickel cadmium batteries used in
standby and emergency applications when listed to UL 1973.
Add 4.1.6.6 Combustible storage in working spaces around energy storage systems
shall comply with the working spaces requirements of the New York City
Electrical Code (Electrical Code).
4.2.3.1 Delete and replace with the following: Retrofitting of ESS shall comply
with the following:
   (1)   Battery systems and modules and capacitor systems and modules shall be
listed in accordance with UL 1973.
   (2)   Battery management and other monitoring systems shall be connected and
installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.
   (3)   The overall installation shall continue to comply with UL 9540 listing
requirements, where applicable. Previously approved unlisted existing battery
systems shall be required to obtain listing to UL 9540 when retrofit is
performed.
   (4)   Retrofits shall be documented in the maintenance, testing, and events
log required in 4.1.2.3.
   (5)   Retrofits shall be the same chemistry as the original system and shall
result in equivalent fire and off-gas behavior results when compared to the
original system tested under UL 9540A.
4.2.3.2 Delete and replace with the following: Changing out or retrofitting
existing lead-acid or nickel-cadmium battery systems with other lead-acid or
nickel-cadmium battery systems less than 50 V ac, 60 V dc in telecommunications
facilities for installations of communications equipment under the exclusive
control of communications utilities located outdoors or in building spaces used
exclusively for such installations that are in compliance with NFPA 76 shall be
considered repairs when there is no increase in system size or capacity greater
than 10 percent from the original design. Such replaced or retrofitted system
shall also comply with the Fire Code.
4.2.3.4 Delete and replace with the following: Changing out or retrofitting
existing lead-acid batteries with other lead-acid batteries utilized
exclusively in uninterruptable power supplies or for standby power applications
shall be considered repairs where there is no increase in system size or
capacity greater than 10 percent from the original design. Such replacement or
retrofitting shall also comply with the Fire Code.
A.4.2.3.3 Delete and replace with the following: DELETED.
4.2.5.2 Delete and replace with the following: An increase in maximum aggregate
rated energy capacity or power rating to an existing ESS shall be considered a
retrofit and comply with 4.2.3.
4.2.7.3 Delete and replace with the following: DELETED.
4.2.9.3* Delete and replace with the following: When required by the AHJ,
visible annunciation shall be provided on the cabinet exterior or in an
approved remote monitoring station(s) at the building’s fire command center
and/or other approved location to indicate potentially hazard conditions
associated with the ESS exist.
4.2.9.4 Delete and replace with the following: DELETED.
4.2.9.5* Delete and replace with the following: DELETED.
4.2.10.1 Delete and replace with the following: Storage batteries previously
used in other applications, such as electric vehicle propulsion, shall not be
permitted to be reused or repurposed.
4.2.10.2 Delete and replace with the following: Materials, equipment, and
devices, excluding batteries, shall not be reused or reinstalled unless
approved by the AHJ.
4.3.1 Delete and replace with the following: Electrical Installation. The
electrical installation shall be in accordance with the Electrical Code based
on the location of the ESS in relation to and its interaction with the
electrical grid.
4.3.2* Delete and replace with the following: Working Space. At a minimum, ESS
equipment shall be provided with working space in accordance with the
Electrical Code, as appropriate, for operation, inspection, troubleshooting,
maintenance, or replacement.
4.3.5.2* Delete and replace with the following: The signage required in 4.3.5.1
shall be in compliance with ANSI Z535 and include the following information as
shown in Figure 4.3.5.2:
   (1)   “Energy Storage Systems” with symbol of lightning bolt in a triangle
   (2)   Type of technology associated with the ESS
   (3)   Special hazards associated as identified in Chapters 9 through 15.
   (4)   Type of suppression system installed in the area of the ESS
   (5)   Emergency contact information
   (6)   Location of E-Stops / controls
   (7)   Location of manually activated smoke / gas purge system switch.
   (8)   Battery management system monitoring facility and other emergency
contact information
   (9)   The number or other unique identifier used by the battery management
system remote monitoring facility to identify the installation, which
firefighters or Department representatives can reference in communications with
the monitoring facility.
4.3.6 Delete and replace with the following: Separation. Rooms or spaces
containing ESS shall be separated from other areas in accordance with the
Building Code and the Fire Code.
4.3.7 Delete and replace with the following: Impact Protection. Where the
battery system is subject to impact by a motor vehicle or other motorized
equipment, such as a forklift or other powered industrial trucks, vehicle
impact protection shall be provided in accordance with applicable requirements
of the Fire Code.
Add 4.3.8.3 Cybersecurity. Battery systems that are connected to a
communication network and have the capability to permit control of any portion
of the electrical system shall comply with either of the following:
   (1)   The ability to control the system is limited to a direct connection
through a local non-networked interface.
   (2)   The battery system is connected through a networked interface
complying with associated software certified to IEC 62443 or UL 2900-1.
4.3.9 Delete and replace with the following: Elevation. ESS shall be located in
control areas on floors in the quantities with maximum aggregate rated energy
capacity described by the Fire Code.
4.3.9.1.1 Delete and replace with the following: ESS shall not be installed
below the finished floor of the lowest level of exit discharge, except when
approved by the FDNY.
Add 4.3.9.1.1.1 ESS installations shall not be installed below the design flood
elevation (DFE) as defined by Appendix G of the Building Code.
4.3.9.2 Delete and replace with the following: ESS installations on rooftops
shall be in accordance with FDNY rules.
4.3.9.3 Delete and replace with the following: Unless otherwise provided in the
Fire Code, the requirements in 4.3.9 shall not apply to the following:
   (1)   Lead-acid and nickel-cadmium battery systems less than 50 V ac, 60 V
dc in telecommunications facilities for installations of communications
equipment under the exclusive control of communications utilities and located
outdoors or in building spaces used exclusively for such installations that are
in compliance with NFPA 76.
   (2)*   Lead-acid and nickel-cadmium battery systems that are designed in
accordance with IEEE C2, used for dc power for control of substations and
control or safe shutdown of generating stations under the exclusive control of
the electric utility, and located outdoors or in building spaces used
exclusively for such installations.
   (3)   Lead-acid battery systems in uninterruptable power supplies listed and
labeled in accordance with UL 1778, utilized for standby power applications,
which is limited to not more than 10 percent of the floor area on the floor on
which the ESS is located.
4.3.10.2 Delete and replace with the following: Required means of egress shall
be provided with emergency lighting as required by the Building Code.
4.3.12 Delete and replace with the following: Fire Command Centers. In
buildings containing ESS and equipped with a fire alarm system, the main
control panel location shall include signage or readily available documentation
that describes the location and type of ESS, operating voltages, and location
of electrical disconnects as required by the Electrical Code.
4.4.1 Delete and replace with the following: ESS installed indoors and in open
parking garages shall comply with this section.
Table 4.4.2 Delete and replace with the following:
Indoor Stationary ESS Installations
Compliance Required   Dedicated-Use Non-Dedicated-Use Reference
                      Buildings a   Buildings b
Administrative        Yes           Yes               Chapters 1 - 3
General               Yes           Yes               Sections 4.1 - 4.3
Size and Separation   Yes c         Yes               Section 4.6
Maximum aggregate     Yes           Yes               Section 4.8
rated energy capacity
Elevation             Yes           Yes               Section 4.3.9
Separation            NA            Yes               Section 4.3.6
Smoke and fire        Yes d         Yes               Section 4.10
detection
Fire control and      Yes c         Yes               Section 4.11
suppression
Water Supply          Yes c         Yes               Section 4.13
Signage               Yes           Yes               Section 4.3.5
Occupied work centers Not allowed   Not allowed       Section 4.7 (Reserved)
                                                      NA
Technology-specific   Yes           Yes               Chapters 9 - 13
protection
 
NA: Not applicable.
a See 4.4.2.1
b See 4.4.2.2
c Reserved
d When approved by the AHJ, alarm signals are not required to be transmitted to
an approved location when local fire alarm annunciation is provided and trained
personnel are always present.
4.4.2.1 Delete and replace with the following: Dedicated-Use Buildings.
Dedicated-use ESS buildings shall be constructed in accordance with the New
York City Construction Codes (Construction Codes) and comply with all the
following:
   (1)   The building shall only be used for energy storage, energy generation,
and other electrical grid-related operations.
   (2)   Occupants in the rooms and areas containing ESS shall be limited to
personnel that operate, maintain, service, test, and repair the ESS and other
energy systems.
   (3)   No other occupancy types shall be permitted in the building.
   (4)   Administrative and support personnel shall be permitted in incidental-
use areas within the buildings that do not contain ESS, provided the following:
      (a)   The areas do not occupy more than 10 percent of the building area
of the story in which they are located.
      (b)   The areas are separated from the ESS and other rooms and areas
containing ESS by 2-hour fire barriers and 2-hour fire resistance-rated
horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with the Building Code, as
appropriate.
      (c)   A means of egress is provided from the incidental use areas to a
public way that does not require occupants to traverse through areas containing
ESS or other energy systems.
Add 4.4.2.1.1 An energy storage system in a dedicated use building as defined
herein is an indoor system. This definition shall not apply to outdoor
structures that are not buildings, including shipping containers, sheds,
chemical storage buildings, prefabricated storage units, and other such
structures or enclosures whether or not specifically designed to house energy
storage systems. Such structures are regulated as outdoor installations
pursuant to the FDNY rules.
4.4.3 Delete and replace with the following: DELETED.
4.4.3.1 through 4.4.3.10.2 Delete and replace with the following: DELETED
Table 4.4.4 Delete and replace with the following:
Open Parking Garage ESS Installations
Compliance Required            Open Parking Garages** Reference
Administrative                 Yes                    Chapters 1 - 3
General                        Yes                    Sections 4.1 - 4.3
Maximum size                   Yes                    Section 4.4.3.2
Means of egress separation     Yes                    Section 4.4.3.4
Walk-in units                  Yes                    Section 4.4.3.5
Enclosures                     Yes                    Section 4.4.3.7
Clearances to exposures        Yes                    Section 4.4.4.2
Fire suppression and control   Yes                    Section 4.11
Open parking garages           Yes                    Section 4.4.4.5
Size and separation            Yes                    Section 4.6
Maximum aggregate rated        Yes                    Section 4.8
capacity
Elevation                      Yes                    Section 4.3.9
Smoke and fire detection       Yes                    Section 4.10
Signage                        Yes                    Section 4.3.5
Occupied work centers          Not allowed            Section 4.7 (Reserved) NA
Open rack installations        Not allowed            Section 4.3.11
Technology-specific protection Yes                    Chapters 9 - 13
 
**See 4.4.4.1(2).
4.4.4.2.1 Delete and replace with the following: Rooftop installations shall
comply with applicable FDNY requirements for rooftop clearances to exposures.
ESS located in open parking garages shall be separated by a minimum 10 ft (3048
mm) from the following exposures:
   (1)   Buildings, except the portion of the building on which rooftop ESS is
mounted
   (2)   Lot lines
   (3)   Public ways
   (4)   Stored combustible materials
   (5)   Locations where motor vehicles can be parked
   (6)   Hazardous materials
   (7)   Other exposure hazards
4.4.4.2.2 Delete and replace with the following: Clearances in open parking
garages shall be permitted to be reduced based on large-scale fire tests in
accordance with 4.1.5, the FDNY Certificate of Approval, and requirements for
electrical equipment separation in accordance with the Electrical Code.
4.4.4.3.1 Delete and replace with the following: ESS located in walk-in
enclosures in open parking garages shall be provided with automatic fire
control and suppression systems within the ESS enclosure in accordance with
4.11.
4.4.4.4 Delete and replace with the following: DELETED.
4.4.4.4.1 Delete and replace with the following: DELETED.
4.4.4.4.2 Delete and replace with the following: DELETED.
4.4.4.5 Delete and replace with the following: Open Parking Garages. ESS and
associated equipment that are located in open parking garages shall comply with
all of the following:
   (1)   ESS shall not be located within 50 ft (15.3 m) of air inlets for
building HVAC systems. When approved, this distance is permitted to be reduced
to 25 ft (7.6 m) if the automatic fire alarm system monitoring the thermal
image fire detection or radiant energy sensing detectors can shut down the
ventilation system connected to the air intakes and close intake and exhaust
dampers upon detection of fire.
   (2)   ESS shall not be located within 25 ft (7.6 m) of exits leading from
the attached building when located on a covered level of the parking structure
not directly open to the sky above. When approved, the separation distance is
permitted to be reduced to 10 ft (3 m) based on largescale fire testing
conducted in accordance with 4.1.5.
   (3)   ESS located in open parking garages shall be separated from any means
of egress component as required by the AHJ to ensure safe egress under fire
conditions.
   (4)   A thermal image fire detection or radiant energy-sensing fire
detection system complying with 4.10 shall be provided to protect the ESS.
   (5)   An approved fence with a locked gate or other approved barrier shall
be provided to keep the general public at least 5 ft (1.5 m) from the outer
enclosure of the ESS.
4.5.4 Delete and replace with the following: Deployment Documents. The
following information shall be provided to the AHJ with any locally required
operational permit applications for mobile ESS deployments:
   (1)   Relevant information for the mobile ESS equipment and protection
measures in the construction documents required by 4.1.2.
   (2)   Location and layout diagram of the area in which the mobile ESS is to
be deployed, including a scale diagram of all nearby exposures.
   (3)   Location and content of signage.
   (4)   Description of fencing to be provided around the ESS, including
locking methods.
   (5)   Details on fire suppression, smoke and automatic fire detection,
system monitoring, thermal management, exhaust ventilation, and explosion
control, if provided.
   (6)   For deployment, the intended duration of operation, including
anticipated connection and disconnection times and dates.
   (7)   Description of the temporary wiring, including connection methods,
conductor type and size, and circuit overcurrent protection to be provided.
   (8)   Description of how fire suppression system connections to water
supplies or extinguishing agents are to be provided.
   (9)   Contact information for certificate of fitness holders who are
responsible for general supervision of maintaining and servicing the equipment
and responding to emergencies.
4.5.6.1 Delete and replace with the following: Electrical connections shall be
permitted to be made using temporary wiring complying with the manufacturer’s
instructions, the UL 9540 listing, and the Electrical Code.
4.5.7 Delete and replace with the following: Deployed Mobile ESS Requirements.
Deployed mobile ESS equipment and operations shall comply with this section and
applicable FDNY requirements.
Table 4.5.7 Delete and replace with the following: DELETED.
4.5.7.1 Delete and replace with the following: Mobile operations on wheeled
vehicles or trailers shall not be required to comply with seismic protection
requirements in 4.3.3.
4.5.7.5.1.1 Delete and replace with the following: Required separation
distances shall be permitted to be reduced when approved by the AHJ.
4.5.7.6 Delete and replace with the following: Electrical Connections.
Electrical connections shall be made in accordance with the manufacturer’s
instructions and the Electrical Code.
4.5.7.6.1 Delete and replace with the following: Temporary wiring for
electrical power connections shall comply with the Electrical Code.
4.5.7.8.1 Delete and replace with the following: An approved fence with a
locked gate or other approved barrier shall be provided to keep the general
public at least 10 ft (3 m) from the outer enclosure of a deployed mobile ESS.
4.6.1 Delete and replace with the following: ESS in the following locations
shall comply with 4.6.2 and 4.6.3 unless otherwise permitted by 4.6.4 or 4.6.5.
   (1)   Indoor ESS installations in non-dedicated-use buildings in accordance
with 4.4.2.
   (2)   Open parking garage installations.
4.6.7 Delete and replace with the following: Sections 4.6.2 and 4.6.3 shall not
apply to lead acid battery systems in uninterruptable power supplies listed and
labeled in accordance with UL 1778, utilized for standby power applications,
which is limited to not more than 10 percent of the floor area on the floor on
which the ESS is located. Batteries must be listed and labeled in accordance
with UL 1973.
4.7 Delete and replace with the following: Occupied Work Centers. Reserved.
4.8 Delete and replace with the following: Maximum Aggregate Rated Energy
Capacity. Comply with the Fire Code.
4.8.1 through 4.8.5 Delete and replace with the following: DELETED.
4.9.1 Delete and replace with the following: General. Exhaust and ventilation
requirements for control areas must comply with the Fire Code and the FDNY
rules.
4.9.2 through 4.9.3.2 Delete and replace with the following: DELETED.
4.10.4 Delete and replace with the following: When approved by the AHJ, the
smoke detection system is permitted to be replaced with a radiant energy-
sensing detection system installed in accordance with NFPA 72, or thermal image
fire detection system installed in accordance with NFPA 72-2025, on rooftops,
and in open parking garages and similar occupancies where conditions negatively
impact the use of smoke detection technologies.
Add 4.10.6 When approved by FDNY, alarm signals are not required to be
transmitted to an approved location when local fire alarm annunciation is
provided and trained personnel are always present.
4.11 Delete and replace with the following: Fire Control and Suppression.
Comply with the Fire Code.
4.11.1* Delete and replace with the following: Where required elsewhere in this
standard, fire control and suppression for ESS shall be provided in accordance
with the Fire Code and the FDNY rules.
4.11.2 Delete and replace with the following: Indoor installations. The indoor
installation of ESS shall only be permitted in buildings fully protected
throughout by a sprinkler system, except lead-acid battery systems, and nickel-
cadmium battery systems as otherwise provided in the Fire Code. Control areas
housing stationary ESS shall be fully protected throughout by a sprinkler
system designed in accordance with NFPA 15, except as may otherwise be approved
based on equipment listings and testing results pursuant to the Fire Code.
4.11.2.1 through 4.11.9 Delete and replace with the following: DELETED.
4.12 Delete and replace with the following: Explosion Control. Where required
elsewhere in this standard and the Fire Code, explosion prevention or
deflagration venting shall be provided in accordance with this section.
4.12.1 Delete and replace with the following: ESS installed within a room,
building, ESS cabinet, or ESS walk-in unit shall be provided with one of the
following:
   (1)   Explosion prevention systems designed, installed, operated,
maintained, and tested in accordance with NFPA 69.
   (2)   Deflagration venting installed and maintained in accordance with NFPA
68.
4.12.2 Delete and replace with the following: Explosion prevention and
deflagration venting shall not be required where approved by DOB and FDNY based
on large scale testing in accordance with 4.1.5 and a deflagration hazard study
that demonstrates that flammable gas concentrations in the room, building, ESS
cabinet, or ESS walk-in unit cannot exceed 25 percent of the LFL.
4.13.1* Delete and replace with the following: Sites where nonmechanical ESS
are installed shall be provided with a permanent source of water for fire
protection.
4.13.2 Delete and replace with the following: DELETED.
4.13.4 Delete and replace with the following: Fire hydrants installed on
private fire service mains shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 24 and
the NYC Fire Code.
4.13.5 Delete and replace with the following: Normally unoccupied, remote
stand-alone telecommunications structures with a gross floor area of less than
1500 ft 2 (139 m 2 ) with lead-acid and nickel-cadmium battery systems less
than 50 V ac, 60 V dc that are in telecommunications facilities for
installations of communications equipment under the exclusive control of
communications utilities and located outdoors that are in compliance with NFPA
76 shall not be required to have a fire water supply.
4.13.6* Delete and replace with the following: Lead-acid and nickel-cadmium
battery systems that are designed in accordance with IEEE C2, used for dc power
for control of substations and control or safe shutdown of generating stations
under the exclusive control of the electric utility, and located outdoors shall
not be required to have a fire water supply.
4.15.1* Delete and replace with the following: An approved method to neutralize
and absorb spills from ESS with free-flowing electrolyte shall be provided.
5.1* Delete and replace with the following: General. All electrical connections
and wiring to and from an ESS or the components of an ESS shall be in
accordance with the Electrical Code or IEEE C2 based on the location of the ESS
in relation to and its interaction with the electrical grid.
5.3 through 5.3.7 Delete and replace with the following: DELETED.
6.1.1 Delete and replace with the following: ESS shall be evaluated and
confirmed for proper operation by the system owner or their designated agent in
accordance the manufacturer’s specifications and with a commissioning plan
prepared in accordance with 6.1.2, 6.1.3, and 6.1.5. The certificate of fitness
holder, as required by the Fire Code and the FDNY rules, shall be present
during the evaluation.
6.1.1.1 Delete and replace with the following: DELETED.
6.1.1.2* Delete and replace with the following: DELETED.
6.1.2 Delete and replace with the following: System commissioning shall be
conducted in accordance with 6.1.2.1 and 6.1.2.2 after the installation is
complete but prior to final inspection and approval. System commissioning shall
also be conducted after the installation of approved fire protection, smoke
control and smoke purge, and hazard mitigation systems.
6.1.2.1 Delete and replace with the following: ESS shall be evaluated for their
proper operation by the system installer or commissioning agent in accordance
with the commissioning plan developed under 6.1.1. The commissioning agent
shall be a qualified person as defined in 3.3.19 of this rule. A commissioning
report documenting the commissioning process shall be prepared in accordance
with 6.1.6.
6.1.2.2 Delete and replace with the following: The commissioning results in
accordance with 6.1.3 shall be provided by the system installer or
commissioning agent to the system owner and FDNY and DOB prior to final
inspection and approval. A copy of the commissioning results shall be retained
by the certificate of fitness holder.
6.1.3.2 Delete and replace with the following: The report shall include the
final commissioning plan, the results of the commissioning process, as well as
a copy of the approved plans and specifications associated with the as-built
system design and installation.
6.1.3.3 Delete and replace with the following: The report shall include any
issues identified during commissioning and the measures taken to resolve them.
A root cause analysis shall be performed for any identified issues.
6.1.3.4 Delete and replace with the following: A corrective action plan
acceptable to FDNY and DOB shall be developed for any open or continuing issues
that are allowed to be continued after commissioning.
6.1.4 Delete and replace with the following: DELETED.
6.1.5 Delete and replace with the following: The commissioning plan shall
include, but should not be limited to, the following information:
   (1)   An overview of the commissioning process developed specifically for
the ESS to be installed and narrative description of the activities to be
conducted;
   (2)   Roles and responsibilities for all those involved in the design,
commissioning construction, installation, or operation of the system(s);
   (3)   Means and methods whereby the commissioning plan will be made
available during the implementation of the ESS project(s);
   (4)   Plans and specifications necessary to understand the installation and
operation of the ESS and all associated operational controls and safety
systems;
   (5)   A detailed description of each activity to be conducted during the
commissioning process, who will perform each activity, and at what point in
time the activity is to be conducted;
   (6)   Procedures to be used in documenting the proper operation of the ESS
and all associated operational controls and safety systems;
   (7)   Testing for any required fire detection or suppression and thermal
management, ventilation, or exhaust systems associated with the installation
and verification of proper operation of the safety controls;
   (8)   Means and methods necessary to document and verify that the system and
its associated controls and safety systems are in proper working condition;
   (9)   Guidelines and format for a commissioning checklist and relevant
operational testing forms and necessary commissioning logs and progress
reports;
   (10)   Means and methods whereby facility operating and maintenance staff
will be trained on the system;
   (11)   Identification of personnel who are qualified to service and maintain
the system and respond to incidents involving each system; and
   (12)   A decommissioning plan meeting the provisions of 8.1 that covers the
removal of the system from service and from the facility in which it is located
and information on disposal of materials associated with each ESS.
6.1.6.1 Delete and replace with the following: ESS shall be evaluated for their
proper operation by the system installer in accordance with the manufacturer’s
instructions, the commissioning plan, and the requirements of this section
after the installation is complete but prior to final approval. System testing
shall also be conducted after the installation of approved fire protection,
smoke control and smoke purge, and hazard mitigation systems. The certificate
of fitness holder shall be present during system testing.
6.1.6.2 Delete and replace with the following: A report documenting the
commissioning process and the results shall be prepared by the entity
commissioning the system and a copy provided to FDNY and Department of
Buildings prior to final inspection and approval and included in the manual
required by 4.1.2.3.
6.3.1 Delete and replace with the following: Operations and maintenance
documentation shall be provided to the Certificate of Fitness Holder.
7.1 Delete and replace with the following: System Operation. All ESS shall be
operated in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions, the operation and
maintenance documentation, and FDNY requirements.
7.1.6 Delete and replace with the following: The operations record shall be
kept in a readily accessible location, or a sign indicating where the record is
located shall be posted adjacent to the system. The FDNY Certificate of Fitness
holder shall maintain the operations record.
7.1.6.2 Delete and replace with the following: The operations record shall be
permitted to be made available electronically when approved by the AHJ.
7.2 Delete and replace with the following: System Maintenance. The ESS shall be
maintained in accordance with its listing and the system manufacturer’s
instructions.
8.1 Delete and replace with the following: Decommissioning Plan. Prior to
decommissioning, the owner’s designated agent(s) shall prepare a written
decommissioning plan in accordance with the manufacturer’s specification and
complying with 8.1.3 that provides the organization, documentation
requirements, and methods and tools necessary to indicate how the safety
systems as required by this standard and the ESS and its components will be
decommissioned and the ESS removed from the site. The designated agent is the
certificate of fitness holder as prescribed in the Fire Code.
8.1.3* Delete and replace with the following: The decommissioning plan shall
include the following information:
   (1)   An overview of the decommissioning process developed specifically for
the ESS that are to be decommissioned;
   (2)   Roles and responsibilities for all those involved in the
decommissioning of the ESS and their removal from the site;
   (3)   Means and methods whereby the decommissioning plan will be made
available at a point in time corresponding to the decision to decommission the
ESS;
   (4)   Plans and specifications necessary to understand the ESS and all
associated operational controls and safety systems, as built, operated, and
maintained;
   (5)   A detailed description of each activity to be conducted during the
decommissioning process and who will perform that activity and at what point in
time;
   (6)   Procedures to be used in documenting the ESS and all associated
operational controls and safety systems that have been decommissioned;
   (7)   Guidelines and format for a decommissioning checklist and relevant
operational testing forms and necessary decommissioning logs and progress
reports;
   (8)   A description of how any changes to the surrounding areas and other
systems adjacent to the ESS, such as but not limited to structural elements,
building penetrations, means of egress, and required fire detection and
suppression systems, will be protected during decommissioning and confirmed as
being acceptable after the system is removed; and
   (9)   A description of hazards associated with ESS decommissioning and plans
for mitigation of such hazards.
Add 8.1.4 Those involved in the decommissioning of the ESS shall be trained and
knowledgeable in accordance with 3 RCNY §
608-01.
8.2.1 Delete and replace with the following: DOB and FDNY shall be notified
prior to decommissioning an ESS and in accordance with the Fire Code and the
FDNY rules.
8.2.2 Delete and replace with the following: The ESS shall be decommissioned by
the owner of the ESS and their designated agent(s) in accordance with the
decommissioning plan.
8.3 Delete and replace with the following: Decommissioning Report. A
decommissioning report shall be prepared by the ESS owner or their designated
agent and summarize the decommissioning process of the system and associated
operational controls and safety systems. The report shall be supplied to DOB
upon request.
Table 9.2 Delete and replace with the following:
Electrochemical ESS Technology-Specific Requirements
               Battery Technology
                                            Sodium   Other
Compliance     Lead- Nickel a Lithium- Flow Nickel   Electrochemical Reference
Required       Acid           Ion           Chloride ESS and Battery
                                                     Technologies b
Exhaust        Yes   Yes c    No       Yes  No       Yes             Section
ventilation                                                          4.9
Spill control  Yes d Yes d    No       Yes  No       Yes             Section
                                                                     4.14
Neutralization Yes d Yes d    No       Yes  No       Yes             Section
                                                                     4.15
Safety caps    Yes   Yes      No       No   No       Yes             Section
                                                                     9.4
Thermal        Yes e Yes      Yes f    No   Yes f    Yes f           Section
runaway                                                              9.3
Explosion      Yes g Yes g    Yes      No   Yes      Yes             Section
control                                                              4.12
Size and       Yes   Yes      Yes      Yes  Yes      Yes             Section
separation                                                           4.6
 
a Nickel battery technologies covered in this column include nickel cadmium
(Ni-Cad), nickel metal hydride (Ni-MH), and nickel zinc (Ni-Zn).
b The protection in this column is not required if documentation acceptable to
the AHJ, including a hazard mitigation analysis complying with 4.1.4, provides
justification that the protection is not necessary based on the technology
used.
c Exhaust ventilation is not required for nickel metal hydride batteries.
d Applicable only to vented- (i.e., flooded-) type nickel and lead-acid
batteries.
e Thermal runway protection is not required for vented (e.g., flooded) lead-
acid batteries.
f The thermal runaway protection as described in 9.3 is permitted to be part of
a battery management system that has been evaluated with the battery as part of
the evaluation to UL 1973 or UL 9540.
g Explosion control is not required for the following:
   (1)   Lead-acid and nickel-cadmium battery systems less than 50 V ac, 60 V
dc in telecommunications facilities for installations of communications
equipment under the exclusive control of communications utilities located in
building spaces or walk-in units used exclusively for such installations that
are in compliance with NFPA 76.
   (2)   Lead-acid and nickel-cadmium battery systems designed in accordance
with IEEE C2 and used for dc power for control of substations and control or
safe shutdown of generating stations under the exclusive control of the
electric utility located in building spaces or walk-in units used exclusively
for such installations.
   (3)   Lead-acid battery systems in uninterruptable power supplies listed and
labeled in accordance with UL 1778, utilized for standby power applications,
and housed in a single cabinet in a single fire area in buildings or walk-in
units.
   (4)   Lead-acid and Ni-Cad battery systems listed and labeled in accordance
with UL 1973, utilized for standby power applications.
9.3 Delete and replace with the following: * Thermal Runaway Protection. Where
required by Table 9.2, a listed device evaluated as part of the ESS or other
approved method shall be provided to manage charging and discharging during
normal operation of the ESS to maintain batteries within their safe operating
parameters and preclude thermal runaway.
Add A.9.3 A component of the thermal runaway protection might be integrated
within the ESS battery management system or ESS management system that controls
the charging and discharging to keep the ESS within its normal and safe
operating limits when that device has been evaluated with the batteries or
capacitors as part of the listing to UL 1973 or UL 9540, as applicable. The
device might also initiate appropriate hazard mitigation as required elsewhere
in this standard when the ESS is in an abnormal state such as overheating or
off-gassing.
Chapter 10 Delete and replace with the following: DELETED.
Chapter 11 Delete and replace with the following: DELETED.
Chapter 12 Delete and replace with the following: DELETED.
Chapter 15 Delete and replace the title of Chapter 15 as follows: One- and Two-
Family Dwellings
15.1* Delete and replace as follows: General. ESS installations associated with
one- or two-family dwellings shall comply with the requirements of this chapter
and the Fire Code.
15.2 Delete and replace with the following: Equipment Listings and Large-Scale
Fire Testing Requirements.
15.2.1 Delete and replace with the following: Permanently wired ESS greater
than 1 kWh in maximum aggregate rated energy capacity shall be listed and
labeled in accordance with UL 9540.
Add 15.2.3 Large-scale fire testing shall be required in accordance with 4.1.5.
15.4.1 Delete and replace with the following: ESS installed in one- and two-
family dwellings shall be commissioned as follows:
   (1)   Verify that the system is installed in accordance with the approved
plans and manufacturer’s instructions and is operating properly.
   (2)   Provide a copy of the manufacturer’s installation, operation, and
maintenance instructions provided with the listed system.
   (3)   Provide training on the proper operation and maintenance of the system
to the system owner.
   (4)   Provide a label on the installed system containing the contact
information for the qualified maintenance and service providers.
15.4.2 Delete and replace with the following: Where the system is installed in
a one- or two-family dwelling that is owned by the developer and has yet to
transfer ownership, commissioning shall be conducted as outlined in Section
15.4, and the developer shall then transfer the required information in Section
15.4 to the homeowner when the property ownership is transferred.
Add 15.4.3 Qualifications of the commissioning agent. The manufacturer’s
representative or master electrician performing the ESS installation shall
serve as the commissioning agent.
15.5 Delete and replace with the following: ESS Spacing. Individual ESS units
shall be separated from each other by a minimum of 3 ft (914 mm) unless smaller
separation distances are documented to be adequate as approved by the AHJ,
based on large-scale fire testing complying with 4.1.5.
15.6.1 Delete and replace with the following: ESS shall only be installed above
grade in the following locations unless otherwise approved by DOB and FDNY:
   (1)   In attached garages, wall- or floor-mounted, separated from the
dwelling in accordance with 15.7.1 and the Fire Code.
   (2)   In detached garages, wall- or floor-mounted.
   (3)   Outdoors, wall-mounted on a non-combustible exterior wall or on a non-
combustible protective barrier approved by DOB and FDNY. Installations must be
located a minimum of 3 ft (914 mm) from doors and windows.
   (4)   Outdoors, ground-mounted within 3 ft (914 mm) of a non-combustible
exterior wall or a non-combustible protective barrier approved by DOB and FDNY.
Installations must be located a minimum of 3 ft (914 mm) from doors and
windows.
15.6.1.1 Delete and replace with the following: In any unfinished room or space
where an ESS is to be installed, the walls and ceiling of unfinished wood-
framed construction shall be protected with not less than 5/8 in. Type X gypsum
board.
15.6.2 Delete and replace with the following: ESS shall not be installed in
living area of dwelling units or in sleeping units.
15.7.1 Delete and replace with the following: The aggregate rating amount for
ESS installed outdoors or within a garage shall not exceed the
following, unless otherwise approved by DOB and FDNY:
   (1)   In attached garages, up to 20 kWh requires a minimum one-hour fire
rated barrier separating the garage from the dwelling, or up to 40 kWh requires
a minimum two-hour fire rated barrier.
   (2)   In detached garages, up to 40 kWh.
   (3)   Outdoors, wall-mounted, up to 40 kWh per building.
   (4)   Outdoors, ground-mounted, up to 40 kWh per building.
   (5)   Up to 80 kWh total for the entire lot.
   (6)   The above ratings may be lowered based on conditions in the FDNY
Certificate of Approval.
A.15.7.3 Delete and replace with the following: The batteries on electric
vehicles should not be included in the aggregate energy capacity limitations in
15.7.1.
15.8 Delete and replace with the following: Electrical Installation. ESS shall
be installed and inspected in accordance with the Electrical Code.
Add 15.14 Energy Storage Management System (ESMS)
Add 15.14.1 Where required by the Fire Code or the FDNY rules, an ESMS approved
by the AHJ shall be provided for monitoring operating conditions and
maintaining voltages, current, and temperatures within the manufacturer’s
specifications.
(Added City Record 9/26/2025, eff. 10/26/2025)
§ 3616-08 National Fire Protection Association (“NFPA”) 720 Amendment Relating
to the Installation and Location of Carbon Monoxide Detectors.
Pursuant to § 28-103.19 of the New York City Administrative Code, NFPA 720
(2015 edition) is hereby amended as follows:
2.1 Add language at the end of the paragraph to read as follows: “Where a
referenced publication has been modified for the City of New York by the New
York City Building Code, every reference to such publication shall be deemed to
include all such modifications.”
2.2 Delete and replace with the following:
   2.2 NFPA Publications. National Fire Protection Association, 1 Batterymarch
Park, Quincy, MA 02169- 7471.
      NFPA 70®, National Electrical Code®, as modified and incorporated into
the New York City Electrical Code.
      NFPA 72®, National Fire Alarm and Signaling Code, as modified and
incorporated into Appendix Q of the New York City Building Code.
      NFPA 101®, Life Safety Code®, as listed in Chapter 35 of the New York
City Building Code.
      NFPA 110, Standard for Emergency and Standby Power Systems, as listed in
Chapter 35 of the New York City Building Code.
      NFPA 111, Standard on Stored Electrical Energy Emergency and Standby
Power Systems, as listed in Chapter 35 of the New York City Building Code.
2.3.4 Delete and replace with the following:
   Section 2.3.4 UL Publications. Underwriters Laboratories Inc., 333 Pfingsten
Road, Northbrook, IL 60062-2096.
      ANSI/UL 1971, Standard for Safety Signaling Devices for Hearing Impaired,
2002, revised 2013.
      ANSI/UL 2034, Standard for Single and Multiple Station Carbon Monoxide
Alarms, as listed in Chapter 35 of the New York City Building Code.
      ANSI/UL 2075, Standard for Gas and Vapor Detectors and Sensors, as listed
in Chapter 35 of the New York City Building Code.
4.4.1.1 Delete and replace with the following:
   Section 4.4.1.1 Carbon monoxide detection system plans and specifications
must be developed in accordance with the New York City Building Code by persons
who are New York State Registered Design Professionals and experienced in the
proper design, application and testing of carbon monoxide detection systems.
4.4.1.2, 4.4.1.3 and 4.4.1.4 Delete and replace with the following: DELETED.
4.4.2.1 Add the following at the beginning: “Carbon monoxide systems
installations must be performed by a New York City licensed electrical
contractor.”
4.4.3.1 Add language at the beginning of the paragraph to read as follows:
“Carbon monoxide system inspection, testing, and maintenance shall be performed
by a New York City licensed electrical contractor holding a New York State
registration for ‘Business of Installing, Servicing or Maintaining Security or
Fire Alarm Systems’ or those fire alarm companies holding a New York State
registration for ‘Business of Installing, Servicing or Maintaining Security or
Fire Alarm Systems,’ and in accordance with rules and regulations promulgated
by the Fire Commissioner.”
5.8.5.3.1(2) Delete and replace with the following:
   (2)   On every level requiring detection and in every HVAC zone of the space
requiring detection.
6.4.1.1 Delete and replace with the following:
   Section 6.4.1.1 An average ambient sound level greater than 105 dBA shall
require the use of a visible notification appliance(s) in accordance with
Section 6.5 where the application is public mode or Section 6.6 where the
application is private mode, except for in Group A-1, A-2, A-3, B or M
occupancies.
      (1)   In Group A-1, A-2, A-3, B or M occupancies, the use of a visible
notification appliance shall be required to be installed where CO detection is
required in subsection (c) of section
915-01 of the rules of the City of New York [72:18.4.1.1]
9.4.1.1 Delete and replace with the following: DELETED.
(Added City Record 12/27/2024, eff. 1/26/2025)
Chapter 4000: Electrical Code
§ 4000-01 Electrical Work Review.
   (a)   Electrical review. Electrical review is required in the following
circumstances:
      (1)   Electrical installations. Electrical review is required where
service equipment totals 1,000 Kilo-Volt Amperes ("KVA") or greater, or where
any new alteration or addition to an electric service installation causes the
altered installation to total 1,000 KVA or greater, as further detailed below:
         (A)   A new installation of equipment totaling 1,000 KVA or higher;
         (B)   Any change in an installation with a rating of 1,000 KVA or
higher, up to and including the second level overcurrent protection, unless it
was fully described and approved as "future" on the original approved plan.
         (C)   Any addition to an existing installation which would bring the
total to 1,000 KVA or higher.
         (D)   A new installation or revised installation above 600 volts,
irrespective of KVA rating.
         (E)   The addition of any equipment in a room, which would affect
clearances around the equipment of a 1,000 KVA installation.
      (2)   Electrical equipment. Electrical review is required for electrical
equipment not specifically addressed in the Electrical Code Technical Standards
and any other electrical equipment not bearing the label of approval of an
electrical testing laboratory acceptable to the Commissioner.
   (b)   Filing requirements. 
      (1)   Electrical installations 1,000 KVA or greater, or new or revised
installations above 600 volts. Filings for electrical installations 1,000 KVA
or greater, or new or revised installations above 600 volts must comply with
the following:
         (i)   Submission must be made in a manner prescribed by the
Department, including electronically, by a New York State Licensed and
Registered Professional Engineer, New York State Licensed and Registered
Architect, or an individual with comparable qualifications from an outside
jurisdiction.
         (ii)   A filing fee of $650.00 must be paid for each submission.
         (iii)   All submissions for service equipment totaling 1,000 KVA or
more or above 600 Volts must include the following plans/drawings:
            - One line diagram
            - Plan view / service equipment room layout
            - Submissions must be in accordance with, and include, the
following requirements:
               (A)   All drawings must be clear, legible, and use standard
notations.
               (B)   Installations that are not all new must clearly mark what
is new and what is existing. In addition, all new work must be encircled by a
‘bubble' or ‘cloud' on the drawings.
               (C)   For residential installations, the calculations justifying
a de-rating of the neutral must be submitted.
               (D)   The plan view must be drawn to scale, showing the point of
service entrance into the building. If the building sets back from the property
line, the underground service feeder must be shown, including wire and raceway
sizes.
               (E)   The arrangement of service equipment and its proximity to
the point of service entrance must be shown, including the manner in which
service will be extended to the service equipment. If the switchboard is free
standing, the clearance around the switchboard must be shown.
               (F)   The location of the main switchboard and/or distribution
panels in relation to the service equipment must be shown.
               (G)   The location of the electric service room with respect to
the surrounding areas must be shown.
               (H)   The means of egress from the switchboard room and where it
leads to must be shown. The legal exit(s) to which egress door(s) lead must
also be shown.
               (I)   When there is more than one service location within a
building, drawings must contain a notation indicating that signs are posted at
the entrance door of each switchboard room showing the location of all the
other switchboard rooms. The location and wording of the signs must be
specified.
               (J)   If the existing service equipment and/or point of service
entrance is to be discontinued, the drawings must so state.
               (K)   If existing service equipment is to remain in conjunction
with new service equipment and is to be supplied by the same service entrance,
the drawing must indicate the make and size of the existing service equipment,
and the type and size of the fuses in the existing equipment.
               (L)   The drawing must show grouping of service equipment at the
point of service entrance.
               (M)   The drawing must show ventilation of the room when the
service equipment totals 2000 KVA or larger (this may be in the form of a note
on the drawing).
               (N)   The drawing must show the available short circuit current
at the point of service entrance and at the point of change in the interrupting
rating of the overcurrent protection. Where used, series ratings must be
indicated.
               (O)   A statement confirming that all fuses and/or circuit
breakers have been coordinated for selective short circuit overcurrent
protection must be on the drawing.
               (P)   A one line diagram must be submitted indicating the
service equipment and the distribution equipment up to the 2nd level
overcurrent protection, showing all overcurrent devices with their ampere
rating, make and type, interrupting current ratings and bus and wire sizes.
Frame and trip sizes for circuit breakers must be indicated.
               (Q)   Drawings must indicate that transformers are properly
grounded. Service and distribution equipment proposed for future installation
must be marked on the drawings as "future."
               (R)   All voltages must be clearly shown on the drawings, which
must include voltages pertaining to all of the equipment overcurrent protection
up to and including the second level protection.
               (S)   When a generator (or other non-utility source) is part of
a 1,000 KVA submission and the generator itself is rated below 1,000 KVA, a one
line diagram must be submitted showing how the generator is connected to the
normal service. The drawings must include the grounding of the generator frame
and neutral bonding if needed (four pole transfer device). If the generator is
rated 1,000 KVA or larger, a room layout must be submitted along with a one
line diagram.
         (iv)   A selective coordination report prepared by a professional
engineer must be filed with the Department prior to electrical inspection. Such
engineer may be different from the applicant.
         (v)   Where installation of equipment differs from the original
approved drawings, amended drawings showing the as-built condition must be
filed with the Department prior to electrical inspection.
      (2)   Special permission. Request for special permission must be made
electronically and comply with the following:
         (i)   Demonstrate practical difficulty and provide supporting
documentation.
         (ii)   Proposed equally safe alternative methods must be included.
         (iii)   A filing fee of $350.00 must be paid for each submission made
where an objection was issued due to failure to obtain prior special
permission.
      (3)   Office of Technical Certification and Research ("OTCR") review.
Filings for OTCR review of electrical equipment not otherwise approved for use
by the New York City Electrical Code must comply with the following:
         (i)   The submission, including a cover letter, notarized application
and check, must be filed with OTCR or electronically, as the Commissioner may
require.
         (ii)   A filing fee of $600.00 must be paid for each submission.
         (iii)   Payment must be made" in a form and manner as provided by the
Commissioner.
         (iv)   The submission must contain the following:
            (A)   A cover letter indicating the following:
               1.   Type/model numbers of material/equipment being submitted
for approval.
               2.   Items included in support of the submittal.
               3.   Explanatory information/comments, if applicable.
            (B)   A completed and notarized application for review.
            (C)   Two (2) brochures, or catalog data sheets, and a set of
unmounted photographs or photographs.
            (D)   A complete test report that includes a conclusion sheet from
a laboratory acceptable to the Commissioner.
            (E)   Equipment samples only when requested by OTCR.
   (c)   Compliance with the New York City Energy Conservation Code. All
electrical submissions must comply with the requirements of the Energy
Conservation Code where applicable.
(Amended and renumbered* City Record 6/11/2019, eff. 7/11/2019)
* Editor's note: Formerly 1 RCNY §
34-05.
§ 4000-06 Fire Alarm Wiring and Power Sources. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 12/3/2015, eff. 1/2/2016)
Chapter 5000: New York City Energy Conservation Code
§ 5000-01 Construction Document Approval Requirements for Compliance with the
New York City Energy Conservation Code.
   (a)   Purpose. This section sets forth the requirements for filing and
approval of construction documents and the universe of progress inspections
during construction, in accordance with the New York City Energy Conservation
Code.
   (b)   References. See 2020 New York City Energy Conservation Code
(Administrative Code §§ 28-1001.1 et seq.); 2020 New York State Energy
Conservation Construction Code (19 NYCRR part 1240); Administrative Code § 28-
104.7.9, Sections BC 107.13 and BC 110.3.5, Mechanical Code, and Fuel Gas Code;
1 RCNY §
101-07 ("Approved Agencies").
   (c)   Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms
shall have the following meanings:
      Above-Grade Wall. An above-grade wall as defined in the Energy Code. This
definition differs in the residential provisions and the commercial provisions
of the Energy Code.
      Addition. An addition as defined in the Energy Code.
      Approved Progress Inspection Agency. An approved progress inspection
agency as described in subparagraph (iii) of paragraph (3) of subdivision (c)
of 1 RCNY §
101-07.
      ASHRAE 90.1. ASHRAE 90.1-2016 (as amended) as defined in the Energy Code.
      Commercial Building. A commercial building as defined in the Energy Code.
      Design Applicant. An applicant of record who develops, signs and seals
the construction drawings. The design applicant may be someone other than the
registered design professional who prepares, signs and seals the energy
analysis.
      Energy Code. The New York City Energy Conservation Code ("ECC"), as
defined in Chapter 10 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code.
      Grade Plane. A grade plane as defined in the Energy Code. This definition
differs from the Building Code definition of Grade Plane.
      Historic Building. An historic building as defined in the Energy Code.
      Project. A project as defined in the Energy Code.
      Registered Design Professional. A registered design professional as
defined in the Energy Code.
      Residential Building. A residential building as defined in the Energy
Code.
      Story. A story as defined in the Energy Code. This definition differs
from the Building Code definition of Story.
      Story above Grade Plane. A story above grade plane as defined in the
Energy Code. This definition differs from the Building Code definition of Story
Above Grade Plane.
      Sustainable Roofing Zone. A sustainable roofing zone as defined in
Chapter 15 of the Building Code. Note that this is a Building Code requirement
and not an Energy Code requirement.
      Thermal Bridge. A thermal bridge as defined in the Energy Code.
   (d)   Applicability.
      (1)   Applicable version and edition of Energy Code. Applications must
comply with the Energy Code version and edition in effect when the application
is filed, continuing through construction and sign-off of the application by
the Department.
      (2)   Residential building projects. All applications related to a single
residential building project must follow ECC Chapters R2 through R6.
      (3)   Commercial building projects. All applications related to a single
commercial building project must follow either ECC Chapters C2 through C6 or
ASHRAE 90.1 in its entirety.
         (i)   ECC Compliance Path. Vertical fenestration is allowed up to 30%
of the gross above-grade wall area, prescriptively. Commercial buildings with
vertical fenestration exceeding 30% of the above-grade wall must provide
daylighting controls in required daylight zones in accordance with ECC
provisions to a maximum fenestration area of 40% of the gross above-grade wall
area. Alternatively, commercial buildings with vertical fenestration exceeding
the prescriptive requirements for maximum vertical fenestration area may show
compliance using the Component Alternative Method in Section C402.1.5, through
the use of COMcheck.
         (ii)   ASHRAE 90.1 Compliance Path. Vertical fenestration is allowed
up to 40% of the gross wall area, prescriptively. If the vertical fenestration
exceeds 40% of the gross wall area, the design team must use energy modeling in
accordance with Section 11 of ASHRAE 90.1 ("Energy Cost Budget Method") or
Appendix G of ASHRAE 90.1 ("Performance Rating Method") and as provided in
subparagraph (iv) of paragraph (1) of subdivision (f) of this section or
Section 5.6 of ASHRAE 90.1 ("Building Envelope Trade-off Option").
         (iii)   Additional requirements in Section 11 and Appendix G. For new
buildings 25,000 square feet and greater in area, and which follow Section 11
or Appendix G, additional requirements must be satisfied to demonstrate
compliance with Section 5.2.3. The building envelope must comply with either
Section 5.5 of ASHRAE 90.1 ("Prescriptive Building Envelope") or the applicant
must calculate an envelope performance factor in accordance with Appendix C of
ASHRAE 90.1 that meets certain thresholds dependent on the occupancy of the
building.
      (4)   Identification of related applications. Applicants must indicate in
the application form all applications related to the project or, if an
application has not yet been filed, the name of the applicant or the
applicant's firm and discipline for any anticipated related applications.
   (e)   Professional statement. Every application filed by a registered design
professional for approval of construction documents for a new building or
alteration shall include a professional statement of either compliance with or
exemption from the Energy Code.
      (1)   Compliance. All new building and alteration applications must
indicate compliance on the application form, except as specifically excluded in
paragraph (2) of this subdivision.
      (2)   Exemption. Only applications that consist entirely of work exempt
from the Energy Code may indicate exemption in the professional statement. The
application must state one of the following bases for exemption:
         (i)   Historic building. Any alteration to an historic building is
exempt. Any addition to an historic building is not exempt, and must meet the
requirements of the ECC for new construction.
         (ii)   Envelope of low-energy building. All the proposed work is
related to the envelope system of a low-energy, unconditioned building, or
equipment building as described in ECC Chapter C4 or ECC Chapter R4.
         (iii)   Categories of work not affecting energy use. Temporary
structures (as described in §§ 28-111 and BC 3103) are exempt from compliance
with the Energy Code. In addition, the following work types are exempt: fire
alarm, fire suppression in a range hood, standpipe, sprinkler, fuel storage,
construction equipment, curb cut, fire protection plan, sidewalk shed,
supported scaffold, fence, place of assembly, temporary place of assembly,
earthwork, support of excavation, builder's pavement plan, protection means and
methods, suspended scaffold, subdivision, full demolition, and cranes. Other
work types are not exempt. 
         (iv)   Post-approval amendment. A post-approval amendment for a job
that was exempt under a prior edition of the Energy Code.
   (f)   Energy analysis. An energy analysis is required for every project that
is not entirely exempt. The energy analysis must identify the compliance path
followed, demonstrate how the project design complies with the Energy Code and,
for commercial projects, indicate whether the project is designed in accordance
with ECC Chapters C2 through C6 or with ASHRAE 90.1.
      (1)   Accepted formats for energy analysis. Tabular analysis along with
COMcheck or REScheck may be used for different disciplines in the same
application, as long as the compliance paths are identical. The following
formats may be used to present the energy analysis:
         (i)   Tabular analysis. For new buildings, additions and/or
alterations to existing residential or commercial buildings for which either
ECC Chapters R2 through R6, ECC Chapters C2 through C6 or ASHRAE 90.1 has been
used, and the applicant is complying prescriptively, the applicant may include
a table entitled "Energy Analysis" as described in figure 1.
         Such table must compare the proposed values of each Energy Code-
regulated item in the scope of work with the respective prescriptive values
required by the Energy Code. The items must be organized by discipline,
including Envelope Systems, Mechanical and Service Water Heating Systems,
Lighting and Electrical Systems, Additional Efficiency Options, and
Commissioning as applicable.
         For commercial building additions and/or alterations involving
lighting, the applicant may choose to utilize the Lighting Application
Worksheet from COMcheck for the lighting part of the analysis in lieu of
including lighting in the tabular analysis; however, the supporting
documentation index must provide a breakdown of each lighting fixture to
clarify the location per room type or floor. See subparagraph (iii) of this
paragraph and Figure 2 in subdivision (g) of this section.
Figure 1: Sample tabular energy analysis: 
 
ENERGY ANALYSIS
Code chapter and/or standard used for design Climate Zone 4A
Item Description   Code Prescriptive  Proposed Design     Supporting
                   Value & Citation   Value               Documentation
(List all elements List the
of the scope of    prescriptive value                     Indicate where in
work in the detail required by the    List the value used the drawing set the
that they are      Energy Code and    in the design.      information is to be
addressed by the   provide the                            found.
Energy Code)       citation for such
                   value.
 
         (ii)   REScheck Software Program. The REScheck software program
available from the United States Department of Energy website may be used for
residential buildings as follows:
            (A)   New buildings. REScheck may be used for new residential
buildings.
            (B)   Additions. REScheck may be used for additions. Only the new
portions of the building shall be input into the software.
            (C)   Alterations and repairs. REScheck may be used for alterations
and repairs. Only the components being altered shall be input into the
software.
            (D)   REScheck version.
               1.   For applications filed on or after May 12, 2020, the report
must specify the 2020 New York City Energy Conservation Code.
               2.   For applications filed before May 12, 2020, the report must
specify the edition of REScheck that matches the edition of the New York City
Energy Conservation Code in effect when the application was filed. If a New
York City-specific version is no longer supported, the report must specify the
applicable IECC version of the software.
         (iii)   COMcheck Software Program. The COMcheck software program
available from the United States Department of Energy website may be used for
commercial buildings as follows:
            (A)   New buildings. COMcheck may be used for new commercial
buildings.
            (B)   Additions. COMcheck may be used for additions. Only the new
portions of the building shall be input into the software.
            (C)   Alterations and repairs. COMcheck may be used for alterations
and repairs. Only the components being altered shall be input into the
software.
            (D)   COMcheck versions.
               1.   For applications filed on or after May 12, 2020, the report
must specify the edition of COMcheck that matches the edition of the New York
City Energy Conservation Code or ASHRAE 90.1 in effect when the application was
filed.
               2.   For applications filed before May 12, 2020, the report must
specify the edition of COMcheck that matches the edition of the New York City
Energy Conservation Code in effect when the application was filed. If a New
York City-specific version is no longer supported, the report must specify the
applicable IECC or ASHRAE 90.1 version of the software, as determined by the
Department.
         (iv)   Energy modeling. For new commercial buildings and additions or
alterations to commercial buildings, where the performance path is used in
accordance with ASHRAE 90.1 section 11 or Appendix G, an energy modeling
program developed by the United States Department of Energy, including DOE2 or
updates of DOE2, shall be used; such updates include DOE2.1E, VisualDOE,
EnergyPlus and eQuest. Other energy modeling programs must be approved by the
Secretary of State of New York State and the commissioner. The commissioner may
at his or her discretion require the energy modeling report to be submitted to
the Department. All applications must provide a Supporting Documentation Index
indicating the mandatory measures, an energy modeling form, and energy modeling
reports. Additional envelope requirements for buildings 25,000 square feet and
greater. Additionally, for applications 25,000 square feet and greater, a
ComCheck Envelope Compliance Certificate, using ASHRAE 90.1, must be submitted
along with the energy modeling reporting to ensure compliance with additional
envelope provisions.
         (v)   Alternative formats. Formats other than those listed in
subparagraphs (i) through (iv) of this paragraph, including, but not limited
to, the home energy software programs described in section ECC 101.5.1, may be
used for a project only if they are approved in advance by both the Secretary
of State of New York State and the commissioner.
      (2)   Mixed-occupancy buildings three stories or fewer. In accordance
with Section ECC 101.4.1, buildings three stories or fewer above grade plane
with mixed residential and non-residential occupancies must comply with the
respective requirements of Chapters R2 through R6 and Chapters C2 through C6 or
ASHRAE 90.1, and must have separate energy analyses, except that a tabular
analysis format or energy modeling may be used to show both the residential and
non-residential requirements.
      (3)   Build-outs of tenant space prior to issuance of new building
certificate of occupancy. The energy analysis for any alteration application
for a build-out of a new building tenant space before the final certificate of
occupancy is issued must be consistent with the compliance path for the new
building. Such energy analysis for the new building must be provided upon
request.
      (4)   Professional responsibility for energy analysis. The energy
analysis must be signed and sealed by registered design professional(s).
         (i)   Election. The project team must elect one of the following
methods for performing the energy analysis:
            (A)   Responsibility by discipline. Where each system of the energy
analysis – envelope, mechanical/service water heating and lighting/power –
meets the prescriptive requirements of the Energy Code individually, different
registered design professionals may sign and seal their respective parts of the
energy analysis report and include them as follows:
               1.   If all such systems are filed with the Department under the
same application number, each registered design professional may include his or
her part of the energy analysis in his or her respective parts of the project
construction drawings.
               2.   If such systems are filed with the Department under
different application numbers, each part of the energy analysis in the related
applications must utilize the same compliance path; except that in the case of
foundation and earthwork permits issued pursuant to section 28-104.2.5, the
energy analysis for the new building project must be submitted with subsequent
construction documents. Refer also to paragraph (5) of this subdivision.
            (B)   Lead professional. Where energy modeling (whole-building
analysis) is performed for the energy analysis and the envelope, mechanical/
service water heating and lighting/power do not meet the prescriptive
requirements of the Energy Code on their own, a lead professional must be
identified who must sign and seal the entire energy analysis for all systems
involved. The energy modeling program must be based on energy modeling software
in accordance with subparagraph (iv) of paragraph (1) of this subdivision. The
energy analysis must be presented in the construction drawings for one
application only. The lead professional must be a registered design
professional and need not be a design applicant.
         (ii)   Registered design professional other than a design applicant. A
registered design professional other than a design applicant may prepare, sign
and seal the energy analysis, either as lead professional or for individual
discipline(s) in accordance with subparagraph (i) of this paragraph.
      (5)   Foundation and earthwork permits. When phased or partial approval
is requested by the applicant for the purpose of issuance of a foundation and
earthwork permit in accordance with § 28-104.2.5 of the Administrative Code, a
tabular analysis must be filed showing the foundation insulation requirements
of the ECC. Refer also to subclause 2 of clause (A) of subparagraph (i) of
paragraph (4) of this subdivision.
   (g)   Supporting documentation. The construction drawings submitted for
approval must provide all energy design elements and must match or exceed the
energy efficiency of each value in each part of the energy analysis – envelope,
mechanical/service water heating, and lighting/power. The supporting
documentation must be listed in a table that serves as an indexing guide to the
construction document set. Such table must list the proposed values of each
Energy Code-regulated item in the scope of work with the respective location in
the drawing set. Such table is not required if the location of the supporting
documentation is included in a column as shown in the Tabular Analysis
described in figure 1.
Figure 2: Sample Supporting Documentation Index: 
 
SUPPORTING DOCUMENTATION INDEX
Code chapter and/or standard used for design Climate Zone 4A
Code Section               Item Description            Supporting Documentation
                                                       Location
                           List all elements of the    List the drawing page
List specific code section scope of work in the detail number and/or section
                           that they are addressed by  title.
                           the energy code.
 
   For additions, the construction documents must clearly show in the
supporting documentation, the new construction as it relates to existing
conditions. For alterations, the construction documents must clearly show in
the supporting documentation those physical portions of the systems that are
being brought up to code and those that are not being altered.
   Further, supporting documentation must provide all information necessary for
a progress inspector to verify during construction that the building has been
built in accordance with the approved construction documents to meet the
requirements of the Energy Code. In addition, other mandatory Energy Code
requirements must be provided as described in paragraphs (1) through (7) of
this subdivision. This is not an exhaustive list.
      (1)   Envelope. Building wall sections and details must be provided for
each unique type of roof/ceiling, wall, and either the foundation, slab-on-
grade, basement or cellar assembly. Such building wall sections shall show each
layer of the assembly, including, but not limited to, insulation, moisture
control and air barriers. If continuous insulation is indicated, it must be
fully continuous, uninterrupted by framing, slab edges, shelf angles, or any
other continuous breaks in the insulation. The insulation in each case must be
labeled and must be equal to or greater than the R values, and an assembly in
each case must be equal to or less than the assembly U factors, in the energy
analysis.
         (i)   Fenestration. Door, window and skylight schedules must include
columns for U-factor, VT and SHGC values for each fenestration assembly type,
and such values must be equal to or less than those in the energy analysis. For
commercial buildings, the building elevation must indicate a demarcation line
at 95 feet. Fenestration located below 95 feet must be clearly identified on
construction documents. For any portion of a fenestration assembly that is
above 95 feet, the entire fenestration assembly may comply with the U factor
requirements for fenestration 95 feet and above. Mandatory requirements to
prevent air leakage shall be detailed.
         (ii)   Spandrel assemblies. Spandrel assemblies are considered opaque
walls. The U factor for the proposed design must be that which is defined in
the Energy Code, according to the frame type, spandrel assembly, and rated R-
value of insulation between framing members. If a spandrel assembly is not
described within the Energy Code, or contains insulation values outside of the
range of rated R-values, the designer will be required to provide simulation of
the wall assembly, using software such as THERM.
         (iii)   Thermal bridging. Construction documents must include
information on clear field, point, and linear thermal bridges. Clear field
thermal bridges, such as brick ties, cladding, studs, must be de-rated using
Appendix A of ASHRAE 90.1. If the assembly is not identified in Appendix A of
90.1, such as Z-girts, then these assemblies must be noted in the drawings,
accompanied by supporting documentation indicating the de-rated value.
Individual point thermal bridges, such as structural beam penetration through
insulation, larger than 12 in 2 in commercial buildings and larger than 8 in 2
in residential buildings must be identified on the construction documents.
Linear thermal bridges specifically identified in the ECC, such as shelf
angles, slab edges, balconies, parapets, window interfaces, must be identified
both on elevation plans and in a tabular format as shown in figure 3. Each
linear thermal bridge type must have a relevant detail showing the cross-
section through the thermal bridge.
Figure 3: Sample Linear Thermal Bridge Documentation.
 
 
Linear                   Detail       [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Thermal     Total Length Location     1e024518ebfb3921ec38bc2ecfa58f65299ca12d/
Bridge Type                           IMAGES/0-0-0-16936.jpg]-value
List all                              List unmitigated [https://
applicable                            export.amlegal.com/media/
thermal                               1e024518ebfb3921ec38bc2ecfa58f65299ca12d/
bridges     List         List the     IMAGES/0-0-0-16936.jpg]-value directly
that are    aggregate    drawing page from Table C402.6, R402.6 or 90.1 Table
identified  length of    number and/  5.4.4. Alternatively, provide [https://
in Table    each type of or section   export.amlegal.com/media/
C402.6,     thermal      title.       1e024518ebfb3921ec38bc2ecfa58f65299ca12d/
R402.6 or   bridge.                   IMAGES/0-0-0-16936.jpg]-value with
90.1 Table                            supporting documentation and/or
5.4.4.                                calculations, if differing from default
                                      value above.
 
      (2)   Mechanical/service water heating. Mechanical system design
criteria, and mechanical and service water heating system and equipment types,
sizes and efficiencies shall be provided with coordinated naming convention
between the mechanical schedule and the energy analysis. For commercial
buildings, the total installed space cooling capacity, the total installed
space heating capacity, and the total installed service hot water capacity must
be listed on the drawings. For all new construction, the ventilation system
design must be included in the construction documents in accordance with the
requirements in the ECC. Space heating and cooling equipment, energy recovery
equipment, economizers, ventilation equipment, service water heating equipment,
and mandatory requirements including control systems, duct sealing and duct and
piping insulation must be shown on the construction drawings and must be equal
to or greater than the energy efficiency requirements established in the energy
analysis, the Energy Code and/or this section, as applicable. A narrative must
be provided for each mandatory control system describing its function and
operation and specifying proper setpoints of equipment and controls. For new
buildings, the construction documents must indicate the method of compliance
for the supply of heated water and clearly show the service water heating
distribution system meeting the specified requirements. Sloped drain water heat
recovery units that comply with IAPMO PS 92 and are tested and labeled in
accordance with IAPMO 346, are deemed to comply.
      (3)   Electrical. The applicant must provide supporting documents for
lighting, power and controls on either electrical drawings or drawings of other
disciplines as appropriate. Such documents must:
         •   support the energy analysis;
         •   satisfy mandatory requirements of the Energy Code, such as
controls, transformers, metering, voltage drop, elevator, commercial kitchen
equipment, and electric motor requirements; and
         •   support progress inspections required by this section.
      The drawings must be numbered with an "E," "EN" or other discipline
designator and must be signed and sealed by a registered design professional.
If the registered design professional is an electrical engineer, the engineer
must file in a form and manner prescribed by the commissioner.
         (i)   Interior and exterior lighting. Supporting documentation for
lighting must be as follows:
            (A)   Commercial buildings, except within dwelling units. The
applicant must provide reflected ceiling plans, floor plans and/or electrical
drawings with lighting layouts for each floor or space in the project, and for
exterior lighting as applicable. Control devices and zones shall be indicated
on drawings. The lighting fixtures must be described and keyed to the lighting
plans, including type designation, brief description, locations, lamp type,
ballast/transformer type, watts per lamp, quantity of lamps per fixture, and
system input watts per fixture, such that the drawings support the energy
analysis. Lighting controls must be shown and described on a schedule, and a
narrative provided describing their function and operation.
            (B)   Dwelling units in residential and commercial buildings. In
homes and dwelling units, the applicant must indicate on floor plans what
fixtures are to be installed with high-efficacy lamps, and where the separate
meter for each dwelling unit is located.
         (ii)   Exterior lighting zones. Exterior lighting zones as set forth
in ECC Table C405.4.2(1) correspond with the following zoning districts in the
New York City Zoning Resolution:
            Lighting zone 1: Park land.
            Lighting zone 2: All R districts, R districts with C overlays and
MX districts.
            Lighting zone 3: M districts, except MX; C districts, except C5, C6
and C overlays on R districts.
            Lighting zone 4: C5 and C6 districts.
         (iii)   Electrical motors and controls. Electrical motor horsepower
and controls must be shown on the drawings and described.
         (iv)   Metering. Projects requiring electrical submetering and/or
monitoring must clearly indicate on the drawings that submetering and/or
monitoring will be provided in accordance with the Energy Code. Projects
requiring whole building fuel use metering must clearly indicate on the
drawings that whole building fuel use metering will be provided in accordance
with the Energy Code.
         (v)   Automatic receptacle controls. For applications using ASHRAE
90.1, certain receptacles must be automatically controlled and clearly shown on
the drawings in accordance with ASHRAE 90.1.
         (vi)   Electric vehicle service equipment capable. New residential
buildings with parking areas must indicate on the construction documents the
method of compliance for the future installation of electric vehicle service
equipment in accordance with the Energy Code and the Building Code, as
applicable.
         (vii)   Elevators and escalators. For applications with elevators, the
construction documents must provide the efficiency class and usage category.
For new building applications with elevator shafts rising 75 feet or more must
provide documentation showing compliance with regenerative drives, as
applicable. For applications with escalator installations must provide
documentation showing compliance with regenerative drives, as applicable.
         (viii)   Commercial kitchen equipment. For applications with certain
commercial kitchen equipment, the construction documents must provide the type
of equipment, the minimum performance value, and the design specification value
in accordance with the ECC.
      (4)   Permanent certificate in residential buildings. For residential
buildings and commercial R-3 buildings, the construction documents must
indicate the following in accordance with Section ECC R401.3:
         (i)   New buildings. For new buildings, a permanent certificate must
be installed indoors and in accordance with Sections ECC R401.3, except that it
may be posted near the electrical distribution panel at eye level and in plain
sight.
         (ii)   Additions and alterations. For additions and alterations
affecting information on an existing permanent certificate, such permanent
certificate must be updated, initialed where changed and reposted such that the
values on the posted permanent certificate remain current. For additions and
alterations where a permanent certificate was not previously required, a new
permanent certificate must be provided with the values applicable to the scope
of work and posted on a permanent certificate that complies with the new
building requirements.
      (5)   Other mandatory requirements. The construction documents must
comply with all mandatory requirements of the Energy Code.
         (i)   For residential buildings, references for such requirements are
listed throughout Chapters R2 through R6.
         (ii)   For commercial buildings complying with the provisions of ECC
Chapters C2 through C6, references for such requirements are set forth
throughout Chapters C2 through C6; for commercial buildings complying with
ASHRAE 90.1, such requirements are set forth throughout the standard.
         (iii)   Commissioning documentation requirements. The construction
documents for each commercial building must show the following:
            (A)   Professional statement. Every application filed by a
registered design professional for approval of construction documents for a new
building or alteration under the commercial provisions of ECC or ASHRAE 90.1
must include a statement of either compliance with or exemption from the
commissioning requirements of the Energy Code. The total installed space
cooling capacity, the total installed space heating capacity and the total
installed service hot water capacity must be listed on the drawings, as well as
all the building systems that require commissioning, as applicable. For
alteration applications, the total connected load of the HVAC distribution
equipment that is within the scope of work must be listed on the drawings.
            (B)   Commissioning Plan. The commissioning plan requirements may
be described in the construction documents, or the construction documents may
refer to specifications. The specifications may be requested by the department.
            (C)   Equipment specifications. The construction documents must
show the location of all equipment requiring commissioning, along with the
performance data for each piece of equipment.
            (D)   Operating and maintenance manual. A statement that the owner
shall receive an operating and maintenance manual for the HVAC equipment
requiring commissioning within 90 days of the date of receipt of the
Certificate of Occupancy or letter of completion.
            (E)   Balancing report. A statement that the owner shall receive a
systems balancing report for the HVAC equipment requiring commissioning within
90 days of the date of receipt of the Certificate of Occupancy or letter of
completion.
         (iv)   Air leakage and air barrier testing statement. The construction
documents for each new building or additions greater than 10,000 square feet in
area must provide information relating to the air barrier testing compliance
with the Energy Code. A continuous air barrier location be shown on the
elevation and section drawings and in each envelope assembly detail.
            (A)   Residential buildings. New buildings required to comply with
the residential provisions of the Energy Code, must include a statement of
compliance with the air leakage rate testing requirements of the Energy Code.
            (B)   Commercial buildings. New buildings or additions, required to
comply with the commercial provisions of the Energy Code, must indicate
compliance with one of the following three air barrier requirements:
               1.   Visual inspection. Only commercial buildings less than
10,000 square feet may comply with visual inspection. The continuous air
barrier for the opaque envelope must indicate compliance with the material or
assemblies in the Energy Code.
               2.   Whole building air barrier testing. Buildings 10,000 square
feet and greater, but less than 50,000 square feet and 75 feet in height or
less must include a statement of compliance with the air leakage rate testing
requirements of the Energy Code. For buildings not required to comply with
testing, and instead choose to comply voluntarily with whole building air
barrier testing must include a statement of compliance with the air leakage
rate testing requirements of the Energy Code.
               3.   Air barrier continuity plan. Buildings 10,000 square feet
and greater but less than 50,000 square feet, which are greater than 75 feet in
height, and for buildings greater than 50,000 square feet must include a
statement of compliance with the Air Barrier Continuity Plan requirements of
the Energy Code. The construction documents must indicate each unique air
barrier joint or seam to be tested along with the recommended method of
testing.
      (6)   Deferred submittals. Drawings showing design intent and performance
criteria matching those in the energy analysis may be submitted as supporting
documentation provided that, in accordance with § 28-104.2.6 of the
Administrative Code, the applicant lists such deferred submittals in the
construction drawings and submits them for approval prior to installation or
construction. If required, the energy analysis must be updated when deferred
submittals are provided for approval.
      (7)   Required progress inspections. Supporting documentation must set
forth all applicable required progress inspections in accordance with the
Energy Code, 1 RCNY §
101-07 and this section.
         (i)   Applicant's instructions regarding required progress
inspections. Progress inspections required to be performed during construction
for any new building, addition or alteration project must be identified by the
design applicant according to the scope of work and listed and described in the
approved construction drawings as required progress inspections. The
description must show the standard of construction and the inspection criteria
as appropriate for the scope of work in accordance with Table I or Table II of
subdivision (h) of this section, as applicable; simple reference to the
citations provided, without such description, is not sufficient. The applicant
must include the instruction that, in accordance with Chapter 1 of the Building
Code and ECC 104.2.3, where an inspection or test fails, the construction must
be corrected and must be made available for reinspection and/or retesting by
the progress inspector until it complies. For additions and alterations, the
applicant must clearly indicate what portions of the altered systems must be
inspected and/or tested, and what inspection and/or testing may be outside the
scope of the work.
         (ii)   Construction scheduling instructions. The drawings must state
that, in accordance with Article 116 of Title 28 and Section BC 110,
construction must be scheduled to allow required progress inspections to take
place, and that roofs, ceilings, exterior walls, interior walls, floors,
foundations, basements and any other construction shall not be covered or
enclosed until required progress inspections are completed or the progress
inspector indicates that such covering or enclosure may proceed, at each stage
of construction, as applicable.
         (iii)   Commercial building reference standards and citations.
Progress inspection reference standards and citations must conform to the
respective requirements of ECC Chapters C2 through C5 or ASHRAE 90.1 as used
for design, in accordance with the following:
            (A)   When ECC Chapters C2 through C5 have been used for the
project design, as reflected in the energy analysis, the applicant must list on
the drawings the respective references and citations for ECC for the progress
inspection.
            (B)   When ASHRAE 90.1 has been used for the project design, as
reflected in the energy analysis, the applicant must list on the drawings the
respective references and citations for ASHRAE 90.1 for the progress
inspection.
   (h)   List of progress inspections required. The following progress
inspections and/or testing set forth in Tables I and II shall be required when
applicable to the scope of work and shall be identified/described in the
supporting documentation and included on the drawings submitted to the
Department. Energy Code sections cited in Tables I and II of this section shall
be understood to include the section, all subsections, all tables and, when
ASHRAE 90.1 is used, appendices related to the cited Energy Code section.
      (1)   Residential buildings. The progress inspections and tests described
in Table I must be performed for buildings regulated by ECC Chapters R2 through
R6. For heating, cooling and/or service hot water systems in multiple
dwellings, including where such systems serve a single dwelling unit, the
applicant must list inspections, tests and citations from Table II, in
accordance with Section ECC R403.8.
TABLE I – PROGRESS INSPECTIONS FOR ENERGY CODE COMPLIANCE – RESIDENTIAL
BUILDINGS 
                                      Reference Standard   ECC or Other
 Inspection/ Test Frequency (minimum) (See ECC Chapter R6) Citation 
                                      or Other Criteria
                                                                                               Reference
                                                                                               Standard
    Inspection/ Test                                                              Frequency    (See ECC     ECC or Other
                                                                                  (minimum)    Chapter R6)  Citation 
                                                                                               or Other
                                                                                               Criteria
IA  Envelope Inspections
    Protection of exposed foundation insulation: Insulation must be visually                   Approved
IA1 inspected to verify proper protection where applied to the exterior of        Prior to     construction R303.2.1
    basement or cellar walls, crawl-space walls and/or the perimeter of slab-on-  backfill     documents
    grade floors.
    Insulation placement and R-values: Installed insulation for each component of As required
    the conditioned space envelope and at junctions between components, including to verify
    thermal bridges and heated slab insulation, must be visually inspected to     continuous   Approved     R303.1, R303.2,
IA2 ensure that the R-values are marked, that such R-values conform to the R-     enclosure    construction R402.1.2, R402.2,
    values identified in the construction documents and that the insulation is    while walls, documents    Table R402.4.1.1,
    properly installed. Certifications for unmarked insulation must be similarly  ceilings and              R402.4.4, R402.6
    visually inspected.                                                           floors are
                                                                                  open
                                                                                               Approved
    Fenestration and door U-factor and product ratings: U-factors, SHGC and VT                 construction
    values of installed fenestration must be verified by visual inspection for    As required  drawings;    R303.1, R303.1.3,
IA3 conformance with the U-factors, SHGC and VT values identified in the          during       NFRC 100,    R402.1, R402.3,
    construction drawings, either by verifying the manufacturer's NFRC labels or, installation NFRC 200,    R402.5
    where not labeled, using the ratings in ECC Tables R303.1.3(1), (2), and (3).              ANSI/DASMA
                                                                                               105
    Fenestration air leakage: Windows, skylights and sliding glass doors, except  As required  NFRC 400,
IA4 site-built windows, skylights and doors, must be visually inspected to verify during       AAMA/WDMA/   R402.4.3
    that installed assemblies are listed and labeled to the referenced standard.  installation CSA 101/
                                                                                               I.S.2/A440
                                                                                  Prior to     Approved
IA5 Fenestration areas: Dimensions of windows, doors and skylights must be        final        construction R402.3
    verified by visual inspection.                                                construction documents
                                                                                  inspection
    Air barrier – visual inspection: Openings and penetrations in the building  As required  Approved     R402.4.1,
IA6 envelope, including site-built fenestration and doors, must be visually       during       construction R402.4.4,
    inspected to verify that they are properly sealed, in accordance with Table   envelope     documents;   R402.4.5, R402.4.6
    R402.4.1.1.                                                                   construction ASTM E 283
                                                                                               ASTM E 779;
                                                                                               ASTM 1827;
    Air barrier – testing: Testing must be performed in accordance with Section Prior to     ANSI/BOMA
    ECC R402.4.1.2 or R402.4.1.3 and shall be accepted if the building meets the  final        Z65.1;       R402.4.1.2,
IA7 requirements detailed in such section. Test results must be retained in       construction RESNET/ICC   R402.4.1.3
    accordance with the provisions of Title 28. Testing must be performed by a    inspection   380;
    third-party independent of the contractor and acceptable to the department.                Approved
                                                                                               construction
                                                                                               documents
IB  Mechanical and Plumbing Inspections
                                                                                  Prior to     Approved     R402.4.2, BC 2111;
IB1 Fireplaces: Provision of combustion air and tight-fitting fireplace doors     final        construction MC Chapters 7, 8,
    must be verified by visual inspection.                                        construction documents;   9; FGC Chapter 6
                                                                                  inspection   UL 127
    Ventilation and air distribution system: Ventilation system must be verified               Approved
    to comply with the ERV/HRV requirements or balanced ventilation system.       Prior to     construction
    Whole-house ventilation fan efficacy must be verified by visual inspection.   final        documents;   R403.6, R403.8,
IB2 Not less than 20% of installed automatic or gravity dampers, and a minimum of construction HVI Standard C403, C404
    one of each type, must be visually inspected and physically tested for proper inspection   916; ANSI/
    operation.                                                                                 ACCA 9Qlvp-
                                                                                               2016
                                                                                               ACCA Manuals
                                                                                  Prior to     J and S;
    HVAC and service water heating equipment: Heating and cooling equipment must  final        Approved     R403.7, R403.8,
IB3 be verified by visual inspection for proper sizing. Pool heaters and covers   plumbing and construction R403.10, R403.11,
    shall be verified by visual inspection.                                       construction documents,   R403.12, C403,
                                                                                  inspection   including    C404
                                                                                               energy
                                                                                               analysis
    HVAC and service water heating system controls: System controls must be
    inspected to verify that each dwelling is provided with at least one
    individual programmable thermostat with capabilities as described in ECC
    R403.1.1, and that such controls are set and operate as specified in ECC      Prior to     Approved
    R403.1.1. Controls for supplementary electric-resistance heat pumps must be   final        construction
    inspected to verify that such controls prevent supplemental heat operation    electrical   documents,   R403.1, R403.2,
IB4 when the heat pump compressor can meet the heating load. Controls for whole-  and          including    R403.5, C403, C404
    house mechanical ventilation (balanced ventilation option) shall enable       construction control
    manual override. Controls for snow- and ice-melting systems and pools must be inspection   system
    inspected for proper operation. Not less than 20% or one of each control                   narratives
    type, whichever is more, must be inspected. Controls for turning off
    circulating hot water pumps when not in use must be inspected for an
    automatic or manual switch.
                                                                                  Prior to
                                                                                  closing      Approved
    HVAC and service water piping design and insulation: Installed piping         ceilings and construction R403.4, R403.5,
IB5 insulation must be visually inspected to verify correct insulation placement  walls and    documents;   R403.8, C403,
    and values. Service hot water distribution systems must be inspected to       prior to     NYC          C404; MC 1204
    verify the supply of heated water.                                            final        Mechanical
                                                                                  construction Code
                                                                                  inspection
    Duct leakage testing, insulation and design: All ductwork and air handlers    Prior to
    must be inspected to verify that the system is entirely within conditioned    closing      Approved
    space. Ducts must be verified by visual inspection for proper sizing. Ducts,  ceilings and construction
    air handlers, filter boxes and building cavities used as ducts must be        walls and    documents;   R403.3, C403; MC
IB6 visually inspected for proper sealing. For alterations, where the air handler prior to     ASHRAE 193;  603.9
    and/or some ductwork is in unconditioned space, duct-leakage testing must be  final        ASHRAE
    performed either after rough-in or post-construction to ensure compliance     construction Manual D
    with ECC R403.3.3 and R403.3.4. Not less than 20% of such ductwork must be    inspection
    tested.
IC  Electrical Power and Lighting Systems
                                                                                  Prior to
                                                                                  final        Approved
IC1 Metering: The presence and operation of individual meters must be verified by electrical   construction R404.2
    visual inspection for all dwelling units.                                     and          documents
                                                                                  construction
                                                                                  inspection
                                                                                  Prior to
    Interior lighting power: Lamps in permanently installed lighting fixtures     final        Approved
IC2 must be visually inspected to verify compliance with high-efficacy            electrical   construction R404.1
    requirements.                                                                 and          documents
                                                                                  construction
                                                                                  inspection
ID  Other
    Maintenance information: Maintenance manuals for equipment and systems        Prior to
    requiring preventive maintenance must be reviewed for applicability to        sign-off or  Approved
ID1 installed equipment and systems before such manuals are provided to the       issuance of  construction R303.3
    owner. Labels required for such equipment or systems must be inspected for    Certificate  documents
    accuracy and completeness.                                                    of Occupancy
                                                                                  Prior to
                                                                                  final
                                                                                  plumbing,
    Permanent certificate: The installed permanent certificate must be visually   electrical   Approved     R401.3, 1 RCNY §
ID2 inspected for location, completeness and accuracy.                            and/or       construction 5000-01(g)(4)
                                                                                  construction documents
                                                                                  inspection
                                                                                  as
                                                                                  applicable
    Electric vehicle service equipment requirements: Electric vehicle outlet or   Prior to     Approved
ID3 conduit and electrical service reserved space must be visually inspected to   final        construction R404.3
    verify compliance. Location must be noted on the permanent certificate.       construction documents
                                                                                  inspection
 
      (2)   Commercial buildings. The progress inspections and tests described
in Table II shall be performed for buildings regulated by ECC Chapters C2
through C6 or ASHRAE 90.1 as applicable.
TABLE II – PROGRESS INSPECTIONS FOR ENERGY CODE COMPLIANCE – COMMERCIAL
BUILDINGS 
 Inspection/ Periodic  Reference Standard (See ECC Chapter C6) or Other ECC or
 Test        (minimum) Criteria                                          Other
                                                                         Citation 
     Inspection/ Test                                       Periodic       Reference Standard (See ECC Chapter C6) or Other ECC or Other Citation 
                                                            (minimum)      Criteria
IIA  Envelope Inspections
     Protection of exposed foundation insulation:           As required
     Insulation must be visually inspected to verify proper during
IIA1 protection where applied to the exterior of basement   foundation     Approved construction documents, ASTM C 272       C303.2.1; ASHRAE 90.1 – 5.8.1, 5.9
     or cellar walls, crawl-space walls and/or the          work and prior
     perimeter of slab-on-grade floors.                     to backfill
     Insulation placement and R-values: Installed           As required to
     insulation for each component of the conditioned space verify
     envelope and at junctions between components,          continuous
     including thermal bridges and heated slab insulation,  enclosure                                                        C303.1, C303.2, C402.1, C402.2, C402.6,
IIA2 must be visually inspected to ensure that the R-values while walls,   Approved construction documents                   C406; ASHRAE 90.1 -5.5, 5.6, 5.8, 5.9, 11
     are marked, that such R-values conform to the R-values ceilings and                                                     or Appendix G, Appendix I
     identified in the construction documents and that the  floors are
     insulation is properly installed. Certifications for   open
     unmarked insulation also be visually inspected.
     Fenestration and door U-factor and product ratings: U-
     factors, SHGC and VT values of installed fenestration
     must be visually inspected for conformance with the U- As required    Approved construction documents; NFRC 100, NFRC   C303.1, C303.1.3, C402.1.4, C402.4, C406;
IIA3 factors, SHGC and VT values identified in the          during         200, NFRC 300, ANSI/DASMA 105, ASTM E 972         ASHRAE 90.1 -5.4.2, 5.5, 5.6, 5.8.2, 5.9,
     construction drawings by verifying the manufacturer's  installation                                                     11 or Appendix G, Appendix I
     NFRC labels or, where not labeled, using the ratings
     in ECC Tables C303.1.3(1), (2) and (3).
     Fenestration air leakage: Windows and door assemblies,
     except site-built windows and/or doors, must be
     visually inspected to verify that installed assemblies As required
     are listed and labeled by the manufacturer to the      during
IIA4 referenced standard. For curtain wall, storefront      installation;  NFRC 400, AAMA/WDMA/CSA 101/I.S.2/A440;ASTM E     C402.5.2, C402.5.6; ASHRAE 90.1 -5.4.3.2,
     glazing, commercial entrance doors and revolving       prior to final 283; ANSI/DASMA 105                               5.4.3.3, 5.8.2, 5.9
     doors, the testing reports must be reviewed to verify  construction
     that the installed assembly complies with the standard inspection
     cited in the approved plans. Weatherseals at loading
     docks must be visually verified.
     Fenestration areas: Dimensions of windows, doors and   Prior to final                                                   C402.4; ASHRAE 90.1 -5.4, 5.5.4, 5.6,
IIA5 skylights must be verified by visual inspection.       construction   Approved construction documents                   5.9, 11 or Appendix G
                                                            inspection
     Air barrier visual inspection: Openings and
     penetrations in the building envelope, including site-
     built fenestration and doors, must be visually
     inspected to verify that a continuous air barrier
     around the envelope forms an air-tight enclosure. The
     progress inspector must visually inspect to verify     As required    Approved construction documents; ASTM E2178, ASTM C402.5; ASHRAE 90.1 – 5.4.3.1, 5.4.3.5,
IIA6 that materials and/or assemblies have been tested and  during         E2357, ASTM E1677, ASTM E779, ASTM E283.          5.9
     meet the requirements of the respective standards, or  construction
     must observe the testing of the building and/or
     assemblies and verify that the building and/or
     assemblies meet the requirements of the standard, in
     accordance with the standard(s) cited in the approved
     plans.
     Air barrier testing: Testing must be performed in
     accordance with section ECC C402.5.1.3.1 or ASHRAE     As required
     90.1 section 5.4.3.1.3, and shall be accepted if the   during
     building meets the requirements detailed in such       construction,  Approved construction documents; ASTM E 779,      C402.5, C402.5.1.3, C406; ASHRAE 90.1 -
IIA7 section. Test results shall be retained in accordance  or prior to    ANSI/BOMA Z65.1, ASTM E3158, RESNET/ICC 380       5.4.3.1.3, 5.9, Appendix I
     with the provisions of Title 28 of the Administrative  final
     Code. Testing must be performed by a third-party       construction
     independent of the contractor and acceptable to the    inspection
     department.
     Air barrier continuity plan testing: Each unique air
     barrier joint or seam must be tested or inspected for
     compliance. Documentation includes the method of test
     performed on each unique air barrier joint or seam and
     the results of the test. If an air barrier joint or    As required
IIA8 seam has a deficiency, the deficiency must be noted,   during         Approved construction documents; ASTM E 779, ASTM C402.5.1.3; ASHRAE 90.1 - 5.4.3.1.3, 5.9
     and retested until it complies with the testing        construction   E 1186, ASTM E 2813, ASTM E 3158
     requirements. Test results must be retained in
     accordance with the provisions of Title 28 of the
     Administrative Code. Testing must be performed by a
     third-party independent of the contractor and
     acceptable to the department.
     Vestibules: Required entrance vestibules must be       Prior to final
IIA9 visually inspected for proper operation.               construction   Approved construction documents                   C402.5.7; ASHRAE 90.1 – 5.4.3.4
                                                            inspection
IIB  Mechanical and Service Water Heating Inspections
     Fireplaces: Provision of combustion air and tight-     Prior to final                                                   C402.2.8; BC 2111; MC Chapters 7, 8, 9;
IIB1 fitting fireplace doors must be verified by visual     construction   Approved construction documents; UL 127           FGC Chapter 6
     inspection.                                            inspection
     Shutoff dampers: Dampers for stair and elevator shaft
     vents and other outdoor air intakes and exhaust
     openings integral to the building envelope must be     As required
IIB2 visually inspected to verify that such dampers, except during         Approved construction documents; AMCA 500D        C402.5.5, C403.7.7; ASHRAE 90.1 - 6.4.3.4
     where permitted to be gravity dampers, comply with     installation
     approved construction drawings. Manufacturer's
     literature must be reviewed to verify that the product
     has been tested and found to meet the standard.
     HVAC-R, commercial kitchen equipment, and service
     water heating equipment: Equipment sizing,
     efficiencies, pipe sizing and other performance        Prior to final                                                   C403.1, C403.2, C403.3, C403.7.5, C404.2,
     factors of all major equipment units, as determined by plumbing and   Approved construction documents, ASHRAE 183,      C404.5, C404.9, C405.10, C406; ASHRAE
IIB3 the applicant of record, and no less than 15% of minor construction   ASHRAE HVAC Systems and Equipment Handbook        90.1 - 6.3, 6.4, 6.5, 6.7, 7.4, 7.5, 7.8,
     equipment units, must be verified by visual inspection inspection                                                       10.4.6, Appendix I
     and, where necessary, review of manufacturer's data.
     Pool heaters and covers must be verified by visual
     inspection.
     HVAC-R and service water heating system controls: No
     less than 20% of each type of required controls must
     be verified by visual inspection and tested for
     functionality and proper operation. Such controls must
     include, but are not limited to:

     •   Thermostatic
     •   Off-hour
     •   Zones
     •   Freeze protection/Snow- and ice-melt system
     •   Ventilation System and Fan Controls
     •   Energy recovery systems
     •   Kitchen/lab exhaust systems                   After
     •   Fan systems serving single and multiple zones installation
     •   Outdoor heating systems                       and prior to
     •   HVAC control in hotel/motel guest rooms       final
     •   Air/Water Economizers & controls              electrical and
     •   Hydronic systems                              construction
     •   Heat rejection systems                        inspection,
     •   Hot gas bypass limitation                     except that
     •   Refrigeration systems                         for controls
     •   Door switches                                 with           Approved construction documents, including
IIB4 •   Computer room systems                         seasonally     control system narratives; ASHRAE Guideline 1:    C403, C404, C406; ASHRAE 90.1 - 6.3, 6.4,
     •   Service water heating systems                 dependent      The HVAC Commissioning Process where applicable   6.5, 6.6, 7.4, 7.5, Appendix I
     •   Pool heater and time switches                 functionality,
                                                            such testing
     Controls with seasonally dependent functionality:      must be
     Controls whose complete operation cannot be            performed
     demonstrated due to prevailing weather conditions      before sign-
     typical of the season during which progress            off or
     inspections will be performed shall be permitted to be issuance of a
     signed off for the purpose of a Temporary Certificate  Final
     of Occupancy with only a visual inspection, provided,  Certificate of
     however, that the progress inspector must perform a    Occupancy
     supplemental inspection where the controls are
     visually inspected and tested for functionality and
     proper operation during the next immediate season
     thereafter. The owner must provide full access to the
     progress inspector within two weeks of the progress
     inspector's request for such access to perform the
     progress inspection.

     For such supplemental inspections, the Department must
     be notified by the approved progress inspection agency
     of any unresolved deficiencies in the installed work
     within 180 days of such supplemental inspection.
                                                            After
     HVAC-R and service water piping design and insulation: installation
     Installed piping insulation must be visually inspected and prior to                                                     C403.11, C404.4, C404.5; MC 603.9; ASHRAE
IIB5 to verify proper insulation placement and values.      closing        Approved construction documents                   90.1 - 6.3, 6.4.4, 6.8.2, 6.8.3; 7.4.3
     Service hot water distribution systems must be         shafts,
     inspected to verify the supply of heated water.        ceilings and
                                                            walls
     Duct leakage testing, insulation and design: For duct
     systems designed to operate at static pressures in     After
     excess of 3 inches w.g. (747 Pa), representative       installation
     sections, as determined by the progress inspector,     and sealing
     totaling at least 25% of the duct area, must be tested and prior to   Approved construction documents; SMACNA HVAC Air
IIB6 to verify that actual air leakage is below allowable   closing        Duct Leakage Test Manual; SMACNA Duct             C403.11; ASHRAE 90.1 - 6.4.4.2.2
     amounts. Installed duct insulation must be visually    shafts,        Construction Standards, Metal and Flexible
     inspected to verify proper insulation placement and    ceilings and
     values. Joints, longitudinal and transverse seams and  walls
     connections in ductwork must be visually inspected for
     proper sealing.
IIC  Electrical Power and Lighting Systems
     Metering: The presence and operation of all required
     meters for monitoring total electrical energy usage    Prior to final
IIC1 and/or total fuel use, system energy usage, tenant     electrical and Approved construction documents                   C405.5, C405.11, C405.12; ASHRAE 90.1 -
     energy usage, or electrical energy usage in the        construction                                                     8.4.3, 8.4.5, 8.4.6, 10.4.5
     building, in individual dwelling units, or in tenant   inspection
     spaces must be verified by visual inspection.
     Lighting in dwelling units: Lamps in permanently       Prior to final
IIC2 installed lighting fixtures must be visually inspected electrical and Approved construction documents                   C405.1; ASHRAE 90.1 – 9.1.1
     to verify compliance with high-efficacy requirements.  construction
                                                            inspection
     Interior lighting power: Installed lighting must be    Prior to final                                                   C405.3, C406; ASHRAE 90.1 - 9.1, 9.2,
IIC3 verified for compliance with the lighting power        electrical and Approved construction documents                   9.5, 9.6, 9.7;
     allowance by visual inspection of fixtures, lamps,     construction                                                     1 RCNY §
     ballasts and transformers.                             inspection                                                       101-07(c)(3)(v)(C)4, Appendix I
     Exterior lighting power: Installed lighting must be    Prior to final                                                   C405.4; ASHRAE 90.1 – 9.4.2;
IIC4 verified for compliance with source efficacy and/or    electrical and Approved construction documents                   1 RCNY §
     the lighting power allowance by visual inspection of   construction                                                     101-07(c)(3)(v)(C)4
     fixtures, lamps, ballasts and relevant transformers.   inspection
     Lighting controls: Each type of required lighting
     controls, including:

     •   occupant sensors
     •   manual interior lighting controls
     •   light-reduction controls                      Prior to final
IIC5 •   automatic lighting shut-off                   electrical and Approved construction documents, including        C405.2, C406; ASHRAE 90.1 - 9.4.1, 9.4.3,
     •   daylight zone controls                        construction   control system narratives                         9.7, Appendix I
     •   sleeping unit controls                        inspection
     •   exterior lighting controls
     •   egress illumination controls

     must be verified by visual inspection and tested for
     functionality and proper operation.
     Electric motors and elevators: Where required by the
     construction documents for Energy Code compliance,     Prior to final
     motor listing or labels must be visually inspected to  electrical and                                                   C403.8, C405.6, C405.7, C405.8, C405.9;
IIC6 verify that they comply with the respective energy     construction   Approved construction documents                   ASHRAE 90.1 - 8.4.4, 10.4, 10.8
     requirements in the construction documents. Elevators  inspection
     and escalators must be inspected for compliance with
     regenerative drive requirements.
IID  Other
     Maintenance information: Maintenance manuals for       Prior to sign-
     mechanical, service hot water and electrical equipment off or         Approved construction documents, including
     and systems requiring preventive maintenance must be   issuance of    electrical drawings where applicable; ASHRAE      C408.1.1, C408.2.5.2, C408.3.2; ASHRAE
IID1 reviewed for applicability to installed equipment and  Final          Guideline 4: Preparation of Operating and         90.1 - 4.2.2.3, 6.7.2.2, 6.7.2.3.5.2,
     systems before such manuals are provided to the owner. Certificate of Maintenance Documentation for Building Systems    8.7.2, 9.7.2.2, 9.4.3.2.2
     Labels required for such equipment or systems must be  Occupancy
     inspected for accuracy and completeness.
 
      (i)   Energy Analysis of Constructed Conditions. In accordance with § 28-
104.3 of the Administrative Code and section ECC 103.4, if constructed work
differs from the last-approved full energy analysis, an as-built energy
analysis shall be submitted to the Department, listing the actual values used
in the building for all applicable Energy Code-regulated items and
demonstrating that the building complies with the Energy Code. Such energy
analysis shall be signed and sealed by a registered design professional. The
progress inspector shall certify that to the best of his or her knowledge and
belief the building as built complies with such signed and sealed energy
analysis and construction drawings for Energy Code compliance; where no trade-
offs have been used among disciplines, more than one registered design
professional may sign and seal the elements of the energy analysis. The energy
analysis shall be approved or accepted by the Department prior to sign-off.
(Amended City Record 9/20/2017, eff. 10/10/2017; amended City Record 7/24/2020,
eff. 8/23/2020)
§ 5000-02 Amendment to ASHRAE 90.1 Relating to Lighting Controls and Modeling
Requirements.
Pursuant to § 28-103.19 of the Administrative Code of the City of New York,
ASHRAE 90.1, as modified by Section ECC CA102.1 of the 2016 New York City
Energy Conservation Code, is hereby amended to read as follows:
4.2.1.2 Additions to Existing Buildings. 
Revise Section 4.2.1.2 to read as follows:
4.2.1.2 Additions to Existing Buildings. Additions to existing buildings shall
comply with either the provisions of Sections 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10 or Section
11 or Normative Appendix G.
4.2.1.2.1 When an addition to an existing building cannot comply by itself,
trade-offs will be allowed by modification to one or more of the existing
components of the existing building. Modeling of the modified components of the
existing building and addition shall employ the procedures of Section 11 or
Normative Appendix G; the addition shall not increase the energy consumption of
the existing building plus the addition beyond the energy that would be
consumed by the existing building plus the addition if the addition alone did
comply.
4.2.1.3 Alterations to Existing Buildings. 
Revise Section 4.2.1.3 to read as follows:
4.2.1.3 Alterations to Existing Buildings. Alterations of existing buildings
shall comply with the provisions of Sections 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10 or Section
11 or Normative Appendix G.
Exception: Historic buildings need not comply with these requirements.
9.4.1.1 Interior Lighting Controls. 
Revise Item c of Section 9.4.1.1 to read as follows:
c.   Restricted to partial automatic ON: No more than 50% of the lighting power
for the general lighting shall be allowed to be automatically turned on, and
none of the remaining lighting shall be automatically turned on. For open plan
offices, a control device meeting this requirement shall control no more than
2,500 ft 2 .
Table 9.6.1 Lighting Power Density Allowances Using the Space-by-Space Method
and Minimum Control Requirements Using Either Method. 
Revise Table 9.6.1 to read as follows:
TABLE 9.6.1 Lighting Power Density Allowances Using the Space-by-Space Method
and Minimum Control Requirements Using Either Method 
[Click_here_to_view_a_PDF_version_of_Table_9.6.1]
 
Informative Note:
This table is
divided into two
sections; this first
section covers space
types that can be    The control functions below shall be implemented in accordance with the descriptions found in the
commonly found in    referenced paragraphs within Section 9.4.1.1. For each space type: (1) All REQs shall be implemented. (2)
multiple building    At least one ADD1 (when present) shall be implemented. (3) At least one ADD2 (when present) shall be
types. The second    implemented.
part of this table
covers space types
that are typically
found in a single
building type.
                                                                                    Automatic
                                                   Restricted Bilevel  Automatic    Daylight    Automatic
                                                   to Partial Lighting Daylight     Responsive  Partial    Automatic Scheduled
                     Local Control  Restricted to  Automatic  Control  Responsive   Controls    OFF (See   Full OFF  Shutoff
                    (See           Manual ON (See ON (See    (See     Controls for for         Section    (See      (See
                     Section9.4.1.1 Section9.4.1.1 Section    Section  Sidelighting Toplighting 9.4.1.1(g) Section   Section
                     (a))           (b))           9.4.1.1    9.4.1.1  (See Section (See        (Full Off  9.4.1.1   9.4.1.1
                                                   (c))       (d))     9.4.1.1(e)6) Section     complies)) (h))      (i))
                                                                                    9.4.1.1
                                                                                    (f)6)
Common LPD RCR
Space  W/  Threshold a              b              C          d        e            f           g          h         i
Types1 ft2
Informative Note: This table is divided into two sections; this first section covers   The control functions below shall be implemented in accordance with the descriptions found in the
space types that can be commonly found in multiple building types. The second part of  referenced paragraphs within Section 9.4.1.1. For each space type: (1) All REQs shall be implemented. (2)
this table covers space types that are typically found in a single building type.      At least one ADD1 (when present) shall be implemented. (3) At least one ADD2 (when present) shall be
                                                                                       implemented.
                                                                                                                                                      Automatic
                                                                                                                     Restricted Bilevel  Automatic    Daylight    Automatic
                                                                                                                     to Partial Lighting Daylight     Responsive  Partial    Automatic Scheduled
                                                                                       Local Control  Restricted to  Automatic  Control  Responsive   Controls    OFF (See   Full OFF  Shutoff
                                                                                      (See           Manual ON (See ON (See    (See     Controls for for         Section    (See      (See
                                                                                       Section9.4.1.1 Section9.4.1.1 Section    Section  Sidelighting Toplighting 9.4.1.1(g) Section   Section
                                                                                       (a))           (b))           9.4.1.1    9.4.1.1  (See Section (See        (Full Off  9.4.1.1   9.4.1.1
                                                                                                                     (c))       (d))     9.4.1.1(e)6) Section     complies)) (h))      (i))
                                                                                                                                                      9.4.1.1
                                                                                                                                                      (f)6)
Common Space Types1                                                   LPD W/ RCR       a              b              C          d        e            f           g          h         i
                                                                      ft2    Threshold
Atrium
                                                                      0.03/
…that is < 20 ft in height                                          ft     NA        REQ            ADD1           ADD1       -        REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
                                                                      total
                                                                      height
                                                                      0.03/
…that is = 20 ft and = 40 ft in height                              ft     NA        REQ            ADD1           ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
                                                                      total
                                                                      height
                                                                      0.40 +
                                                                      0.02/
…that is > 40 ft in height                                          ft     NA        REQ            ADD1           ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
                                                                      total
                                                                      height
Audience Seating Area
…in an auditorium                                                   0.63   6         REQ            ADD1           ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
…in a convention center                                             0.82   4         REQ            ADD1           ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
…in a gymnasium                                                     0.65   6         REQ            ADD1           ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
…in a motion picture theater                                        1.14   4         REQ            ADD1           ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
…in a penitentiary                                                  0.28   4         REQ            ADD1           ADD1       -        REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
…in a performing arts theater                                       2.43   8         REQ            ADD1           ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
…in a religious building                                            1.53   4         REQ            ADD1           ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
…in a sports arena                                                  0.43   4         REQ            ADD1           ADD1       -        REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
…all other audience seating areas                                   0.43   4         REQ            ADD1           ADD1       -        REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
Banking Activity Area                                                 1.01   6         REQ            ADD1           ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
Breakroom (See Lounge/Breakroom)
Classroom/Lecture hall/Training Room8,9
                                                                                                                                                                             
…in a penitentiary                                                  1.34   4         REQ            REQ            -          REQ      REQ          REQ         -          REQ       -
…all other classrooms/lecture halls/training rooms                  1.24   4         REQ            REQ            -          REQ      REQ          REQ         -          REQ       -
Conference/Meeting/Multipurpose Room8,9                               1.23   6         REQ            REQ            -          REQ      REQ          REQ         -          REQ       -
Confinement Cells                                                     0.81   6         REQ            ADD1           ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
Copy/Print Room                                                       0.72   6         REQ            ADD1           ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         -          REQ       -
Corridor2
…in a facility for the visually impaired (and not used primarily by 0.92   width < 8 REQ            -              -          -        REQ          REQ         REQ        ADD2      ADD2
the staff)3                                                                  ft
…in a hospital                                                      0.99   width < 8 REQ            -              -          -        REQ          REQ         ADD2       ADD2      ADD2
                                                                             ft
…in a manufacturing facility                                        0.41   width < 8 REQ            -              -          -        REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
                                                                             ft
…all other corridors                                                0.66   width < 8 REQ            -              -          -        REQ          REQ         REQ        ADD2      ADD2
                                                                             ft
Courtroom                                                             1.72   6         REQ            ADD1           ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
Computer Room                                                         1.71   4         REQ            ADD1           ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
Dining Area                                                                                                                                                                   
…in a penitentiary                                                  0.96   6         REQ            ADD1           ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
…in a facility for the visually impaired and not used primarily by  2.65   4         REQ            ADD1           ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
staff)3
…in bar lounge or leisure dining                                    1.07   4         REQ            ADD1           ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
…in cafeteria or fast food dining                                   0.65   4         REQ            ADD1           ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
…in family dining                                                   0.89   4         REQ            ADD1           ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
…all other dining areas                                             0.65   4         REQ            ADD1           ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
Electrical/Mechanical Room7                                           0.42   6         REQ            -              -          -        REQ          REQ         -          -         -
Emergency Vehicle Garage                                              0.56   4         REQ            ADD1           ADD1       -        REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
Food Preparation Area                                                 1.21   6         REQ            ADD1           ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
Guest Room                                                            0.91   6         See Section 9.4.1.3b.
Laboratory
…in or as a classroom                                               1.43   6         REQ            ADD1           ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         REQ        ADD2      ADD2
…all other laboratories                                             1.81   6         REQ            ADD1           ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
Laundry/Washing Area                                                  0.60   4         REQ            ADD1           ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
Loading Dock, Interior                                                0.47   6         REQ            ADD1           ADD1       -        REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
Lobby
…in a facility for the visually impaired and not used primarily by  1.80   4         REQ            -              -          -        REQ          REQ         REQ        ADD2      ADD2
staff)3
…for an elevator                                                    0.64   6         REQ            -              -          -        REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
…in a hotel                                                         1.06   4         REQ            -              -          -        REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
…in a motion picture theater                                        0.59   4         REQ            -              -          -        REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
…in a performing arts theater                                       2.00   6         REQ            -              -          -        REQ          REQ         REQ        ADD2      ADD2
…all other lobbies                                                  0.90   4         REQ            -              -          -        REQ          REQ         REQ        ADD2      ADD2
Locker Room                                                           0.75   6         REQ            ADD1           ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         -          REQ       -
Lounge/Breakroom8,9
…in a healthcare facility                                           0.92   6         REQ            REQ            -          REQ      REQ          REQ         -          REQ       -
…all other lounges/breakrooms                                       0.73   4         REQ            REQ            -          REQ      REQ          REQ         -          REQ       -
Office
…enclosed and = 250 ft2(8,9)                                        1.0    8         REQ            REQ            -          REQ      REQ          REQ         -          REQ       -
…enclosed and > 250 ft2                                             1.0    8         REQ            ADD1           ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
…open plan                                                          0.90   4         REQ            -              REQ        REQ      REQ          REQ         -          REQ       -
Parking Area, Interior                                                0.19   4         See Section 9.4.1.2
Pharmacy Area                                                         1.68   6         REQ            ADD1           ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
Restroom
…in a facility for the visually impaired (and not used primarily by 1.21   8         REQ            -              -          -        REQ          REQ         -          REQ       -
the staff)3 
…all other restrooms                                                0.98   8         REQ            -              -          -        REQ          REQ         -          REQ       -
Sales Area4                                                           1.30   6         REQ            ADD1           ADD1       REQ      -            REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
Seating Area, General                                                 0.54   4         REQ            ADD1           ADD1       -        REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
Stairway                                                              The space containing the stairway shall determine the LPD and control requirements for the stairway.
Stairwell                                                             0.69   10        REQ            -              -          REQ      REQ          REQ         REQ        ADD2      ADD2
Storage Room
…< 50 ft2                                                           1.24   6         REQ            -              -          -        -            -           -          ADD2      ADD2
…= 50 ft2 and =1,000 ft2                                            0.63   6         REQ            ADD1           ADD1       -        REQ          REQ         -          REQ       -
…all other storage rooms                                            0.63   6         REQ            ADD1           ADD1       -        REQ          REQ         REQ        ADD2      ADD2
Vehicular Maintenance Area                                            0.67   4         REQ            ADD1           ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
Workshop                                                              1.59   6         REQ            ADD1           ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
 
TABLE 9.6.1 Lighting Power Density Allowances Using the Space-by-Space Method
and Minimum Control Requirements Using Either Method (Continued)
Informative Note: This
table is divided into
two sections; this
first section covers
space types that can be The control functions below shall be implemented in accordance with the descriptions found in
commonly found in       the referenced paragraphs within Section 9.4.1.1. For each space type: (1) All REQs shall be
multiple building       implemented. (2) At least one ADD1 (when present) shall be implemented. (3) At least one ADD2
types. The second part  (when present) shall be implemented.
of this table covers
space types that are
typically found in a
single building type.
                                                                            Automatic
                                           Restricted Bilevel  Automatic    Daylight    Automatic
                        Local   Restricted to Partial Lighting Daylight     Responsive  Partial    Automatic Scheduled
                        Control to Manual  Automatic  Control  Responsive   Controls    OFF (See   Full OFF  Shutoff
                       (See    ON (See    ON (See    (See     Controls for for         Section    (See      (See
                        Section Section    Section    Section  Sidelighting Toplighting 9.4.1.1(g) Section   Section
                        9.4.1.1 9.4.1.1    9.4.1.1    9.4.1.1  (See Section (See        (Full Off  9.4.1.1   9.4.1.1
                        (a))    (b))       (c))       (d))     9.4.1.1(e)6) Section     complies)) (h))      (i))
                                                                            9.4.1.1
                                                                            (f)6)
Building
Type      LPD RCR
Specific/ W/  Threshold a       b          c          d        e            f           g          h         i
Space     ft2
Types1
Informative Note: This table is divided into two sections; this first section covers The control functions below shall be implemented in accordance with the descriptions found in
space types that can be commonly found in multiple building types. The second part   the referenced paragraphs within Section 9.4.1.1. For each space type: (1) All REQs shall be
of this table covers space types that are typically found in a single building type. implemented. (2) At least one ADD1 (when present) shall be implemented. (3) At least one ADD2
                                                                                     (when present) shall be implemented.
                                                                                                                                         Automatic
                                                                                                        Restricted Bilevel  Automatic    Daylight    Automatic
                                                                                     Local   Restricted to Partial Lighting Daylight     Responsive  Partial    Automatic Scheduled
                                                                                     Control to Manual  Automatic  Control  Responsive   Controls    OFF (See   Full OFF  Shutoff
                                                                                    (See    ON (See    ON (See    (See     Controls for for         Section    (See      (See
                                                                                     Section Section    Section    Section  Sidelighting Toplighting 9.4.1.1(g) Section   Section
                                                                                     9.4.1.1 9.4.1.1    9.4.1.1    9.4.1.1  (See Section (See        (Full Off  9.4.1.1   9.4.1.1
                                                                                     (a))    (b))       (c))       (d))     9.4.1.1(e)6) Section     complies)) (h))      (i))
                                                                                                                                         9.4.1.1
                                                                                                                                         (f)6)
                                                                      LPD  RCR
Building Type Specific/Space Types1                                   W/   Threshold a       b          c          d        e            f           g          h         i
                                                                      ft2
Facility for the Visually Impaired3
…in a chapel (used primarily by residents)                          2.21 4         REQ     ADD1       ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
…in a recreation room/common living room (and not used primarily by 2.41 6         REQ     ADD1       ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
staff)
Automotive (See "Vehicular Maintenance Area")
Convention Center-Exhibit Space                                       1.45 4         REQ     ADD1       ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
Dormitory-Living Quarters                                             0.38 8         REQ     -          -          -        -            -           -          -         -
Fire Station-Sleeping Quarters                                        0.22 6         REQ     -          -          -        -            -           -          -         -
Facility for the Visually Impaired3
…in a recreation room/common living room (and not used primarily by 2.41 6         -       -          -          -        -            -           -          -         -
staff)
Gymnasium/Fitness Center
…in an exercise area                                                0.72 4         REQ     ADD1       ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
…in a playing area                                                  1.20 4         REQ     ADD1       ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
Healthcare Facility
…in an exam/treatment room                                          1.66 8         REQ     -          -          REQ      REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
…in an imaging room                                                 1.51 6         REQ     -          -          REQ      -            -           -          ADD2      ADD2
…in a medical supply room                                           0.74 6         (See "Storage Room" under "Common Space Types" for control requirements)
…in a nursery                                                       0.88 6         REQ     -          -          REQ      REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
…in a nurse's station                                               0.71 6         REQ     -          -          REQ      REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
…in an operating room                                               2.48 6         REQ     -          -          REQ      -            -           -          ADD2      ADD2
…in a patient room                                                  0.62 6         REQ     -          -          REQ      REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
…in a physical therapy room                                         0.91 6         REQ     -          -          REQ      REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
…in a recovery room                                                 1.15 6         REQ     -          -          REQ      REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
Library
…in a reading area                                                  1.06 4         REQ     ADD1       ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
…in the stacks                                                      1.71 4         REQ     ADD1       ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         REQ        ADD2      ADD2
Manufacturing Facility
…in a detailed manufacturing area                                   1.29 4         REQ     ADD1       ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
…in an equipment room                                               0.74 6         REQ     ADD1       ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
…in an extra high bay area (> 50 ft floor-to-ceiling height)        1.05 4         REQ     ADD1       ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
…in a high bay area (25-50 ft floor-to-ceiling height)              1.23 4         REQ     ADD1       ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
…in a low bay area (< 25 ft floor-to-ceiling height)                1.19 4         REQ     ADD1       ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
Museum
…in a general exhibition area                                       1.05 6         REQ     ADD1       ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
…in a restoration room                                              1.02 6         REQ     ADD1       ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
Performing Arts Theater-Dressing Room                                 0.61 6         REQ     ADD1       ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         -          REQ       -
Post Office-Sorting Area                                              0.94 4         REQ     ADD1       ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         REQ        ADD2      ADD2
Religious Buildings
…in a fellowship hall                                               0.64 4         REQ     ADD1       ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
…in a worship/pulpit/choir area                                     1.53 4         REQ     ADD1       ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
Retail Facilities
…in a dressing/fitting room                                         0.71 8         REQ     ADD1       ADD1       REQ      -            REQ         -          REQ       -
…in a mall concourse                                                1.10 4         REQ     ADD1       ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
Sports Arena-Playing Area
…for a Class I facility                                             3.68 4         REQ     ADD1       ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
…for a Class II facility                                            2.40 4         REQ     ADD1       ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
…for a Class III facility                                           1.80 4         REQ     ADD1       ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
…for a Class IV facility                                            1.20 4         REQ     ADD1       ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
Transportation Facility
…in a baggage/carousel area                                         0.53 4         REQ     ADD1       ADD1       -        REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
…in an airport concourse                                            0.36 4         REQ     ADD1       ADD1       -        REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
…at a terminal ticket counter                                       0.80 4         REQ     ADD1       ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         -          ADD2      ADD2
Warehouse-Storage Area
…for medium to bulky, palletized items                              0.58 4         REQ     ADD1       ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         REQ        ADD2      ADD2
…for smaller, hand-carried items5                                   0.95 6         REQ     ADD1       ADD1       REQ      REQ          REQ         REQ        ADD2      ADD2
1.   In cases where both a common space type and a building area specific space
type are listed, the building area specific space type shall apply.
2.   In corridors, the extra lighting power density allowance is permitted when
the width of the corridor is less than 8 ft and is not based on the RCR.
3.   A "Facility for the Visually Impaired" is a facility that can be
documented as being designed to comply with the light levels in ANSI/IES RP-28
and is licensed or will be licensed by local/state authorities for either
senior long-term care, adult daycare, senior support and/or people with special
visual needs.
4.   For accent lighting, see Section 9.6.2(b).
5.   Sometimes referred to as a "Picking Area."
6.   Automatic daylight responsive controls are mandatory only if the
requirements of the specified sections are present.
7.   An additional 0.53w/ft 2 shall be allowed, provided that the additional
lighting is controlled separately from the base allowance of 0.42 W/ft 2 . The
additional 0.53 w/ft 2 allowance shall not be used for any other purpose.
8.   Occupant sensor shall not have an override switch that converts from
manual-on to automatic-on functionality.
9.   The occupant sensor may have a grace period of up to 30 seconds to turn on
the lighting automatically after the sensor has turned off the lighting if
occupancy is detected.
APPENDIX G – PERFORMANCE RATING METHOD 
G1.3 Trade-Off Limits. 
Revise Section G1.3 to read as follows:
G1.3 Trade-Off Limits. RESERVED. 
TABLE G3.1 Modeling Requirements for Calculating Proposed and Baseline Building
Performance. 
Revise Item 2 of Table G3.1 to read as follows:
 
No. Proposed Building Performance       Baseline Building Performance
2. Additions and Alterations             
It is acceptable to predict performance
using building models that exclude
parts of the existing building provided
that all of the following conditions
are met:

a. Work to be performed in excluded
parts of the building shall meet the
requirements of Sections 5 through 10.

b. Excluded parts of the building are   If the proposed building model excluded
served by HVAC systems that are         parts of the existing building, the
entirely separate from those serving    baseline building model shall exclude
parts of the building that are included them as well.
in the building model.
                                        When modeled, unmodified existing
c. Design space temperature and HVAC    building component shall follow the
system operating setpoints and          same rules as new and modified building
schedules on either side of the         components.
boundary between included and excluded
parts of the building are essentially
the same.

d. If a declining block or similar
utility rate is being used in the
analysis, and the excluded and included
parts of the building are on the same
utility meter, the rate shall reflect
the utility block or rate for the
building plus the addition.
 
Revise Item 6 of Table G3.1 to read as follows:
 
No. Proposed Building Performance       Baseline Building Performance
6. Lighting                              
Lighting power in the proposed design
shall be determined as follows:

a. Where a complete lighting system
exists, the actual lighting power for
each thermal block shall be used in the
model.

b. Where a lighting system has been
designed and submitted with design
documents, lighting power shall be
determined in accordance with Sections
9.1.3 and 9.1.4.

c. Where lighting neither exists nor is
submitted with design documents,
lighting shall comply with but not
exceed the requirements of Section 9.
Where space types are known, lighting
power shall be determined in accordance
with the Space-by-Space Method. Where   Interior lighting power in the baseline
space types are not known, lighting     building design shall be determined
power shall be determined in accordance using the values in Table G3.7.
with the Building Area Method.
                                        Exceptions: Where lighting neither
d. Lighting system power shall include  exists nor is submitted with design
all lighting system components shown or documents, and the proposed building
provided for on the plans (including    lighting power is determined in
lamps and ballasts and task and         accordance with the Building Area
furniture- mounted fixtures).           Method, the baseline lighting power
                                        shall be determined in accordance with
Exception: For multifamily dwelling     Table G3.8.
units, hotel/motel guest rooms, and
other spaces in which lighting systems  Lighting shall be modeled having the
are connected via receptacles and are   automatic shutoff controls in buildings
not shown or provided for on building   > 5,000 ft 2 and occupancy sensors in
plans, assume identical lighting power  employee lunch and break rooms,
for the proposed and baseline building  conference/meeting rooms, and
designs in the simulations.             classrooms (not including shop
                                        classrooms, laboratory classrooms, and
e. Lighting power for parking garages   preschool through 12th grade
and building facades shall be modeled.  classrooms). These controls shall be
                                        reflected in the baseline building
f. For lighting controls, at a minimum, design lighting schedules. No
the proposed building design shall      additional automatic lighting controls
contain the mandatory automatic         (e.g., automatic controls for daylight
lighting controls specified in Section  utilization and occupancy sensors in
9.4.1 (e.g., automatic daylight         space types not listed above) shall be
responsive controls, occupancy sensors, modeled in the baseline building
programmable controls, etc.). These     design.
controls shall be modeled in accordance
with (g) and (h).                       Exterior lighting in areas identified
                                        as "Tradable Surfaces" in Table G3.6
g. Automatic daylighting responsive     shall be modeled with the baseline
controls shall be modeled directly in   lighting power shown in Table G3.6.
the proposed building design or through Other exterior lighting shall be
schedule adjustments determined by a    modeled the same in the baseline
separate daylighting analysis approved  building as in the proposed design.
by the rating authority. Modeling and
schedule adjustments shall separately
account for primary sidelighted areas,
secondary sidelighted areas, and
toplighted areas.

h. Other automatic lighting controls
included in the proposed building
design shall be modeled directly in the
building simulation by reducing the
lighting schedule each hour by the
occupancy sensor reduction factors in
Table G3.7 for the applicable space
type. This reduction shall be taken
only for lighting controlled by the
occupancy sensors. Credit for other
programmable lighting control in
buildings less than 5,000 ft 2 can be
taken by reducing the lighting schedule
each hour by 10%.
 
TABLE G3.1.1-4 Baseline System Descriptions 
Revise Table G3.1.1-4 to read as follows:
TABLE G3.1.1-4 Baseline System Descriptions 
System No. System Type Fan Control Cooling Type (1) Heating Type (1)
System No.      System Type     Fan Control     Cooling Type  Heating Type (1)
                                                (1)
                Packaged                        Direct        Hot-water fossil
1. PTAC         terminal air    Constant volume expansion     fuel boiler
                conditioner
                Packaged                        Direct        Electric heat
2. PTHP         terminal heat   Constant volume expansion     pump
                pump
                Packaged                        Direct        Fossil fuel
3. PSZ-AC       rooftop air     Constant volume expansion     furnace
                conditioner
                Packaged                        Direct        Electric heat
4. PSZ-HP       rooftop heat    Constant volume expansion     pump
                pump
5. Packaged VAV Packaged                        Direct        Hot-water fossil
with Reheat     rooftop VAV     VAV             expansion     fuel boiler
                with reheat
                Packaged
6. Packaged VAV rooftop VAV                     Direct        Electric
with PFP Boxes  with parallel   VAV             expansion     resistance
                fan power boxes
                and reheat
7. VAV with     VAV with reheat VAV             Chilled water Hot-water fossil
Reheat                                                        fuel boiler
                VAV with
8. VAV with PFP parallel fan-   VAV             Chilled water Electric
Boxes           powered boxes                                 resistance
                and reheat
9. Heating and  Warm air                                      Fossil fuel
Ventilation     furnace, gas    Constant volume None          furnace
                fired
10. Heating and Warm air                                      Electric
Ventilation     furnace,        Constant volume None          resistance
                electric
11. SZ-VAV      Single-zone VAV VAV             Chilled water See note 2.
12. SZ-CV-HW    Single zone     Constant volume Chilled water Hot-water fossil
                                                              fuel boiler
13. SZ-CV-ER    Single zone     Constant volume Chilled water Electric
                                                              resistance
 
Notes: 
1.   For purchased chilled water and purchased heat, see G3.1.1.3.
2.   For Climate Zones 0 through 3a, the heating type shall be electric
resistance. For all other climate zones the heating type shall be hot-water
fossil fuel boiler.
G3.1.3.5 Hot-Water Pumps. 
Revise Section G3.1.3.5 to read as follows:
G3.1.3.5 Hot-Water Pumps. The baseline building design hot-water pump power
shall be 19 W/gpm. The pumping system shall be modeled as primary-only with
continuous variable flow and a minimum of 25% of the design flow rate. Hot-
water systems serving 120,000 ft 2 or more shall be modeled with variable-speed
drives, and systems serving less than 120,000 ft 2 shall be modeled as riding
the pump curve.
Exception: The pump power for systems using purchased heat shall be 14 W/gpm.
G3.1.3.10 Chilled-Water Pumps. 
Revise Section G3.1.3.10 to read as follows:
G3.1.3.10 Chilled-Water Pumps. Chilled-water systems shall be modeled as
primary/secondary systems with constant flow primary loop and variable flow
secondary loop. For systems with a cooling capacity of 300 tons or more, the
secondary pump shall be modeled with variable-speed drive and a minimum flow of
25% of the design flow rate. For systems with less than 300 tons cooling
capacity the secondary pump shall be modeled as riding the pump curve. The
baseline building constant-volume primary pump power shall be modeled as 9 W/
gpm and the variable-flow secondary pump power shall be modeled as 13 W/gpm at
design conditions. For computer room systems using System 11 with an integrated
water-side economizer, the baseline building design primary chilled-water pump
power shall be increased by 3 W/gpm for flow associated with the water-side
economizer.
Exception: For systems using purchased chilled water, the building distribution
pump shall be modeled with variable-speed drive, a minimum flow of 25% of the
design flow rate, and a pump power of 16 W/gpm.
G3.1.3.11 Heat Rejection. 
Revise Section G3.1.3.11 to read as follows:
G3.1.3.11 Heat Rejection (Systems 7, 8, 11, and 12). The heat rejection device
shall be an axial-fan open-circuit cooling tower with variable-speed fan
control and shall have an efficiency of 38.2 gpm/hp at the conditions specified
in Table 6.8.1-7. Condenser water design supply temperature shall be calculated
using the cooling tower approach to the 0.4% evaporation design wet-bulb
temperature as generated by the formula below, with a design temperature rise
of 10°F.
Approach 10°F Range = 25.72 – (0.24 × WB)
where WB is the 0.4% evaporation design wet-bulb temperature in °F; valid for
wet bulbs from 55°F to 90°F.
The tower shall be controlled to maintain a 70°F leaving water temperature
where weather permits, floating up to leaving water temperature at design
conditions. The baseline building design condenser-water pump power shall be 19
W/gpm. For computer room systems using System 11 with an integrated water-side
economizer, the baseline building design condenser water-pump power shall be
increased 3 W/gpm for flow associated with the water-side economizer. Each
chiller shall be modeled with separate condenser water and chilled-water pumps
interlocked to operate with the associated chiller.
TABLE G3.7 Performance Rating Method Lighting Power. 
Revise Table G3.7 to read as follows:
TABLE G3.7 Performance Rating Method Lighting Power Densities and Occupancy
Sensor Reductions Using the Space-by-Space Method 
             Lighting    Occupancy   Building Type                 Occupancy
Common Space Power       Sensor      Specific Space Lighting Power Sensor
Types a      Density, W/ Reduction b Types a        Density, W/ft2 Reduction b
             ft2
                                                                  Lighting Occupancy                                                        Lighting Occupancy
Common Space                                                      Power    Sensor    Building Type Specific Space Types a                   Power    Sensor
Types a                                                           Density, Reduction                                                        Density, Reduction
                                                                  W/ft2    b                                                                W/ft2    b
Audience Seating Area                                                                Assisted Living Facility
…in an auditorium                                               0.90     10%       …in a chapel (used primarily by residents)           2.77     10%
                                                                  0.70     10%       …in a recreation room (used primarily by residents)  3.02     10%
                                                                  0.30     10%       Automotive (See "Vehicular Maintenance Area")
…in a gymnasium                                                 0.40     10%       Convention Center – Exhibit Space                    1.30     35%
…in a motion picture theater                                    1.20     10%       Dormitory – Living Quarters                          1.11     10%
…in a penitentiary                                              0.70     10%       Fire Station – Sleeping Quarters                     0.30     10%
…in a performing arts theater                                   2.60     10%       Gymnasium/Fitness Center
…in a religious building                                        1.70     10%       …in an exercise area                                 0.90     35%
…in a sports arena                                              0.40     10%       …in a playing area                                   1.40     35%
…in a transportation facility                                   0.50     10%       Healthcare Facility
…all other audience seating area                                0.90     10%       …in an emergency room                                2.70     10%
Atrium                                                                               …in an exam/treatment room                           1.50     10%
                                                                  0.0375
...that is ≤ 40 ft in height                                    per foot 10%       …in an imaging room                                  0.40     22%
                                                                  in total
                                                                  height
                                                                  0.50 +
                                                                  0.025
…that is > 40 ft in height                                      per foot 10%       …in a medical supply room                            1.40     45%
                                                                  in total
                                                                  height
Banking Activity Area                                             1.50     10%       …in a nursery                                        0.60     10%
Breakroom (See Lounge/Breakroom)                                                     …in a nurse's station                                1.00     10%
Classroom/Lecture Hall/Training Room                                                 …in an operating room                                2.20     10%
…in a penitentiary                                              1.30     None      …in a patient room                                   0.70     10%
…all other classroom/lecture hall/training room                 1.40     30%       …in a physical therapy room                          0.90     10%
Conference/Meeting/ Multipurpose Room                             1.30     None      …in a recovery room                                  0.80     10%
Confinement Cells                                                 0.90     10%       Library
Copy/Print Room                                                   0.90     10%       …in a reading area                                   1.20     15%
Corridor                                                                             …in the stacks                                       1.70     15%
…in a facility for the visually impaired (and used primarily by 1.15     25%       Manufacturing Facility
residents)
…in a hospital                                                  1.00     25%       …in a detailed manufacturing area                    2.10     10%
…in a manufacturing facility                                    0.50     25%       …in an equipment room                                1.20     10%
…all other corridor                                             0.50     25%       …in an extra-high bay area (> 50 ft floor-to-ceiling 1.32     10%
                                                                                     height)
Courtroom                                                         1.90     10%       …in a high bay area (25-50 ft floor-to-ceiling height1.70     10%
Computer Room                                                     2.14     35%       …in a low bay area (< 25 ft floor-to-ceiling height) 1.20     10%
Dining Area                                                                          Museum
…in a penitentiary                                              1.30     35%       …in a general exhibition area                        1.00     10%
…in a facility for the visually impaired (and used primarily by 3.32     35%       …in a restoration room                               1.70     10%
residents)
…in bar/lounge or leisure dining                                1.40     35%       Post Office – Sorting Area                           1.20     10%
…in cafeteria or fast food dining                               0.90     35%       Religious Buildings
…in family dining                                               2.10     35%       …in a fellowship hall                                0.90     10%
…all other dining area                                          0.90     35%       …in a worship/pulpit/choir area                      2.40     10%
Electrical/Mechanical Room                                        1.50     30%       Retail Facilities
Emergency Vehicle Garage                                          0.80     10%       …in a dressing/fitting room                          0.89     10%
Food Preparation Area                                             1.20     30%       …in a mall concourse                                 1.70     10%
Guest Room                                                        1.14     45%       Sport Arena – Playing Area
Judges Chambers                                                   1.30     30%       …for a Class I facility                              4.61     10%
Laboratory                                                                           …for a Class II facility                             3.01     10%
…in or as a classroom                                           1.40     None      …for a Class III facility                            2.26     10%
…all other laboratories                                         1.40     10%       …for a Class IV facility                             1.50     10%
Laundry/Washing Area                                              0.60     10%       Transportation Facility
Loading Dock, Interior                                            0.59     10%       …in a baggage/carousel area                          1.00     10%
Lobby                                                                                …in an airport concourse                             0.60     10%
…in a facility for the visually impaired (and used primarily by 2.26     25%       …at a terminal ticket counter                        1.50     10%
residents)
…for an elevator                                                0.80     25%       Warehouse – Storage Area
…in a hotel                                                     1.10     25%       …for medium to bulky, palletized items               0.90     45%
…in a motion picture theater                                    1.10     25%       …for smaller, hand-carried items                     1.40     45%
…in a performing arts theater                                   3.30     25%
…all other lobbies                                              1.30     25%
Locker Room                                                       0.60     25%
Lounge/Breakroom
…in a healthcare facility                                       0.80     None
…all other lounge/breakroom                                     1.20     None
Office
…enclosed                                                       1.10     30%
…open plan                                                      1.10     15%
Parking Area, Interior                                            0.20     15%
Pharmacy Area                                                     1.20     10%
Restroom
…in a facility for the visually impaired (and used primarily by 1.52     45%
residents)
…all other restroom                                             0.90     45%
Sales Area                                                        1.70     15%
Seating Area, General                                             0.68     10%
Stairwell                                                         0.60     75%
Storage Room
…in a hospital                                                  0.90     45%
...that is ≥ 50 ft 2                                            0.80     45%
…that is < 50 ft 2                                              0.80     45%
Vehicular Maintenance Area                                        0.70     10%
Workshop                                                          1.90     10%
 
a.   In cases where both a common space type and a building area specific space
type are listed, the building area specific space type shall apply.
b.   For manual-ON or partial-auto-ON occupancy sensors, the occupancy sensor
reduction factor shall be multiplied by 1.25.
c.   For occupancy sensors controlling individual workstation lighting,
occupancy sensor reduction factor shall be 30%.
(Added City Record 7/6/2018, eff. 8/5/2018; amended City Record 7/24/2020, eff.
8/23/2020)
Chapter 6000: Fuel Gas Code
§ 6008-01 American Society of Mechanical Engineers ("ASME"), Boiler & Pressure
Vessel Code Edition Amendment. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 7/13/2016, eff. 8/12/2016)
§ 6008-02 Referenced Standards.
Pursuant to § 28-103.19 of the New York City Administrative Code, delete and
replace the following reference standards as follows:
Reference standards ANSI Z21.5.1/CSA 7.1, ANSI Z21.5.2/CSA 7.2, ANSI Z21.10.1/
CSA 4.1, ANSI Z21. 13/CSA 4.9, ANSI Z21.18/CSA 6.3, ANSI Z21.40.1/CGA 2.9, ANSI
Z21.40.2/CGA 2.92, ANSI Z21.42, ANSI Z21.54, ANSI Z21.58/CSA 1.6, and ANSI
Z83.11/CSA 1.8 as added by Section FGC 802 of the New York City Fuel Gas Code
are hereby deleted and new ANSI Z21.5.1/CSA 7.1, ANSI Z21.5.2/CSA 7.2, ANSI
Z21.10.1/CSA 4.1, ANSI Z21. 13/CSA 4.9, ANSI Z21.18/CSA 6.3, ANSI Z21.40.1/CGA
2.9, ANSI Z21.40.2/CGA 2.92, ANSI Z21.42, ANSI Z21.54, ANSI Z21.58/CSA 1.6, and
ANSI Z83.11/CSA 1.8 are added to read as follows:
                              American National Standards
                              Institute
ANSI                          25 West 43rd Street, Fourth
                              Floor
                              New York, NY 10036
Standard Reference            Title                          Referenced in code
Number                                                       section number
Z21.5.1/CSA 7.1 -2017         Gas Clothes Dryers, Volume I,  613.1
                              Type 1 Clothes Dryers
Z21.5.2/CSA 7.2 -2016         Gas Clothes Dryers, Volume II, 613.1, 614.3
                              Type 2 Clothes Dryers
                              Gas Water Heaters - Volume I,
Z21.10.1/CSA 4.1 -2013        Storage Water Heaters with     624.1
                              Input Ratings Of 75,000 Btu
                              Per Hour Or Less
Z21. 13/CSA 4.9 -2014         Gas-Fired Low Pressure Steam   631.1
                              And Hot Water Boilers
Z21.18/CSA 6.3 -2007 (R2016)  Gas Appliance Pressure         410.3
                              Regulators
                              Gas-Fired, Heat Activated Air
Z21.40.1/CGA 2.9 -96 (R2017)  Conditioning and Heat Pump     627.1
                              Appliances
                              Gas-Fired, Work Activated Air-
Z21.40.2/CGA 2.92 -96 (R2017) Conditioning and Heat Pump     627.1
                              Appliances (Internal
                              Combustion)
Z21.42 -2013 (R2018)          Gas-Fired Illuminating         628.1
                              Appliances
Z21.54 -2002 (R2007) &        Gas Hose Connectors For
Addenda 2009                  Portable Outdoor Gas-Fired     411.1
                              Appliances
Z21.58/CSA 1.6 -2015          Outdoor Cooking Gas Appliances 623.1
Z83.11/CSA 1.8 -2016          Gas Food Service Equipment     623.1
 
(Added City Record 11/15/2023, eff. 12/15/2023)
Chapter 7000: Mechanical Code
§ 7000-01 National Fire Protection Association, Flammable Combustible Code
Edition Amendment. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 1/22/2018, eff. 2/21/2018)
§ 7015-01 Referenced Standards.
Pursuant to § 28-103.19 of the New York City Administrative Code, delete and
replace the following reference standards as follows:
Reference standard ACCA Manual D as added by Section MC 1502 of the New York
City Mechanical Code is hereby deleted and a new ACCA Manual D is added to read
as follows:
 
                           Air Conditioning Contractors of
ACCA                       America
                           2800 Shirlington Road, Suite 300
                           Arlington, VA 22206
Standard Reference         Title                            Referenced in code
Number                                                      section number
ANSI/ACCA 1 Manual D -2016 Residential Duct Systems         603.2
 
Reference standard AHRI 700 as added by Section MC 1502 of the New York City
Mechanical Code is hereby deleted and a new AHRI 700 is added to read as
follows:
 
                   Air-Conditioning, Heating and
AHRI               Refrigeration Institute
                   4100 North Fairfax Drive, Suite 200
                   Arlington, VA 22203
Standard Reference Title                               Referenced in code
Number                                                 section number
700 -2019          Standard for Specifications for     1102.2.2.3
                   Refrigerants
 
Reference standard ASME CSD-1 as added by Section MC 1502 of the New York City
Mechanical Code is hereby deleted and a new ASME CSD-1 is added to read as
follows:
 
                   American Society of Mechanical
ASME               Engineers
                   Three Park Avenue
                   New York, NY 10016-5990
Standard Reference Title                          Referenced in code
Number                                            section number
                   Controls and Safety Devices    1004.1, 1004.1.1, 1004.8,
CSD-1 -2012        for Automatically Fired        1006.1, 1006.2, 1006.3,
                   Boilers                        1006.4, 1007.1, 1007.2,
                                                  1007.3, 1010.2.1, 1011.1
 
Reference standard NFPA 54 as added by Section MC 1502 of the New York City
Mechanical Code is hereby deleted and a new NFPA 54 is added to read as
follows:
 
                   National Fire Protection Association
NFPA               1 Batterymarch Park
                   Quincy, MA 02169-7471
Standard Reference Title                                Referenced in code
Number                                                  section number
54 -2018           National Fuel Gas Code               504.9, 901.2, 910.7
 
Reference standard NSF 358-1 as added by Section MC 1502 of the New York City
Mechanical Code is hereby deleted and a new NSF 358-1 is added to read as
follows:
 
          NSF International
NSF       789 Dixboro Road, P.O. Box 130140
          Ann Arbor, MI 48113-0140
Standard                                                                                Referenced
Reference Title                                                                         in code
Number                                                                                  section
                                                                                        number
                                                                                        Table
NSF 358-  Polyethylene Pipe and Fittings for Water-Based Ground-Source “Geothermal” 1210.4,
1 -2014   Heat Pump Systems                                                             Table
                                                                                        1210.5
 
Reference standard SMACNA as added by Section MC 1502 of the New York City
Mechanical Code is hereby deleted and a new SMACNA is added to read as follows:
 
                   Sheet Metal & Air-Conditioning
SMACNA             Contractors National Association, Inc.
                   4201 Lafayette Center Drive
                   Chantilly, VA 20151-1209
Standard Reference Title                                     Referenced in code
Number                                                       section number
SMACNA -2021       Fibrous Glass Duct Construction Standards 603.5
 
Reference standard UL 2158A as added by Section MC 1502 of the New York City
Mechanical Code is hereby deleted and a new UL 2158A is added to read as
follows:
 
                   UL LLC
UL                 333 Pfingsten Road
                   Northbrook, IL 60062-2096
Standard Reference Title                                 Referenced in code
Number                                                   section number
2158A -2017        Standard for Clothes Dryer Transition 504.8.3
                   Duct
 
(Added City Record 11/15/2023, eff. 12/15/2023)
Chapter 8000: New York City Plumbing Code
§ 8000-01 Building Water Conservation Reports, Plans and Waterless Urinals.
   (a)   Scope. This rule sets forth the criteria for the approval of building
water conservation plans in accordance with Section PC C102.1 of Appendix C of
the New York City Plumbing Code ("Plumbing Code"), which permits the use of
waterless urinals only as part of an approved building water conservation plan.
   (b)   Compliance. Waterless urinals shall comply with national reference
standard ANSI/ASME A112.19.19-2006.
   (c)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms
shall have the following meanings:
      (1)   Baseline water use. Water use calculated from the minimum number of
plumbing fixtures required by the Plumbing Code and all additional fixtures as
added by the design and/or as existing in the building, using the maximum flow
rates permitted by Section PC 604 of the Plumbing Code and excluding the water-
conserving strategies proposed in the building water conservation plan.
         (i)   The calculation for new buildings shall be in accordance with
LEED NC Version 2.2, WE Credit 3, using Tables 2 and 5; Table 1 shall be
replaced by PC Table 604.4; Tables 3 and 4 are not applicable.
         (ii)   The calculation for existing buildings shall be in accordance
with LEED EB Version 2.0, WE Prerequisite 1, using Tables 3 and 4; Table 1
shall be replaced by PC Table 604.4; where existing fixtures are water-
conserving, Table 2 shall be replaced by the flow rate listed on the fixture or
published by the manufacturer.
      (2)   Design water use. Baseline water use, except that flow rates shall
be the lesser of the manufacturer's published flow rates or the maximum flow
rates permitted by Section PC 604 of the Plumbing Code, including all water-
conserving strategies proposed in the building water conservation plan.
         (i)   The calculation for new buildings shall be in accordance with
LEED NC Version 2.2, WE Credit 3, using Tables 2 and 4; Table 1 shall be
replaced by PC Table 604.4; Table 3 shall be replaced by the lesser of the
manufacturers' published flow rates or the maximum flow rates permitted by PC
Table 604.4; Table 5 shall not apply.
         (ii)   The calculation for existing buildings shall be in accordance
with LEED EB Version 2.0, WE Prerequisite 1, Table 3, and WE Credit 3, Table 4.
Tables 1 in each of the prerequisite and the credit shall be replaced by PC
Table 604.4. Flow rates for water-conserving flush and flow fixtures shall be
taken from the manufacturers' published flow rates. Other tables in WE
Prerequisite 1 and WE Credit 3 shall not apply.
      (3)   Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design ("LEED"). A set of
building standards for sustainability, published by the United States Green
Building Council.
      (4)   LEED NC Version 2.2. LEED for New Construction and Major Renovation
("NC"), Version 2.2, dated October 2007.
      (5)   LEED EB Version 2.0. LEED for Existing Buildings ("EB"), Version
2.0, dated October 2006.
      (6)   Waterless urinals. Urinals that discharge into a sanitary drainage
system, but are not fed by the potable water supply system.
   (d)   Building water conservation plan. Any application for new building or
alteration work that includes the installation of one or more waterless urinals
shall include a building water conservation plan sealed and signed by a
registered design professional, and signed by the building owner. Such building
water conservation plan may be submitted by either the building owner or a
tenant and shall include:
      (1)   A building water conservation analysis, demonstrating the means by
which the building or tenant space will achieve the water reduction targets set
forth below.
         (i)   New buildings. Potable water consumption, as projected by the
design water use, shall be reduced by twenty (20) percent from the baseline
water use calculated for the entire building, excluding irrigation supplied
from the building.
         (ii)   Existing buildings. For alterations in buildings erected
pursuant to plans approved under the 1968 Building Code or prior codes, potable
water consumption, as projected by the design water use, shall be reduced by
twenty (20) percent from the baseline water use calculated for the area of work
of the alteration. For alterations in buildings erected pursuant to plans
approved under the 2008 New York City Construction Codes, potable water
consumption, as projected by the design water use, shall be reduced by twenty
(20) percent from the baseline water use calculated for the entire building,
excluding irrigation supplied from the building.
         (iii)   Water conservation measures. Water conservation measures
utilized to achieve the efficiencies set forth in subparagraphs (i) and (ii) of
this paragraph may include but are not limited to low-flow fixtures, waterless
urinals, fixture sensors, metering controls and water recycling systems in
compliance with Section PC C101 of Appendix C of the Plumbing Code.
      (2)   Manufacturer's specifications, installation recommendations and
recommended maintenance procedures for the waterless urinals; and
      (3)   The building owner's or tenant's maintenance plan for the waterless
urinals.
   (e)   Changes during design or construction. Any changes made to fixture
specifications, occupant usage or other elements of the building water
conservation plan or report during either design or construction shall require
that a revised plan or report be submitted to the department for approval.
§ 8001-01 Individual Private On-Site Sewage Disposal Systems.
   (a)   Applicability and scope. This rule governs the construction and
installation of new individual private on-site sewage disposal systems and
alteration and maintenance of existing individual private on-site sewage
disposal systems. This rule applies to on-site wastewater treatment systems
serving residential (one- and two-family) and non-residential (other than one-
and two-family) properties receiving less than 1,000 gallons of sewage per day
which does not include industrial wastes or other wastes as defined in the Code
of Federal Regulations, the Clean Water Act, the Safe Drinking Water Act, the
Insecticide, Fungicide and Rodenticide Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act,
the New York State Environmental Conservation Law and the New York Code of
Rules and Regulations.
   Exception: Pursuant to ECL § 17-0803 and 6 NYCRR 750-1.4, the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation (DEC) has the authority to issue
permits for a new or modified disposal system discharging any amount of sewage
with the presence of such industrial waste or other wastes, or for a
residential or non-residential use whose total discharge of sewage is 1,000
gallons or more per day. DOB will not issue a permit to construct and use any
such system until a DEC State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES)
permit is provided to the department.
   (b)   References. See 10 NYCRR Part 75 and Appendix 75-A of the New York
State Department of Health (NYS DOH) rules, DEC's Design Standards for
Intermediate Sized Wastewater Treatment Systems (March 5, 2014) and Section
701.2 of the New York City Plumbing Code (PC).
   (c)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms
have the following meanings:
      Absorption area. An area to which wastewater is distributed for
infiltration to the soil.
      Aggregate. Washed gravel or crushed stone 3/4 - 1 1/2 inches in diameter.
      Application rate. The rate at which septic tank effluent is applied to a
subsurface absorption area, for design purposes, expressed in gallons per day
per square foot (GPD/sq. ft.).
      Baffle. A flow deflecting device used in septic tanks and distribution
boxes to inhibit the discharge of floating solids, reduce the amount of settle-
able solids that exit, and reduce the exit velocity of the wastewater.
      Cesspool. A covered excavation in the ground that receives the discharge
of domestic sewage or other organic wastes from a drainage system, so
designated as to retain the organic matter and solids, but permitting the
liquid to seep through the bottom and sides.
      Cleanout. An opening providing access to part of the sewage system.
      Daily flow rate (Q). The design flow of the system expressed in units of
Gallons Per Day (GPD).
      Distribution box. A chamber into which the septic effluent discharges and
from which the sewage enters the subsurface distribution lines.
      Distribution line. The perforated pipe used to distribute wastewater to
the absorption area.
      Gas deflection baffle. A device on the outlet of a septic tank which
deflects gas bubbles away from the outlet and reduces the carryover of solid
particles from the septic tank.
      GPD. Gallons per day.
      GPF. Gallons per flush. Unit used to describe amount of water used in
each toilet flush.
      GPM. Gallons per minute. Unit used to describe flow rate of plumbing
fixtures.
      Groundwater. Subsurface water occupying the saturation zone from which
wells and springs are fed.
      Individual private on-site sewage disposal system. A system designed for
use apart from a public sewer for the disposal of sewage by means of piping and
a septic tank or tanks that discharge into a disposal field or seepage pit and
serving properties discharging less than 1,000 gallons of sewage per day.
      Infiltration. The flow or movement of water into the interstices or pores
of a soil through the soil interface.
      Invert. The floor, bottom, or lowest point of the inside cross section of
a pipe.
      Percolation. The movement of water through the pores of a soil or other
porous medium following infiltration through the soil interface.
      Piping. Piping includes fittings, valves, and other accessories or
appurtenances required to make a complete installation.
      Registered design professional. An architect or engineer licensed and
registered under the New York State Education Law.
      Seepage pit. A covered pit with open jointed or perforated lining into
which the septic tank effluent is discharged. The liquid portion of the sewage
seeps into the surrounding porous soil. The remaining solids or sludge is
retained in the pit.
      Septic tank. A watertight receptacle that receives the discharge of a
drainage system or part thereof, and is designed and constructed so as to
separate solids from the liquid, digest organic matter during a period of
detention, and allow the liquids to discharge into the soil outside of the tank
through a system of open-joint or perforated piping, or seepage pit.
      Sewage. The combination of human and household waste with water which is
discharged to the home plumbing system including the waste from a flush toilet,
bath, sink, lavatory, dishwashing or laundry machine, or the water-carried
waste from any other fixture, equipment or machine.
      Stack. A general term for any vertical line of soil, waste, vent or
inside conductor piping that extends through at least one story with or without
offsets.
      Wastewater. Any water discharged from a house through a plumbing fixture
to include, but not limited to, sewage and any water or waste from a device
(e.g., water softener brine) which is produced in the house or property.
      Watercourse. A visible path through which surface water travels on a
regular basis. Drainage areas which contain water only during and immediately
after a rainstorm are not considered a watercourse.
      Wellpoint. A well used to measure groundwater levels.
      Wetland. An area(s) of marshes or swamps which have been designated as
such by DEC or other agency having jurisdiction. Marshes or swamps that have
not been classified by an agency as a wetland cannot be treated for design
purposes as a wetland.
   (d)   Construction documents and permit requirements. It is unlawful to
construct, replace or substantially alter an individual private on-site sewage
disposal system without a permit issued by the department. Such system must
meet the requirements of this section or 10 NYCRR Part 75 and Appendix 75-A.
      Exception: Applications for permits to construct and maintain private
sewage disposal systems serving tax lots or zoning lots containing 15 or more
dwelling units must be submitted to the New York City Department of Health and
Mental Hygiene (DOHMH) unless such agency determines by reason of physical or
engineering difficulties, estimated cost of construction or other pertinent
considerations, that it is more practicable to construct individual systems, in
accordance with 24 RCNY Health Code §
143.11.
      (1)   Connection to City sewer. No permit will be issued for an
individual private on-site sewage disposal system where a public sanitary or
combined sewer is available and connection thereto is feasible as determined by
the New York City Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) in accordance
with Section 107.11 of the New York City Building Code (BC) and PC Section
106.6.
      (2)   Field testing. No permit will be issued until the sand column meets
the requirements of subdivision (g) of this section and an absorption test has
been performed in accordance with subdivision (h) of this section.
      (3)   Applicant. All construction documents filed in connection with a
permit application for a new, replacement of, or substantially altered
individual private on-site sewage disposal system must be prepared by a
registered design professional.
         Exception: Applicants for plumbing work consisting of in- kind repairs
or replacements of "like-for-like" components may be licensed master plumbers.
      (4)   Construction documents. 
         (i)   Lot diagram. A lot diagram must indicate all information as
appropriate to the nature and extent of the work proposed including the size,
height and location of proposed plumbing work; all existing structures on the
zoning lot and their distances from lot and street lines; the established grade
and existing curb elevations; and the proposed final grade elevations of the
site shown by contours or spot grades at reasonable intervals. The lot diagram
must be drawn using an accurate boundary survey to the city datum and must be
attached to the application.
         (ii)   Application. An application for a permit must include all
necessary forms and construction documents as required by the department. These
include but are not limited to:
            (A)   Two complete topographical surveys with original seal and
signature by a licensed surveyor.
            (B)   Three site plans, sealed and signed by a registered design
professional, showing the following: lot dimensions, location of existing
dwelling and proposed expansion, septic tank, seepage pit and drywell and
proposed expansions, if any, their distance in relation to stream, lake, water
course or DEC designated wetlands.
            (C)   A fee as specified in 1 RCNY §
101-03.
            (D)   Alteration plan showing existing building.
            (E)   Computations showing existing hydraulic load on the existing
septic system and the proposed hydraulic load as a result of the expansion.
            (F)   Calculations showing the daily flow rate (Q).
            (G)   Calculations showing the proposed tank capacity, in gallons.
         (iii)   Documents required from other agencies. Prior to construction
document approval for an individual on-site private sewage disposal system, the
applicant must submit applicable documents from other agencies having
jurisdiction over such system, including:
            (A)   DEP Certification of unavailability or nonfeasibility per PC
Section 106.6.1.2.
            (B)   A copy of the site connection proposal certified by the DEP
Bureau of Water and Sewer Operations.
            (C)   A DEC permit for systems located in freshwater wetlands,
coastal wetlands and coastal zone erosion hazard areas per 28-104.9.
            (D)   City Planning Commission. Certification for systems located
within a special natural area district per New York City Zoning Resolution
Article X, Chapter 5.
            (E)   Board of Standards and Appeals. Waiver for the construction
of systems located within the bed of a mapped street per NYS General City Law
35.
   (e)   Waivers. Where there is a practical difficulty in carrying out the
provisions of this section, the Commissioner may issue a waiver where such
waiver is consistent with the general purpose and intent of 10 NYCRR Part 75
and 75-A.
   (f)   On-site location limitations. All systems must meet the following
requirements, as applicable.
      (1)   Discharge of effluent. Individual private on-site sewage disposal
systems must be located, designed, constructed, installed, altered or operated
in a manner that will prevent the discharge of effluent onto the surface of the
ground or into any watercourse or groundwater;
      (2)   Location and access. The entire system must be located outside the
building footprint, within the lot line of the premises for which the system is
installed, and in front of the building. Clear access must be provided to the
disposal system for servicing.
         Exception: Installing a system in a location other than the front yard
requires a waiver from the commissioner. In such case dry piping, with trap,
properly plugged, must be carried from the house plumbing stack through the
front foundation wall to preclude the need for rearranging plumbing when sewers
become available.
      (3)   Site grading. The slope of the finished grade above the proposed
individual private on-site sewage treatment system may not be greater than 15
percent.
      (4)   Separation of piping. Separation of sewage and water piping must
comply with Sections PC 603 and 703.
      (5)   Minimum separation. The minimum permissible distance between the
various components of the sewage system and between the components and various
encumbrances must comply with Table 1.
         Exception: The separation distance between the outer perimeter of the
aggregate collar of the seepage pit or the outer perimeter of the sand collar
of the outermost edge of the sand filter field and the front property line
adjacent to the street may be zero feet provided that one of the following
conditions is met:
         (i)   Ten feet of horizontal clearance to any water main in the street
is maintained via a direct measurement; or
         (ii)   A watertight pipe/sleeve is installed around the water main in
the street if it is located within ten feet of an absorption facility; or
         (iii)   The presence of at least two feet of relatively impermeable
soil which has a percolation rate greater than 120 minutes/inch is verified as
being located between the water main in the street and the seepage pit through
performance of a percolation test in the on-site soil at the approximate depth
of the water main in the street. Percolation test documentation must be
submitted by the applicant for inclusion in the permit file when two feet of
relatively impermeable on-site soil is used in lieu of ten feet of horizontal
clearance or a water main protective sleeve.
Table 1
Minimum Distances Between Sewage System Components and Between Components and
Encumbrances 
 
            Building   Property Sand Filter                     Water   Water
            Foundation Line     Field       Seepage Pit Drywell Service Course/
            Wall                                                Line    Wetland
Septic Tank 10 ft      10 ft    5 ft        5 ft        –     –     –
Sand Filter 20 ft      10 ft    20 ft       20 ft       20 ft   10 ft   100 ft
Field
Seepage Pit 20 ft      10 ft    20 ft       20 ft       20 ft   10 ft   100 ft
Drywell     10 ft      5 ft     20 ft       20 ft       –     –     –
 
      (6)   Minimum lot area and frontage. The minimum lot area and frontage
requirements are 10,000 square feet and 100 feet respectively.
         Exception: The minimum lot area and frontage requirements do not apply
to a tax lot for which title was recorded in the applicable county clerk's
office prior to August 1, 1968 where recorded dimensions of such lots are less
than 10,000 square feet and/or the frontage of which is less than 100 feet,
provided that only one individual private on-site sewage disposal system is
permitted on each such lot.
   (g)   Sand column construction. All sand columns required for individual
private on-site sewage disposal systems must be constructed in accordance with
this section and tested in accordance with subdivision (h) of this section.
Sand column construction is subject to special inspection.
      (1)   Sand column dimensions. A sand column must be constructed by
excavating a hole not less than three feet in width and seven feet in length.
Necessary measures must be taken to prohibit surface water from entering the
excavation.
      (2)   Minimum depth of sand column. The excavation must continue
vertically until a suitable permeable soil stratum of virgin, sandy material is
reached. Where an unsatisfactory impermeable stratum is encountered, the
excavation must extend through such stratum. The excavation for the proposed
absorption test sand column must extend to a minimum depth of five feet into
that permeable soil stratum. The minimum depth of the sand column must be 15
feet when measured from ground surface. The area at the bottom of the
excavation must be a minimum of 21 square feet and confirmed by visual
inspection. The depth of the permeable sand stratum and surface, trapped, or
perched water must be recorded by a special inspector.
      (3)   Support of excavation. The applicant may use a caisson or other
means for the construction of the sand column if water enters the excavation or
if a "flowing clay" stratum is penetrated.
      (4)   Serpentine rock. If serpentine rock is encountered, the special
inspector must document the presence of the serpentine rock, submit a
laboratory test report and certify that he/she or the contractor has taken all
required safety measures to protect the environment and the public health.
      (5)   Backfilling the excavation. When the required depth for the sand
column has been reached, as determined by the applicant, the excavation must be
immediately backfilled with clean, coarse concrete sand that complies with ASTM
C 33. A certified report from a testing laboratory signed by the supplier must
be submitted to the department and serve to verify that the sand backfill
delivered to the site meets ASTM C 33. The special inspector must witness the
placement of the sand into the sand column and must verify that the material is
consistent with ASTM C 33. Measures to prevent cave-ins must be taken prior to
and during backfilling.
   (h)   Soil and groundwater testing. Soil and groundwater testing is subject
to special inspection and must include a field investigation consisting of the
following:
      (1)   Field Testing. The following tests must be performed at the site of
a proposed individual private on-site sewage disposal system:
         (i)   Groundwater depth verification. Groundwater depth verification
must be conducted on sand columns constructed at the site of a proposed
subsurface disposal system in accordance with subdivision (g) of this section.
The depth of the groundwater is determined by installing a wellpoint within the
sand column at the time of sand column construction. Wellpoint construction
must be in accordance with paragraph (2) of this subdivision. Groundwater
verification must be conducted in accordance with paragraph (3) of this
subdivision.
         (ii)   Absorption test/percolation test (AT/PT). AT/ PT must be
conducted on sand columns constructed at the site of a proposed subsurface
disposal system in accordance with subdivision (g) of this section. The number
of AT/PT must be in accordance with paragraph (4) of this subdivision. The
results of the test must be documented by the special inspector on forms
provided by the department.
      (2)   Wellpoint construction. A pipe with a minimum diameter of 1 1/
4 inches must be inserted through the sand column to serve as a wellpoint to
test the groundwater level. The pipe must be driven or placed into the column
to a depth of at least one foot below the bottom of the sand column with
sufficient piping to extend three feet above the existing grade. The bottom
four feet of the pipe must have a screen with holes of a sufficient size to
admit water and exclude the surrounding sand. (See Figure 1.)
Figure 1
WellPoint
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1e024518ebfb3921ec38bc2ecfa58f65299ca12d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-14707.jpg]
      (3)   Groundwater verification. The presence of accumulated water in the
wellpoint pipe, indicating groundwater level, must be determined by the
department representative and the special inspector using an approved probe.
The special inspector shall also note the type of water table - perched,
apparent, or artesian. The wellpoint must be maintained for 72 hours so that
the level of water accumulation can be monitored and measured. A reading of the
water level in the wellpoint must be taken 72 hours after the setting of the
wellpoint and must be performed as follows:
         (i)   Timing. The groundwater level in a wellpoint must be performed
between March 15th and June 30th.
         (ii)   High tide. The groundwater level must be determined during the
time of daily high tide between March 15th and June 30th, in the following
tidal areas:
            (A)   On Staten Island, the areas on the Raritan Bay and Arthur
Kill sides of Hylan Boulevard and Arthur Kill Road.
            (B)   In all other locations, if the individual private onsite
sewage disposal system is to be constructed within 1,000 feet of the shoreline
or tidal wetland line, whichever is closest to such systems. This subparagraph
applies only to those systems where the bottom of the sand column is within
three feet of mean sea level.
         (iii)   Acceptable sand column. If no water is found in the wellpoint
after 72 hours have elapsed, the sand column is deemed a dry hole and the site
is acceptable for installation of a seepage pit system.
         (iv)   Additional check if water is found. If water is found in the
wellpoint after 72 hours have elapsed and the water level is no higher than
five feet below the impervious soil layer, or three feet below the impervious
soil layer in tidal areas, as specified in subparagraph (ii) of paragraph (3)
of this subdivision, the department representative must check again for the
presence of water after a gallon of water is poured down the wellpoint.
            (A)   If the department representative observes the complete exit
of the gallon of water from the wellpoint within 30 minutes, then the sand
column is considered a dry hole, and the site is acceptable for installation of
a seepage pit system.
            (B)   If the gallon of water does not exit the wellpoint within 30
minutes, the applicant must remove, examine, clean and reset the wellpoint in
the sand column and perform the groundwater verification again in accordance
with this subdivision.
         (v)   Unacceptable site. If water is found in the wellpoint, following
resetting, a seepage pit system is not appropriate for the site.
         (vi)   Invalid sand column. If a reading cannot be taken for any
reason, the sand column is invalid and cannot be used for further testing.
      (4)   Number of AT/PT for seepage pit and sand field systems. The number
of AT/PT must be as specified in subparagraphs (i) and (ii), below. The
commissioner may require additional AT/PT to confirm the suitability of
subsurface conditions.
         (i)   Seepage pit type system with one sand column. Where a seepage
pit- type system is designed with one sand column a minimum of one AT/PT must
be conducted within the sand column. Sand columns must be constructed in
accordance with subdivision (g) of this section. AT/PT must be conducted in
accordance with paragraph (5) of this subdivision.
         (ii)   Seepage pit and sand filter type systems with two sand columns.
Where a system is proposed and two sand columns are required per subdivision
(g) of this section each sand column is subject to the AT/ PT described in
paragraph (5) of this subdivision. The requirements to install a wellpoint set
forth in paragraph (2) of this subdivision are not applicable to the second
sand column.
            Exception: In those cases where the second sand column is within 25
feet of the first sand column, AT/ PT testing is not required subject to the
submission by the applicant of the following:
            (A)   Proof that satisfactory excavation, wellpoint and AT/PT were
performed on sand column 1 and witnessed by the department; and
            (B)   Data prepared by a special inspector confirming compliant
construction of the second sand column.
         (iii)   Seepage pit and sand filter type systems with sand column
depth of 35 feet or deeper. Where a system is proposed with one or more sand
columns having a depth of 35 feet or deeper, all required AT/ PT(s) must be
performed on two consecutive days.
      (5)   AT/PT on sand column backfill material. Where a sand column is
constructed in accordance with subdivision (g) of this section, an AT/PT must
be performed on the clean sand backfill. An acceptable sand column must pass a
four-hour AT/PT following a pre-soak performed onsite in the following manner:
         (i)   Timing; supervision; forms. The AT/PT may be performed any time
during the year provided the air temperature is above freezing. The AT/PT must
be performed under the supervision of a department employee as well as subject
to continuous special inspection. The result of the AT/PT must be filed on
forms provided by the department, stating the suitability of the site and the
capacity of the subsoil for the proposed use.
         (ii)   Scheduling. At the time of scheduling an AT/PT, the registered
design professional must inform the department of the date and time the pre-
soak will start, the date and time that the saturation point will be reached,
and the start of the four-hour test.
         (iii)   AT/PT procedure. The pre-soak and four-hour test must be
performed in the following manner:
            (A)   The sand column must be pre-soaked prior to the scheduled AT/
PT. The required volume of water for the pre-soak is 80 gallons for every foot
of dry depth, as determined using a water level sensor or other analogous
device. Where the base of the sand column exceeds 21 square feet, the volume
must be increased proportionately.
            (B)   The pre-soak must be conducted by using a one-inch diameter
or larger hose. Where the hose is connected to a potable water supply, a
certified reduced pressure zone (RPZ) backflow preventer must be used.
            (C)   Following the pre-soak, the four-hour AT/PT must absorb twice
the daily flow rate (Q) as determined by Table 2. In no case may the absorption
rate be less than 1.5 gallons per minute (GPM).The rate of water flow into the
sand column during the AT/ PT must be recorded using a calibrated water meter
with all necessary control valves. Where connected to a potable water supply, a
certified reduced pressure zone backflow preventer must be used.
Table 2
Seepage Pits – Required Absorptive Area for Seepage Pit Systems (Square Feet) 
Percolation Daily Flow Rate (Q) (GPD) a,b
Rate        220 260 300 330 390 440 450 520 550 600 650 660 750 780 900 <1,000
(min/inch)
Percolation Daily Flow Rate (Q) (GPD) a,b
Rate        220 260 300 330 390 440 450   520   550   600   650   660   750   780   900   <1,000
(min/inch)
1-5         183 217 250 275 325 367 375   433   458   500   542   550   625   650   750   845
6-7         220 260 300 330 390 440 450   520   550   600   650   660   750   780   900   1,020
8-10        244 289 333 367 433 489 500   578   611   667   722   733   833   867   1,000 1,130
11-15       275 325 375 413 488 550 563   650   688   750   813   825   938   975   1,125 1,275
16-20       314 371 429 471 557 629 643   743   786   857   929   943   1,071 1,114 1,280 1,450
21-30       367 433 500 550 650 733 750   867   917   1,000 1,083 1,100 1,250 1,300 1,500 1,690
31-45       440 520 600 660 780 880 900   1,040 1,100 1,200 1,300 1,320 1,500 1,560 1,800 2,030
46-60       489 578 667 733 867 978 1,000 1,156 1,222 1,333 1,444 1,467 1,667 1,733 2,000 2,255
Over 60     Unsuitable
 
a   For one and two-family properties, minimum daily flow rate (Q) is based on
the efficiency of water fixtures employed multiplied by the number of bedrooms:
      Water saving fixtures (post 1991) 1.6 GPF max. water closets and 3.0 GPM
max. faucets/showerheads: 110 GPD per bedroom.
      Standard fixtures (1980 - 1991) 3.5 GPF max. water closets and 3.0 GPM
max. faucets/showerheads: 130 GPD per bedroom.
      Standard fixtures (prior to 1980) 3.5+ GPF max. water closets and 3.0+
GPM max. faucets/showerheads: 150 GPD per bedroom.
b   Where daily flow rate (Q) differs from values shown, round up to the next
value indicated in the table.
            (D)   Readings must be observed and recorded by the special
inspector at intervals of 60 minutes or less for the duration of the test.
Records of readings must be maintained on site during testing. In no case may
the absorption rate be less than 1.5 gallons per minute (GPM). The test must be
terminated if there is an absorption rate which does not meet the requirements
of subparagraph (iii) at any time during the four-hour test. In such case, the
sand column is deemed unacceptable.
         (iv)   AT/PT failure and retesting. If the sand column fails the AT/
PT, the registered design professional has the option to:
            (A)   Clean out the sand column to any depth, pre-soak and re-test,
or
            (B)   Construct a second sand column, pre-soak and perform the AT/
PT on the newly constructed sand column. The original sand column must be
entirely backfilled.
         The retest must be performed on the following day. If a lot fails the
AT/PT twice, the lot is considered unbuildable.
      (6)   AT/PT termination. The AT/PT must be terminated if any of the
following conditions occur:
         (i)   Water flow stops. If the water flow stops for any reason for 15
minutes in a test that has no sign of failure.
         (ii)   Termination of test. If the special inspector terminates the
test for any reason before reaching 50% of the saturation.
         (iii)   Malfunctions. If the meter or the water supply system
malfunctions and cannot be repaired within 15 minutes in a test that has no
sign of failure.
         (iv)   Failure to protect potable water. If the special inspector does
not use the required properly tested and certified reduced pressure zone
backflow preventer where connection is made to a potable water system.
         (v)   Unforeseen circumstances. If the AT/PT is impossible to complete
for any unforeseen circumstance.
      (7)   AT/PT failure criteria. The AT/PT is deemed a failure if any of the
following conditions occurs:
         (i)   Average rate. If the average rate for any given hour falls below
1.5 GPM while maintaining a steady water puddle on the top of the hole during
the four-hour test.
         (ii)   Percolation rate. If the percolation rate is faster than one
minute per inch unless the site is modified by blending with a less permeable
soil to reduce the infiltration rate throughout the area to be used.
         (iii)   Overflow or leakage. If the water consistently overflows or
leaks outside the perimeter of the hole during pre-soak or during the four-hour
AT/PT.
         (iv)   Vertical flow. If the water penetrates the clay perimeter of
the hole instead of flowing vertically into the sand column at any time during
the four-hour AT/ PT.
         (v)   Interruption of test. If the registered design professional or
his/her representative manipulates the water flow rate or stops the water at
any time during a test.
   (i)   Design and construction standards for all types of systems. Systems
must be designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions of this
section.
      (1)   Piping. All piping associated with the installation of individual
private on-site sewage disposal systems must be shown on construction
documents. In addition, the following requirements apply:
         (i)   House drain connection slope. The slope of a house drain
connection to a septic tank must not be less than 1/4" per foot and must be
extra heavy cast iron pipe, not less than four inches in diameter.
         (ii)   Outlet pipe slope. The slope of an outlet pipe from a septic
tank to an absorption facility or distribution box must not be less than 1/8"
per foot and must be constructed of plastic, extra strength vitrified clay or
other noncorrosive material. The use of cast iron, ductile iron or concrete
pipe is prohibited.
         (iii)   Bends and venting. The piping must be laid in accordance with
Section PC 306. The house drain must have no more than two bends. Any bend 45
degrees or greater must be equipped with a cleanout and a properly fitted plug.
The house connection must allow for venting of gases from the septic tank.
Cleanouts must be provided in accordance with Section PC 708.
      (2)   Septic tanks. The following requirements apply to all septic tanks
unless otherwise specified:
         (i)   Design criteria. The following requirements apply to all septic
tanks regardless of material:
            (A)   Driveways or other facilities may not be constructed above
tanks unless the tank is specially designed and reinforced to safely carry the
load imposed.
            (B)   All septic tanks must be enclosed.
            (C)   Septic tank capacities for one and two-family properties must
be based upon the number of household bedrooms. Table 3 specifies minimum tank
capacities and minimum liquid surface areas. For the purpose of calculating the
required capacity of a tank, a finished attic is considered an additional
bedroom.
Table 3
Minimum Septic Tank Capacities for One- and Two-Family Homes 
 
Number of Bedrooms Minimum Tank Capacity (gallons) Minimum Liquid Surface Area
                                                   (sq. ft)
1,2,3              1,000                           27
4                  1,250                           34
5                  1,500                           40
6                  1,750                           47
 
Note: Tank size requirements for more than 6 bedrooms is calculated by adding
250 gallons and 7 square feet of surface area for each additional bedroom. A
garbage grinder shall be considered equivalent to an additional bedroom for
determining tank size.
            (D)   Septic tank capacities for sites other than one and two-
family homes must be sized based on the daily flow rate (Q) of the proposed
occupancy. Table B-3 of the New York State Design Standards for Intermediate
Sized Wastewater Treatment Systems specifies the typical per-unit hydraulic
loading rates for various occupancies and uses. When an establishment includes
several different types of uses from the table, each use must be computed
separately and the daily flow rate (Q) is the sum of the individual rates. The
minimum effective tank capacity must be calculated in accordance with Table D-
2 of the New York State Design Standards for Intermediate Sized Wastewater
Treatment Systems, as follows:
Minimum Effective Tank Capacity (gal) = 1.5 x Q
Where a non-residential facility has a significant delivery period, it may be
necessary to increase tank size and guidance is provided in section D.6 of the
New York State Design Standards for Intermediate Sized Wastewater Treatment
Systems. Additionally, no tank may have a capacity less than 1,000 gallons.
            (E)   An additional 250 gallons of capacity and seven square feet
of surface area is required when a garbage grinder is to be installed at the
time of construction or in the future. A gas deflection baffle or other
acceptable outlet modification, and a dual compartment tank or two tanks in
series must also be provided.
            (F)   A tank must contain a minimum depth of 30 inches for liquid.
The maximum depth for determining the allowable capacity of a tank is 60
inches. A tank deeper than 60 inches may provide extra sludge storage, but no
credit may be given toward tank capacity when such a tank is used.
            (G)   The minimum distance between the inlet and the outlet in a
tank must be six feet. A tank must meet the minimum surface area requirement
for the tank capacity specified in Table 3. The effective length of a
rectangular tank must not be less than two nor greater than four times the
effective width.
            (H)   Installed tanks must be able to support at least 300 pounds
per square foot (psf).
            (I)   A tank must have a top opening with a minimum of 20 inches in
the shortest dimension to permit cleaning and maintenance.
            (J)   A tank must have inlet and outlet baffles or sanitary tees or
other devices to prevent the passage of floating solids and to minimize the
disturbance of settled sludge and floating scum by sewage entering and leaving
the tank. An outlet design, such as a gas deflection baffle, is required in a
tank. An inlet and outlet baffle must extend a minimum of 12 inches and 14
inches, respectively, below the liquid level in a tank with a liquid depth of
less than 40 inches, and 16 and 18 inches respectively, in a tank with a liquid
depth of 40 inches or greater. The distance between an outlet baffle and the
outlet must not exceed six inches. A baffle must be constructed of durable
material not subject to corrosion, decay or cracking.
            (K)   There must be a minimum of one-inch clearance between the
underside of the top of a tank and the top of all baffles, partitions and/or
tees to permit venting of tank gases through the building stack. Multi-chamber
and multi-tank systems must also be designed to permit the venting of tank
gases.
            (L)   There must be a minimum drop in elevation of two inches
between the inverts of the inlet and outlet pipes.
         (ii)   Construction. The following requirements apply to all septic
tanks regardless of material:
            (A)   A tank must be watertight and constructed of durable material
that is not subject to corrosion, decay, frost damage or cracking. A tank must
be constructed of concrete, fiberglass or polyethylene.
            (B)   A tank must be placed on a three-inch bed of sand or pea
gravel to provide for proper leveling and bearing. Additional instructions
provided by the manufacturer must also be followed.
         (iii)   Dual-compartment tanks. Dual compartments are recommended for
all tanks and are required on all tanks with an interior length of ten feet or
more. In addition to meeting the requirements of subparagraph (i) of paragraph
(2) of this subdivision, dual-compartment tanks must be designed as follows:
            (A)   The first compartment (inlet side) must account for 60-75% of
the required total design volume.
            (B)   The baffle separating the compartments must extend from the
bottom of the tank to at least six inches above the invert of the outlet pipe.
            (C)   Compartments must be connected by a four-inch vertical slot
at least 18 inches in width, a six-inch elbow, or two four-inch elbows located
at a distance below the liquid level equal to 1/3 the distance between the
invert of the outlet and the bottom of the tank. At least one access cover must
be provided into each compartment.
            (D)   For the purposes of Table 3, the capacity and surface area
must be based upon the total capacity and surface areas of both compartments.
         (iv)   Tanks in series. In addition to meeting the requirements of
subparagraph (i) of paragraph (2) of this subdivision, tanks in series must be
designed as follows:
            (A)   The first tank must account for 60-75% of the required total
design volume.
            (B)   Tanks must be connected by a single pipe with a minimum
diameter of four inches.
            (C)   For the purposes of Table 3, the capacity and surface area
must be based upon the total capacity and surface areas of all the tanks and
chambers.
         (v)   Concrete tanks. In addition to meeting the requirements of
subparagraph (i) of paragraph (2) of this subdivision, concrete tanks must be
designed as follows:
            (A)   The concrete tank must have a water surface at the flow line
that is rectangular in plan with the length at least 2 times but no more than
four times the width. (See Figure 2.)
            (B)   Concrete must have a minimum compressive strength of 4,000
pounds per square inch (psi) at 28 days set.
            (C)   Wall thickness must be a minimum of three inches unless the
design has been certified by a New York State licensed professional engineer as
complying with all appropriate requirements for thin-wall construction. All
walls, bottom and top must contain reinforcing to assure support for 300 psf.
            (D)   The design of the concrete tank must be certified by a New
York State licensed professional engineer as adequate for the expected loads.
Specifications for installation and backfill must be established by the
applicant.
            (E)   All joints, pipe penetrations and access ports must be sealed
so that the concrete tank is watertight. Joints below the liquid level must be
tested for watertightness prior to backfilling. A hydrostatic air pressure or
vacuum test must be performed to confirm watertightness. This test must be
performed under the supervision of a special inspector.
               1.   If a hydrostatic test is used, it must be run for 28 hours.
A tank that shows no water loss during such time period is watertight.
               2.   If a vacuum test is used, it must apply five inches of
mercury vacuum for ten minutes. A concrete tank that demonstrates no detectable
vacuum loss during such time period is watertight.
            (F)   The walls and floor of a cast-in-place concrete tank must be
poured at the same time (monolithic pour).
Figure 2
Typical Concrete Septic Tank
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1e024518ebfb3921ec38bc2ecfa58f65299ca12d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-14704.jpg]
         (vi)   Fiberglass and polyethylene tanks. In addition to meeting the
requirements of subparagraph (i) of paragraph (2) of this subdivision
fiberglass and polyethylene tanks must comply with the following:
            (A)   A fiberglass or polyethylene tank must not be installed in
areas where the groundwater level can rise to the level of the bottom of the
septic tank.
            (B)   The manufacturer's installation instructions must be followed
during installation, bedding, and backfilling of a fiberglass or polyethylene
septic tank so as to prevent damage to tank walls and bottom.
            (C)   A fiberglass or polyethylene tank must be delivered to the
site completely assembled.
            (D)   All pipe penetrations and access ports must be sealed so that
the tank is watertight. A hydrostatic air pressure or vacuum test must be
performed to confirm watertightness. This test must be performed under the
supervision of a special inspector.
               1.   If a hydrostatic test is used, it must be run for 28 hours.
A tank that shows no water loss during such time period is watertight.
               2.   If a vacuum test is used, it must apply five inches of
mercury vacuum for ten minutes. A tank that demonstrates no detectable vacuum
loss during such time period is watertight.
         (vii)   Metal septic tanks. In addition to meeting the requirements of
subparagraph (i) of paragraph (2) of this subdivision metal septic tanks must
be designed as follows:
            (A)   Metal tanks must be labeled indicating conformance with UL
70.
            (B)   Any damage to the interior or exterior tank coating must be
refinished with an equivalent coating of material prior to placement or
backfill.
            (C)   Metal tanks must have a minimum diameter of five feet. The
length must be at least two but not more than four times the diameter.
            (D)   See Figure 3 for typical metal tanks.
Figure 3
Typical Metal Septic Tank
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1e024518ebfb3921ec38bc2ecfa58f65299ca12d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-14701.jpg]
      (3)   Associated system components. 
         (i)   Manholes. Manholes must comply with one of the following:
            (A)   All manholes in paved areas must have a cast iron watertight
frame and a cover that can be locked to prevent tampering that is flush with
the finished paved surface.
            (B)   All manholes in other than paved areas that are more than 12
inches below final grade must have an extension collar over each opening.
Extension collars may not be brought flush with the ground surface unless the
cover of the access opening can be locked to prevent tampering. If the cover of
an access opening cannot be locked to prevent tampering, the extension collar
must be terminated 12 inches below existing grade.
            (C)   Where drop manholes are used on sloping sites with gravity
distribution to reduce the velocity of flow to lower distribution lines, drop
manholes must comply with the following: 1. Baffles are required at the inlet
end of the manhole and approximately four inches from the inlet. 2. The inverts
of all outlets in each manhole must be at the same level.
         (ii)   Manhole covers. Manhole covers must comply with the following:
            (A)   A septic tank must have one access opening with a manhole
cover over the inlet, and one access opening with a manhole cover over the
outlet of the tank as per Figures 2 and 3.
            (B)   The top of the manhole cover must either be set within 12
inches of the finished grade or, where a cover is located more than 12 inches
below the finished grade, an extension collar must be provided over each access
opening to bring the manhole cover to a point within 12 inches of the finished
grade.
            (C)   The manhole cover must be installed so as to prevent
unauthorized entry and must be accessible for inspection, maintenance and
cleaning. No person other than a licensed master plumber or person engaged in
sewer services (one who renders sewer services, including but not limited to
installing, altering, repairing, cleaning and pumping sewers and septic tanks
as part as one's regular business or employment) may remove or open the cover
of any tank unless otherwise authorized during an emergency by an officer or
employee of a city agency.
            (D)   Manhole covers must be designed for a live load of at least
300 pounds per square foot.
            (E)   Concrete manhole covers, when used, must be reinforced and at
least four inches thick.
            (F)   An access opening with cover must be at least 20 inches
square for non-concrete tanks and at least 24 inches in diameter for concrete
tanks.
      (4)   Seepage pit design and construction. 
         (i)   Design requirements. A seepage pit system must be designed in
accordance with the following requirements:
            (A)   Seepage pit units must have a liquid capacity (volume below
inlet line) at least two times that of the septic tank.
            (B)   Seepage pits must contain a sand column constructed in
accordance with subdivision (h) of this section. A second sand column must be
provided if the permeable stratum at the bottom of the test hole for the
seepage pit is deeper than 15 feet.
            (C)   Seepage pits must include an absorptive area. The required
absorptive area is the interface area between the outside of the aggregate
collar in the pit and the surrounding sand collar which transmits the effluent
to the sand column below. As shown in Figure 4, the aggregate collar must be at
least one foot in width, and the sand collar must be at least two feet in
width.
            (D)   The percolation rate, determined by the AT/PT on the concrete
sand used in backfilling the test hole and absorption facilities, must be used
to calculate the minimum required absorptive area in the seepage pit for a
given sewage application rate and daily flow rate (Q) in accordance with Table
2.
            (E)   In addition Table 4 applies to seepage pit designs which
utilize cylindrical rings. The bottom area of the seepage pit cannot be
included in calculating the required absorptive area. For those designs
utilizing Table 4, the effective diameter of a seepage pit is the outside
diameter of the aggregate ring surrounding the inside perforated concrete
rings. Effective depth is measured from the invert of the seepage pit inlet to
the floor of the seepage pit.
Table 4
Cylindrical Seepage Pits – Required Absorptive Area (Sq Ft) 
Diameter of Seepage Pit  Effective Strata Depth Below Frost Line (below inlet)
(feet)                   1' 2' 3' 4' 5' 6' 7' 8' 9' 10'
Diameter of Seepage Pit  Effective Strata Depth Below Frost Line (below inlet)
(feet)                   1'   2' 3'  4'  5'  6'  7'  8'  9'  10'
3                        9.4  19 28  38  47  57  66  75  85  94
4                        12.6 25 38  50  63  75  88  101 113 126
5                        15.7 31 47  63  79  94  110 126 141 157
6                        18.8 38 57  75  94  113 132 151 170 188
7                        22   44 66  88  110 132 154 176 198 220
8                        25.1 50 75  101 126 151 176 201 226 251
9                        28.3 57 85  113 141 170 198 226 254 283
10                       31.4 63 94  126 157 188 220 251 283 314
11                       34.6 69 104 138 173 207 242 276 311 346
12                       37.7 75 113 151 188 226 264 302 339 377
 
Absorptive Area for Cylinder = 3.14 * D * h
Absorptive Area for Rectangular Pit = (2W + L) h
h = effective depth (invert of inlet to bottom of seepage pit)
D = outside diameter in feet
W = outside width in feet
L = outside length in feet
            (F)   If more than one seepage pit of circular design is required
to dissipate the effluent from a septic tank, the separation distance between
the outside edges of the sand collars of the seepage pits must be 3 times the
effective seepage pit dimension of the largest pit. The effective seepage pit
dimension must be the distance between the opposite outer perimeters of the
sand collar. For the purpose of determining separation distances, a seepage pit
is permitted to contain multiple leaching rings.
            (G)   For seepage pits of non-circular shapes, the separation
distance between the outer edges of the sand collars of the seepage pits must
be 3 times the average of the length times the width. Either separation
distance must be measured as the soil, undisturbed when construction is
complete, between pit excavations. For the purpose of determining separation
distances, a seepage pit is permitted to contain multiple leaching rings.
            (H)   See Figure 4 for depiction of typical seepage pit.
Figure 4
Typical Seepage Pit with Single Ring
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1e024518ebfb3921ec38bc2ecfa58f65299ca12d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-14698.jpg]
         (ii)   Construction requirements. A seepage pit system must be
constructed in accordance with the following requirements:
            (A)   A seepage pit must contain either perforated precast
reinforced concrete rings or perforated cast-in-place reinforced concrete
rings. The concrete used must have a minimum compressive strength of 3,000 psi.
Seepage pits must be designed with sufficient structural stability to withstand
lateral soil forces as well as vertical loads.
            (B)   A seepage pit cover slab must be made of either precast
reinforced concrete or cast-in-place reinforced concrete. An access way with an
opening of at least 20 inches in the shortest dimension with a cover must be
provided for inspection and cleaning. The cover of the access way must be
structurally sound so as to withstand anticipated loads.
            (C)   Seepage pits must be built upon a two-foot thick foundation
of concrete sand meeting the requirements of ASTM C 33 and Table 5, as shown in
Figure 4. The foundation must cover the entire bottom of the seepage pit
excavation regardless of over excavation and must underlay all components
including the sand collar.
            (D)   Inlet pipes to the seepage pits must be solid piping with a
minimum diameter of four inches on a minimum slope of 1/8 inch per foot.
Seepage pits may not be connected in series. When more than one seepage pit is
required, a distribution box must be provided and installed in accordance with
subparagraph (iv) of paragraph (5) of this subdivision.
            (E)   No trees or shrubs may be planted within ten feet of the
perimeter of a seepage pit.
Table 5
Specification for Sand and Aggregate 
Specification for Concrete Sand Used in the Sand Collar around the Seepage Pit
and in the Sand Columns (ASTM C 33)
Sieve Size       Percent Passing (Weight %)
3/8 " (9.5 mm)   100
No. 4 (4.75 mm)  95-100
No. 8 (2.36 mm)  80-100
No. 16 (1.18 mm) 50-85
No. 30 (600 um)  25-60
No. 50 (300 um)  10-30
No. 100 (150 um) 0-10
No. 200 (75 um)  0-3
Specification for Filter Sand Used in Sand Filter Field
U.C. < 4
D10 = .25 to 1.0 mm
100% passing 1/4" sieve
Specifications for Aggregate Used in Seepage Pit and Sand Filter Field (ASTM D
448)
% By Weight Passing
100              1 1/2 inch
75 to 90         1 inch
35 to 50         3/4 inch
less than 100    1/2 inch
 
      (5)   Sand filter field. Where a seepage pit is not permissible because
groundwater is encountered in the sand column, a sand filter field type septic
system may be used. The system must contain a septic tank, sand filled columns
and either a gravity system with a distribution box or a sand filter field
designed to accommodate a pressure distribution pump chamber. The system must
be designed and installed in accordance with the following requirements:
         (i)   Testing. Testing for sand filter field systems must comply with
paragraph (1) of subdivision (h) of this section.
         (ii)   Sand columns. A minimum of two sand columns is required under
sand filter field systems. Construction of the sand column must comply with
subdivision (g) of this section.
         (iii)   Septic tanks. Septic tanks must comply with the requirements
of paragraph (2) of this subdivision.
         (iv)   Distribution box and piping. A distribution box must precede
all gravity sand filter field systems. The distribution box and related piping
must comply with the following requirements:
            (A)   The box must be of concrete or steel. If steel, it must be
12-gage minimum, bituminous-coated in accordance with UL 70.
            (B)   The floor area of the box must be sized to allow for maximum
head of sewage for equal distribution to all outlet lines.
            (C)   The top of the box must be at least 9 inches above the invert
of the outlet lines.
            (D)   To minimize frost action and reduce the possibility of
movement once installed, distribution boxes must be set on a bed of sand or pea
gravel at least 12 inches thick.
            (E)   A baffle at the inlet must be provided to prevent short
circuiting of the flow.
            (F)   The box must be high enough so that the cover is within 12
inches of the finished grade.
            (G)   All outlet inverts must be set two inches below the inlet
invert.
            (H)   There shall be a minimum two inch clearance between the
inverts of the outlets and the bottom of the box to prevent short-circuiting
and reduce solids carry-over.
            (I)   Lines from the distribution box to the disposal field must be
not less than four inches in diameter and must be laid with tight joints on a
uniform slope not less than 1/8 inch per foot.
            (J)   Gravity perforated distributors must be four inches in
diameter SDR 35 PVC, sloped 1/16 to 1/32 inch per foot, less than or equal to
50 feet long, and spaced three feet on center and 1 1/2 feet from sidewalls.
Perforations must be 5/8 inch in diameter and placed at the 4 o'clock and 8
o'clock positions every six inches along the length of the pipe.
            (K)   Perforated distributors must be laid in an eight-inch deep
bed of aggregate meeting the requirements of ASTM D 448 and Table 5.
            (L)   The distributor aggregate must be covered with Mirafi 140 or
equivalent permeable geotextile under at least 12 inches of soil which must be
seeded or sodded with grass.
            (M)   At least two feet of filter sand meeting the requirements of
ASTM C 33 and Table 5 must be placed under the aggregate and distribution pipes
in the sand filter field.
            (N)   The application rate of septic tank effluent to the sand
filter field, using gravity flow, must not exceed one GPD/sf.
         (v)   Pressure distribution pump chamber and related piping. Where a
sand filter field cannot rely on gravity to distribute waste, a pressure
distribution system designed by a professional engineer must be used. The
design must incorporate the following requirements:
            (A)   Pressure perforated and capped distributors must be 1 1/2 to
three inches in diameter, installed level, less than or equal to 100 feet in
length, and spaced three feet on center and 1 1/2 feet from trench sidewalls.
            (B)   The minimum dose volume is ten times the delivery and
distributor pipe volume. The filter must be uniformly dosed at least twice
daily based upon the daily flow rate (Q).
            (C)   Distributor perforations must be sized to deliver a minimum
of one GPM of effluent at a head of two feet.
            (D)   The discharge head must be not less than two feet and not
more than six feet.
            (E)   Perforated distributors must be laid in an eight-inch deep
bed of aggregate meeting the requirements of ASTM D 448 and Table 5.
            (F)   The distributor aggregate must be covered with Mirafi 140 or
equivalent permeable geotextile under at least 12 inches of soil which must be
seeded or sodded with grass.
            (G)   At least two feet of filter sand meeting the requirements of
ASTM C 33 and Table 5 must be placed under the aggregate and distribution pipes
in the sand filter field.
            (H)   The application rate of septic tank effluent to the sand
filter field, using pressure distribution, must not exceed 1.15 GPD/sf.
         (vi)   Sand filter field. The bottom of the sand filter field must
have a slope equal to or greater than 5 percent toward the sand filled columns.
(See Figure 5.)
Figure 5
Typical Sand Filter Field
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1e024518ebfb3921ec38bc2ecfa58f65299ca12d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-14695.jpg]
         (vii)   Daily flow. Daily flow rate (Q) for one- and two-family
properties must be in accordance with water conservation fixtures (i.e., 150 or
130 or 110 GPD per bedroom as noted in Table 6).
Table 6
Sand Filter Field Design Flow 
 
Sewage       Daily Flow Rate (Q) (GPD) a,b
Application  220 260 300 330 390 440 450 520 550 600 650 660 750 780 900 <1,000
(GPD/SF)
1.15         191 226 261 287 339 383 391 452 478 522 565 574 652 678 782 885
1            220 260 300 330 390 440 450 520 550 600 650 660 750 780 900 1,015
 
a   For one and two-family properties, minimum daily flow rate (Q) is based on
the efficiency of water fixtures employed multiplied by the number of bedrooms:
      Water saving fixtures (post 1991) 1.6 GPF max. water closets and 3.0 GPM
max. faucets/showerheads: 110 GPD per bedroom.
      Standard fixtures (1980 - 1991) 3.5 GPF max. water closets and 3.0 GPM
max. faucets/showerheads: 130 GPD per bedroom.
      Standard fixtures (prior to 1980) 3.5+ GPF max. water closets and 3.0+
GPM max. faucets/showerheads: 150 GPD per bedroom.
b   Where daily flow rate (Q) differs from values shown, round up to the next
value indicated in the table.
         (viii)   Driveways and paved areas. Driveways and paved areas may not
be located above absorption facilities including subsurface sand filters unless
the requirements listed below are met:
            (A)   Lateral vent piping must be installed between each
distribution lateral. A minimum spacing of 18 inches must be provided between
vent piping and distribution laterals. Lateral vent pipe must be four-inch SDR
35 perforated PVC or equally acceptable material.
            (B)   The lateral vent pipes must connect to a vent pipe. The vent
pipe must be a minimum of four inches in diameter and must not be connected to
the house vent stack.
            (C)   See Figure 6 for typical sand filter field beneath paved
areas.
Figure 6
Typical Sand Filter Field (Beneath Paved Areas)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1e024518ebfb3921ec38bc2ecfa58f65299ca12d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-14692.jpg]
         (ix)   Serpentine rock. Sand filter fields are required whenever
serpentine rock is proposed as the medium for the ultimate disposal of the
effluent. Sand columns must be dry with a minimum of four feet of filter sand
above serpentine rock. Sand filter field system over serpentine rock must be
designed and installed in accordance with the following requirements:
            (A)   The system design must include at least six feet of vertical
separation between finished grade and the serpentine rock.
            (B)   Sand filter fields located above dry sand columns at
locations where serpentine rock is less than six feet below finished grade must
be modified to provide a minimum of four feet of sand filter both horizontally
and vertically from distributor aggregate to serpentine rock.
      (6)   Alternative systems. Alternative subsurface treatment systems must
comply with the requirements contained in Chapter II Subchapter I Part 75
Appendix 75-A.9 of 10 NYCRR 75.
      (7)   Repairs. A permit is required for repair to any system or
associated components, including the repair or replacement of any type of
absorption field that involves relocating or extending an absorption area to a
location not previously approved, the installation of a new subsurface
treatment system at the same location, or the use of an alternative system. A
licensed master plumber may file a Limited Alteration Application (LAA) with
the department for plumbing work consisting of in-kind repairs or like-for-like
replacements. Exception. Cesspools may not be repaired. Cesspools must be
replaced with an acceptable system in accordance with the requirements of this
section.
      (8)   Expansion of existing septic systems. Where an alteration is
proposed that will result in an increase in the number of bedrooms in one- and
two-family properties or the daily flow rate (Q) in all other properties,
thereby increasing the load on that system, the requirements of this paragraph
apply. Exception. Cesspools may not be expanded. Cesspools must be replaced
with an acceptable system in accordance with the requirements of this section.
         (i)   Evaluation of existing septic system. A special inspector must
perform an inspection of the individual private on-site sewage disposal system
to demonstrate that the existing system is functioning properly. A report of
the inspection must be submitted to the department with the application for
expansion of the system. The inspection must include:
            (A)   Inspection of the premises to verify that there is no
evidence of surface failure of the existing system;
            (B)   Inspection of all piping leading from the residence to the
system. If piping is damaged it must be replaced prior to testing;
            (C)   Inspection of the interior of the system to verify that the
system is free of structural damage and debris; and
            (D)   Inspection of additional parts of the system.
         (ii)   Cleaning and pumping of existing septic systems. Prior to
testing the septic tank as required by subparagraph (iii) of this paragraph, a
septage hauler with a valid permit from the DEC must pump all sludge and debris
from the septic tank and remove such contents from the site.
         (iii)   Infiltration testing of existing septic systems. A test of the
system must be performed by flowing a volume of water equal to the estimated
daily design volume plus the estimated volume of the system, but not less than
3,000 gallons. Following this initial charge of water a continuous stream of
dyed water must be pumped into the system at a rate of 1.5 gallons per minute
for a period of not less than four hours. The special inspector must observe
the test and verify that the system is functioning, continuously accepting
water without backflow and that no dyed water is observed above ground surface.
Dyed water observed breaking the ground surface is a failed test. Where
applicable, the infiltration test must be performed during high tide.
         (iv)   Damaged or malfunctioning septic systems. Where testing and
inspection indicate that a system has been damaged or has failed the
infiltration test, a permit application must be filed with the department for
the repair or replacement of the system. A new infiltration test must be
conducted on the repaired system to verify if expansion is feasible.
         (v)   Application. A registered design professional must submit an
application showing the details of the proposed expanded system. Existing
portions of the individual private on-site sewage disposal system which are
found to be in good working order may be incorporated into the expanded system.
The expanded system must comply with the requirements of this section.
   (j)   Abandoned septic systems. The following requirements apply:
      (1)   Abandoned existing septic systems. An individual private on-site
sewage disposal system must be abandoned and a connection made to a newly
constructed sanitary or combined sewer when such sewer fronts the subject
property. Connection must be made within six months of the sewer being placed
into service.
      (2)   Waste removal and backfilling of abandoned septic systems. When an
individual private on-site sewage disposal system is abandoned after a sewer
connection is made, all septic tanks, dosing tanks, seepage pits, distribution
boxes, cesspools and any other structure that may have held sewage or sewage
solids must be pumped free of wastes. Wastes must be removed by a septage
hauler licensed by the DEC. All component portions of the abandoned system must
be exposed and backfilled with gravel or sand. The site of the abandoned system
must be returned to a level, finished grade.
   (k)   Maintenance and operation. The following requirements apply:
      (1)   Maintenance. The owner must maintain the septic system in good
working order and must have the septic system inspected and pumped as needed.
      (2)   Use. An individual private on-site sewage disposal system must be
used only for the disposal of sewage.
         (i)   Detrimental or dangerous materials. Ashes, cinders or rags;
flammable, poisonous or explosive liquids or gases; oil, grease or any other
insoluble material capable of obstructing, damaging or overloading the building
drainage or sewer system, or capable of interfering with the normal operation
of the sewage treatment processes, may not be deposited, by any means, into
such systems.
      (3)   Discharge of groundwater and storm water. Groundwater infiltration
and/or storm water run-off from sources including but not limited to basement
floors, footings, garages, roofs, or heating and cooling systems must not be
discharged to the individual private on-site sewage disposal system and must be
diverted away from the vicinity of the absorption area.
      (4)   Repair of leaks. All plumbing leaks from fixtures connected to
individual private on-site sewage disposal systems must be repaired promptly to
prevent hydraulic overloading of the system and the development of a surface
discharge.
      (5)   Malfunctioning septic systems. Malfunctioning systems must be
repaired immediately. A permit application must be filed with the department
for the repair or replacement of the system. Conditions that constitute a
malfunctioning system include but are not limited to:
         (i)   Contamination. Evidence of contamination of groundwater or
surface water bodies by sewage or effluent;
         (ii)   Ponding. Ponding or breakout of any wastewater, sewage, septic
tank effluent or any liquid from the existing on-site system onto the surface
of the ground;
         (iii)   Seepage. Seepage of sewage or effluent into portions of
buildings below ground; or
         (iv)   Sewage back-up. Back-up of sewage into the building connected
to the system which is not caused by a physical blockage of the internal
plumbing.
      (6)   Department notice of need for special inspector. The department may
issue a notice directing the owner of an individual private on-site sewage
disposal system to engage a special inspector to verify the condition of the
system. The special inspector must observe and document the results of dye
tests or other diagnostic measures on fixtures connected to the suspected
malfunctioning systems. The special inspector must furnish inspection reports
to the department.
   (l)   Plot plans. Where a new individual private on-site sewage disposal
system is installed the applicant of record must prepare a plot plan. The plot
plan must contain the location of all pertinent components comprising the
individual private on-site sewage disposal system and maintenance and
inspection schedule. Where a drywell is installed it must be indicated on the
plot plan. The plot plan must be permanently affixed to the inside wall
adjacent to the fresh air outlet pipe.
   (m)   Restrictive declaration. Where a new individual private onsite sewage
disposal system is installed the owner must file a restrictive declaration
noting the existence and maintenance requirements of an individual on-site
private sewage system on the property with the City Register or County Clerk,
and the page number and liber number must be identified in the permit
application and on the temporary and permanent certificate of occupancy. Where
an individual private on-site sewage disposal system is abandoned pursuant to
paragraph (1) of subdivision (j) the restrictive declaration must be terminated
in accordance with the department's procedures.
   (n)   Special Inspections. Special inspections are required for the
installation of individual private on-site sewage disposal systems in
accordance with Table 7.
Table 7
Special Inspection 
 
CATEGORY                     TOPIC                        SECTION
                                                          1 RCNY §
                             Minimum depth of sand column 8001-01(g)(2)
Sand column construction     Serpentine rock              1 RCNY §
                             Backfilling the excavation   8001-01(g)(4)
                                                          1 RCNY §
                                                          8001-01(g)(5)
                                                          1 RCNY §
                             Absorption test/percolation  8001-01(h)(1)(iii)
                             test (AT/PT)                 1 RCNY §
                             Groundwater verification     8001-01(h)(3)
                             Number of AT/PT for seepage  1 RCNY §
Soil and groundwater testing pit and sand field systems   8001-01(h)(4)
                             AT/PT on sand column         1 RCNY §
                             backfill material            8001-01(h)(5)(i)
                             Acceptance criteria for      1 RCNY §
                             absorption tests             8001-01(h)(5)(iii)(B)
                             AT/PT termination            1 RCNY §
                                                          8001-01(h)(6)
                             Septic tanks, Concrete tanks 1 RCNY §
                             Septic tanks, Fiberglass and 8001-01(i)(2)(v)(E)
Design and construction      polyethylene tanks           1 RCNY §
standards for all types of   Evaluation of existing       8001-01(i)(2)(vi)(D)
systems                      system Infiltration testing  1 RCNY §
                             of existing individual       8001-01(i)(8)(i)
                             private on-site sewage       1 RCNY §
                             disposal systems             8001-01(i)(8)(iii)
                             Dye tests or other
Maintenance and operation    diagnostic measures to       1 RCNY §
                             verify the condition of the  8001-01(k)(6)
                             system
 
   (o)   Referenced standards. These standards are adopted in full, except to
the extent there is a conflict with this section, in which case the provisions
of this section will apply.
 
Standard Name                                                             Year
American Standard Test Method (ASTM) Standards:
C 33     Specifications for concrete aggregates                           2003
D 448    Standard classification for sizes of aggregate for road and      2003a
         bridge construction
D 1586   Specifications for penetration test and split-barrel sampling of 1999
         soils
Underwriters Laboratories (UL) Standard
70       Standard for septic tanks, bituminous coated metal               2001
 
(Added City Record 9/18/2017, eff. 10/18/2017; amended City Record 12/27/2018,
eff. 1/26/2019)
§ 8015-01 Referenced Standards.
Pursuant to § 28-103.19 of the New York City Administrative Code, delete and
replace the following reference standards as follows:
Reference standards ASME A112.4.14, ASME A112.6.2, and ASME A112.6.9 as added
by Section PC 1502 of the New York City Plumbing Code are hereby deleted and
new ASME A112.4.14, ASME A112.6.2, and ASME A112.6.9 are added to read as
follows:
 
                       American Society of Mechanical
ASME                   Engineers
                       Three Park Avenue
                       New York, NY 10016-5990
Standard Reference     Title                               Referenced in code
Number                                                     section number
A112.4.14 -2017        Manually operated valves for use in Table 605.7
                       plumbing systems
A112.6.2 -2017         Framing-Affixed Supports (Carriers) 405.4.3
                       for Off-the-Floor Plumbing Fixtures
A112.6.9 -2005 (R2015) Siphonic Roof Drains                1107.1
 
Reference standards ASSE 1017, ASSE 1018, ASSE 1019, ASSE 1056, ASSE 1061, and
ASSE 1066 as added by Section PC 1502 of the New York City Plumbing Code are
hereby deleted and new ASSE 1017, ASSE 1018, ASSE 1019, ASSE 1056, ASSE 1061,
and ASSE 1066 are added to read as follows:
                   American Society of Mechanical
ASSE               Engineers
                   901 Canterbury Road, Suite A
                   Westlake, OH 44145
Standard Reference Title                          Referenced in code
Number                                            section number
                   Performance Requirements for
1017-2009          Temperature Actuated Mixing    501.2.3, 613.1
                   Valves for Hot Water
                   Distribution Systems
                   Performance Requirements for
1018-2001 (R2021)  Trap Seal Primer Valves -      1002.4.1.1, 1002.4.1.2
                   Potable Water Supplied
                   Performance Requirements for
1019-2011 (R2016)  Wall Hydrant with Backflow     Table 608.1, 608.13.6
                   Protection and Freeze
                   Resistance
                   Performance Requirements for   Table 608.1, 608.13.5,
1056-2013          Spill Resistant Vacuum Breaker 608.13.8
                   Assemblies
1061-2015          Performance Requirements for   Table 605.5, 605.14.4
                   Push-Fit Fitting
                   Performance Requirements for
1066-1997          Individual Pressure Balancing  604.11
                   In-Line Valves for Individual
                   Fixture Fittings
 
Reference standard CSA B483.1 as added by Section PC 1502 of the New York City
Plumbing Code is hereby deleted and a new CSA B483.1 is added to read as
follows:
 
                         CSA Group
CSA                      8501 East Pleasant Valley
                         Cleveland, OH 44131-5516
Standard Reference       Title                     Referenced in code
Number                                             section number
                         Drinking Water Treatment  705.2.1, 705.4.3, 705.5,
CSA B483.1 -2007 (R2012) Systems                   705.11.1, 705.12, 705.13.2,
                                                   705.16
 
(Added City Record 11/15/2023, eff. 12/15/2023)
Chapter 9000: Zoning
§ 9000-01 Adult Establishments.
Dates of establishment and discontinuance of adult establishments, houses of
worship, and schools for the purposes of §§ 32-01 and 42-01 of the zoning
resolution. In determining whether an adult establishment may lawfully be
established at a location pursuant to §§ 32-01 and 42-01 of the zoning
resolution, the department will use the following criteria to determine the
dates of establishment and discontinuance for adult establishments, houses of
worship and schools located or proposed to be located within 500 feet of each
other.
   (a)   The date of establishment of an adult establishment, house of worship,
or school in existence and operating prior to August 8, 2001 shall be the date
of issuance of an appropriate department permit or, if no permit was required,
the date that it commenced operation, as determined by the department.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in subdivision a of this section, the
date of establishment of an adult establishment, house of worship, or school
shall be the date of issuance of an appropriate department permit, subject to
the following qualifications:
      (1)   With respect to a new building permit or alteration permit:
         (i)   significant progress must be shown toward completion of the work
under the permit. For the purposes of this paragraph, the term "significant
progress" means the issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy or, if
applicable, department signoff of the work within one year of issuance of the
permit, except that upon application, the commissioner or his or her designee,
may extend the one year period in accordance with subdivision c of this section
for a period of time not exceeding one year, and
         (ii)   the use or operation for which the building is constructed or
altered must commence within six months after the issuance of a temporary
certificate of occupancy or, if applicable, within six months after a
department signoff that the work has been completed, except that upon
application, the commissioner or his or her designee, may extend the six month
period in accordance with subdivision c of this section for a period of time
not exceeding six months.
      (2)   With respect to applications for permits filed solely to establish
priority, where no work requiring a building permit is proposed, the use or
operation for which the permit is issued must commence within two months of the
issuance of such permit, except that upon application, the commissioner or his
or her designee may extend such two month period in accordance with subdivision
c of this section for a period of time not exceeding two months.
   (c)   An extension of time pursuant to subdivision b of this section may be
granted where the permittee submits an application no later than 30 days prior
to the expiration of the applicable time period together with satisfactory
evidence that significant progress or the commencement of use or operations
within the applicable time period is impracticable. The commissioner or his or
her designee shall make a determination and notify the applicant in writing of
his or her determination not later than 30 days after receipt of the
application by the department. If the application is denied, the commissioner
or his or her designee shall state the reason(s) therefor. If the commissioner
or his or her designee fails to act upon the application within such 30-day
period, the application shall be deemed to be granted.
   (d)   An adult establishment, otherwise in compliance with the zoning
resolution, may be established within 500 feet of a discontinued adult
establishment, house of worship or school. For the purposes of this
subdivision, once established, an adult establishment, house of worship, or
school shall not be deemed to be discontinued until it has ceased operation for
a continuous period of one year or longer.
   (e)   The time periods set forth in this section for significant progress of
work or for commencement of operations shall commence to run as of the
effective date of this section or issuance of the permit, whichever is later.
Appendix A:
Department of Buildings
Promulgation of Amendments to Regulations Relating to Public Access to Records
Pursuant to Section 1105 of the New York City Charter and by virtue of the
authority vested in me as Commissioner of Buildings by Section 643 of such
Charter, herewith promulgated are the following amendments to regulations of
the Commissioner of Buildings relating to Regulations Relating to Public Access
to Records.
REGULATIONS RELATING TO PUBLIC ACCESS TO RECORDS
RULE 1. PURPOSE – The Department of Buildings, in full accordance with the
letter and spirit of the State Freedom of Information Law, effective September
1, 1974, does hereby enact regulations to permit all members of the public
access to its records.
RULE 2. DEFINITIONS – (a) The term "records" shall mean all information on file
which the Department of Buildings is authorized to disclose to the public
pursuant to Article 6 of the Public Officers Law and Section 1113 and 1114 of
the New York City Charter. Records shall be classified in two categories as
follows:
      (1)   Records routinely made available for public inspection. Such
records include, but are not limited to: building applications, plans,
certificates of occupancy, index cards and index printouts, violations and
complaints with the complainant's name and address deleted.
      (2)   Records not routinely made available for public inspection.
   (b)   The term "offices" shall mean the offices of the Department of
Buildings which are located at the address provided in the City's website,
http://www.nyc.gov.
RULE 3. AVAILABILITY – (a) Routine records may be requested at the office where
such records are maintained. Requests for said records should be made to the
Records Control Officer in the respective office or his/her designee.
   (b)   The term "offices" shall mean the offices of the Department of
Buildings which are located at the address provided in the City's website,
http://www.nyc.gov.
   (c)   Records are available for public inspection and copying on weekdays
and, except holidays, during regular business hours which may vary from office
to office.
RULE 4. DESIGNATION OF RECORDS CONTROL OFFICERS – The respective records
control officers of the Department of Buildings for the respective offices are
hereby designated as follows:
   (a)   Executive offices
      (1)   Materials and Equipment Acceptance Division – Director
      (2)   Division of Cranes and Derricks – Assistant Commissioner
      (3)   Central Billing Section – Director of Fiscal Operations
   (b)   Borough offices
      (1)   Borough of Manhattan – Borough Manager
      (2)   Borough of The Bronx – Borough Manager
      (3)   Borough of Brooklyn – Borough Manager
      (4)   Borough of Queens – Borough Manager
      (5)   Borough of Staten Island – Borough Manager
   (c)   Boiler Division Office – Chief, Boiler Division
   (d)   Elevator Division Office – Director, Elevator Division
   (e)   Bureau of Electrical Control – Director Existing Rules 5, 6, 7 and 8,
which were effective September 1, 1974, are deleted and proposed Rules 5 and 6
are added.
RULE 5. FEES – A maximum fee of twenty-five cents is to be charged for each
photocopy of departmental records not in excess of nine inches by fourteen
inches except for certificates of pending violations (violation searches) and
photocopies of individual violations. The fee for certificates of pending
violations and for photocopies of individual violations will remain as stated
in Section 26-214 of the Building Code. This exception from the twenty-five
cents maximum fee limit, which applies to violation searches and copies of
violations, does not apply to copies of Bureau of Electrical Control notice of
violations and certificates of electrical inspection. The fee charged for any
photocopy of departmental records which is larger than nine inches by fourteen
inches is to be the actual cost of reproduction.
RULE 6. REVIEW OF DENIAL OF ACCESS – A denial by Records Access Officer may be
appealed in writing within thirty days after the receipt of the denial. Appeals
should be directed to the F.O.I.L. Appeals Officer (address provided in the
City's website, http://www.nyc.gov).
EXPLANATION OF PROPOSED AMENDMENT
The above proposed regulations are intended to amend and update the existing
regulations, which were effective on September 1, 1974. This amendment is
necessary to insure continued compliance with the State Freedom of Information
Law (Public Officers Law, Art. 6), as amended. The rules were last published in
the City Record on July 10, 1975.
