Chapter 64: Department of Consumer and Worker Protection
(Am. L.L. 2020/080, 8/28/2020, eff. 8/28/2020)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Administrative Code
Appendix A at L.L. 2020/080.
Section 2201. Department; commissioner.
There shall be a department of consumer and worker protection, the head of
which shall be the commissioner of consumer and worker protection.
(Am. L.L. 2020/080, 8/28/2020, eff. 8/28/2020)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Administrative Code
Appendix A at L.L. 2020/080.
Section 2202. Deputies.
The commissioner may appoint such deputies as he or she deems necessary for the
discharge of his or her duties.
(Am. L.L. 2020/080, 8/28/2020, eff. 8/28/2020)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Administrative Code
Appendix A at L.L. 2020/080.
Section 2203. Powers of the commissioner.
   (a)   The commissioner shall plan, make recommendations, conduct research
and develop programs for consumer education and protection, facilitate the
exchange and dissemination of information in consultation with agencies,
federal and state officials, commercial interests, private groups and others
working in this field and coordinate the consumer protection activities of
other city agencies.
   (b)   The commissioner shall enforce all laws in relation to weights and
measures.
   (c)   The commissioner shall have cognizance and control of the granting,
issuing, transferring, renewing, revoking, suspending and cancelling of all
licenses and permits, except in the cases with respect to which and to the
extent to which any of said powers are conferred on other persons or agency by
laws, and shall collect all fees for licenses and permits the collection of
which by some other person or agency is not authorized by law.
   (d)   The commissioner shall enforce all laws relating to the advertising
and offering for sale and the sale of all commodities, goods, wares and
services.
   (e)   The office of labor standards shall be established within the
department. Such office shall be headed by a director who shall be appointed by
the commissioner.
      (1)   The commissioner shall:
         (i)   enforce municipal labor laws and other labor laws the
commissioner is empowered to enforce;
         (ii)   plan, make recommendations, conduct research and develop
programs for worker education, worker safety and worker protection;
         (iii)   facilitate the exchange and dissemination of information in
consultation with city agencies, federal and state officials, businesses,
employees, independent contractors, labor unions and nonprofit organizations
working in the field of worker education, safety, and protection;
         (iv)   provide educational materials to employers and develop
programs, including administrative support, to assist employers with compliance
with labor laws;
         (v)   implement public education campaigns to heighten awareness of
employee and independent contractor rights under federal, state, and local law;
         (vi)   collect and analyze available federal, state, and local data on
the city's workforce and workplaces and coordinate with federal and state
officials and other city agencies to identify gaps and prioritize areas for the
improvement of working conditions and practices for employees and independent
contractors in the city and within particular industries, and to promote the
implementation and enforcement of laws, rules and regulations designed to
improve such working conditions and practices; and
         (vii)   recommend efforts to achieve workplace equity for women,
communities of color, immigrants and refugees, and other vulnerable workers.
      (2)   Division of paid care. The commissioner shall establish a division
of paid care within the office of labor standards and shall appoint the
division head, who shall be distinct from the director of the office of labor
standards.
   (f)   The commissioner, in the performance of said functions, shall be
authorized to hold public and private hearings, administer oaths, take
testimony, serve subpoenas, receive evidence, mediate disputes, receive and
evaluate complaints, conduct investigations in response to complaints or upon
his or her own initiative, and take appropriate action, including referral to a
federal or state agency, and to receive, administer, pay over and distribute
monies collected in and as a result of actions brought for violations of laws
relating to deceptive or unconscionable trade practices, labor standards, or of
related laws, and to promulgate, amend and modify rules and regulations
necessary to carry out the powers and duties of the department. Each inspector
or other employee of the department who issues notices of violation shall, for
provisions of law that are enforced exclusively by the department, have access
at the time that a violation is issued to equipment allowing such person: (1)
to determine if such violation is a first-time violation of the applicable
provision of law, and (2) if permitted by law, to issue a warning for such
violation and to record that such a warning has been issued.
   (g)   The commissioner shall exercise the powers of a commissioner of public
markets under the agriculture and markets law with respect to open air markets.
   (h)   (1)   The department shall have the power to render decisions and
orders. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of law, the department shall
be authorized, upon due notice and hearing, to impose civil penalties for, and
to order restitution or other forms of equitable relief, and payment of
monetary damages, to a consumer or worker in connection with the violation of
any laws or rules the enforcement of which is within the jurisdiction of the
department pursuant to this charter, the administrative code or any other
general, special or local law. Where the department has delegated any
adjudicatory powers to the office of administrative trials and hearings, for
all cases heard by the adjudicatory body authorized to conduct trials in such
office, the office of administrative trials and hearings shall issue a
recommended decision which the commissioner may adopt, reverse, modify, or
remand in whole or in part for additional proceedings. Except to the extent
that dollar limits are otherwise specifically provided, such civil penalties
shall not exceed five hundred dollars for each violation. All proceedings
authorized pursuant to this subdivision shall be conducted in accordance with
rules promulgated by the commissioner. The remedies and penalties provided for
in this subdivision shall be in addition to any other remedies or penalties
provided for the enforcement of such provisions under any other law including,
but not limited to, civil or criminal actions or proceedings.
      (2)   All such proceedings shall be commenced by the service of a notice
of violation. The commissioner shall prescribe the form and wording of notices
of violation. The notice of violation or copy thereof when filled in and served
shall constitute notice of the violation charged, and, if sworn to or affirmed,
shall be prima facie evidence of the facts contained therein. The notice of
violation shall contain information advising the person charged of the manner
and the time in which such person may either admit or deny the violation
charged in the notice. Such notice of violation shall also contain a warning to
advise the person charged that failure to plead in the manner and time stated
in the notice may result in a default decision and order being entered against
such person. The original or a copy of the notice of violation shall be filed
and retained by the department and shall be deemed a record kept in the
ordinary course of business.
      (3)   Where a respondent has failed to plead within the time allowed by
the rules of the commissioner or has failed to appear on a designated hearing
date or a subsequent date following an adjournment of a violation, such failure
to plead or appear shall be deemed, for all purposes, to be an admission of
liability for the purposes of such violation and shall be grounds for rendering
a default decision and order imposing a penalty up to the maximum amount
prescribed under law for the violation charged. For purposes of this
subdivision, "designated violation" means:
         (A)   any violation of title 20 of the administrative code or of any
law or rule, the enforcement of which is within the jurisdiction of the
department, to the extent any final decision or order relating to such
violation authorizes restitution, imposes an award of monetary damages or
provides equitable relief to a consumer or a worker;
         (B)   any violation of subchapters 1, 7, 11, 22, 29, 30, 31 or 35 of
chapter 2 of title 20 of the administrative code or of chapters 8 or 12 of
title 20 of the administrative code or of article eleven of the general
business law, including any rules or regulations promulgated thereunder, to the
extent any final decision or order relating to such violation imposes both
civil penalties and restitution, monetary damages or equitable relief to a
consumer or a worker; or
         (C)   any violation of subchapters 1, 8 or 14-a of chapter 5 of title
20 of the administrative code, including any rules promulgated under such
subchapters, to the extent any final decision or order relating to such
violation imposes civil penalties for two or more violations and the aggregate
penalty for such violations exceeds five thousand dollars and the final
decision or order imposes restitution, monetary damages or equitable relief to
a consumer.
      (4)   At the request of a consumer or a worker, the department shall
assign, without consideration or liability, a final decision or order, provided
that such decision or order solely authorizes restitution, imposes an award of
monetary damages or provides equitable relief to such consumer or a worker, or
that portion of such award that authorizes restitution, imposes an award of
monetary damages or provides equitable relief to such consumer or a worker.
After such assignment, the department shall not be required to take any further
action to enforce such restitution, award of monetary damages or equitable
relief to such consumer.
      (5)   Any final decision or order of the department relating to a
designated violation, whether the adjudication was had by hearing or upon
default or otherwise, shall constitute a judgment that may be entered and
docketed in the civil court of the city of New York or any other place provided
for the entry and docketing of civil judgments within the state and may be
enforced without court proceedings in the same manner as the enforcement of
money judgments entered and docketed in civil actions.
      (6)   Notwithstanding paragraph five of this subdivision, before a
judgment based upon a default may be so entered and docketed, the department
must have notified the respondent in accordance with this paragraph. The
commissioner shall determine the form of such notice. If the respondent is a
licensee of the department, notice shall be provided by first class mail or
hand delivery to the address the licensee has filed with the department
pursuant to section 20-112 of the administrative code. For all other
respondents, the notice shall be served by first class mail or hand delivery to
the address where the decision or order was sent to the respondent by the
department. Such notice shall state that:
         (A)   a decision and order of default was issued against the
respondent by the department and the amounts of the penalty, restitution, or
other monetary relief imposed;
         (B)   a judgment will be entered and docketed in the civil court of
the city of New York or any other place provided for the entry of civil
judgments within the state of New York; and
         (C)   entry and docketing of such judgment may be avoided by
requesting a stay of default for good cause shown and either requesting a new
hearing or entering a plea pursuant to applicable rules within thirty days of
the mailing or hand delivery date of such notice.
      (7)   The department shall not enter any final decision or order pursuant
to this subdivision unless the notice of violation shall have been served as
follows:
         (A)   for any respondent that is a licensee of the department, the
department shall serve a notice of violation of a designated violation in one
of the following ways:
            (i)   by mailing a copy of such notice to the address the licensee
has filed with the department pursuant to section 20-112 of the administrative
code; or
            (ii)   by personally serving the respondent or delivering the
notice of violation to a person of suitable age and discretion employed by the
respondent at the premises at which the respondent conducts the business the
operation of which gave rise to the violation. In the case of a business that
is carried out at large and not at a fixed place of business or that has filed
with the department an out-of-state address pursuant to section 20-112 of the
administrative code, the department shall also serve a licensee or employee of
such business at the location which gave rise to the violation, the secretary
of state pursuant to section three hundred four of the business corporation law
or an agent designated for service pursuant to rule three hundred eighteen of
the civil practice law and rules or section three hundred five of the business
corporation law.
         (B)   For any respondent that is not a licensee of the department, the
department shall serve a notice of violation of a designated violation in one
of the following ways:
            (i)   by serving the respondent in the same manner as is prescribed
for service of process by article three of the civil practice law and rules or
article three of the business corporation law;
            (ii)   by delivering such notice to a person of suitable age and
discretion employed by the respondent at the premises where the respondent is
operating;
            (iii)   by affixing such notice in a conspicuous place to the
premises where the respondent is operating and delivering such notice by first
class mail to the address of such premises;
            (iv)   by sending such notice by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the respondent's last known business address, provided that
delivery of such notice shall be restricted to the respondent; or
            (v)   by sending such notice by electronic mail to the respondent's
electronic mail address, provided that the department has received
communication from such electronic mail address in the one year prior to the
electronic mailing of such notice, and provided further that service in the
manner prescribed by clauses (i) though (iv) of this subparagraph are
impracticable.
      (8)   Service by certified mail pursuant to clause (iv) of subparagraph B
of paragraph seven of this subdivision shall be deemed complete upon the
mailing of the notice of violation described in such clause, unless the notice
of violation is returned to the sender by the United States postal service for
any reason other than refusal of delivery. Service by electronic mail pursuant
to clause (v) of subparagraph B of paragraph seven of this subdivision shall be
deemed complete upon the electronic mailing of the notice of violation
described in such clause unless the department receives an electronic message
that its electronic mailing of the notice of violation was undeliverable.
      (9)   Proof of service made pursuant to paragraph seven of this
subdivision shall be maintained by, and preserved within, the department for at
least six years following the date of the final decision or order relating to
the adjudication of the subject notice of violation.
      (10)   Entry and docketing of a judgment shall not limit the application
of any other remedies or penalties provided for the enforcement of laws or
rules under the jurisdiction of the department.
      (11)   Notwithstanding any other inconsistent provision of law, powers
conferred upon the department by this subdivision may be exercised by the
office of administrative trials and hearings consistent with orders of the
mayor issued in accordance with subdivisions two and three of section
one thousand forty-eight of this charter.
   (i)   All powers granted to the commissioner of consumer affairs, the
commissioner of consumer and worker protection, or the director of the office
of labor standards by this charter, the administrative code, or any other
general, special, or local law shall be deemed to be granted to the
commissioner or his or her designee.
(Am. L.L. 2015/104, 11/30/2015, eff. 3/29/2016; Am. L.L. 2016/011, 2/8/2016,
eff. 5/8/2016; Am. L.L. 2020/080, 8/28/2020, eff. 8/28/2020; Am. 2020 N.Y. Laws
Ch. 205, 10/7/2020, eff. 10/7/2020; Am. L.L. 2021/098, 9/26/2021, eff. 1/24/
2022; Am. L.L. 2021/159, 12/24/2021, eff. 6/22/2022)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Administrative Code
Appendix A at L.L. 2013/046, L.L. 2014/007, L.L. 2015/104, L.L. 2020/080, and
L.L. 2021/098.
Section 2204. Consumers council. [Repealed]
(Repealed L.L. 2020/080, 8/28/2020, eff. 8/28/2020)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Administrative Code
Appendix A at L.L. 2020/080.
