Title 30: Emergency Management
Chapter 1: Office of Emergency Management
§ 30-101 Definitions.
As used in this title:
   a.   "Office" shall mean the New York city office of emergency management
and shall have the same meaning as set forth in section four hundred ninety-
five of the New York city charter.
   b.   "Commissioner" shall mean the commissioner of the New York city office
of emergency management.
   c.   "Emergency support functions" shall mean a functional area of response
activity established to facilitate coordinated delivery of assistance required
to save lives, protect property and health, maintain public safety, and
otherwise respond to emergency conditions.
§ 30-102 Protocols regarding weather emergencies.
   a.   The commissioner shall develop protocols that shall include, but need
not be limited to, the following: (1) what specific actions the office may take
when the national weather service forecasts the occurrence of certain specified
severe weather conditions, as determined by the office, including identifying
what other agencies or offices of city, state or federal government shall be
contacted or consulted; (2) based on the national weather service consultation
and inter-agency communications, whether and at what level to activate
emergency support functions; and (3) the circumstances under which the office
would call upon the state emergency management office or other jurisdictions
for assistance, or request mutual aid assistance from the state or other
jurisdictions pursuant to article two-B of the executive law.
   b.   On or before November fifteenth, 2011 and every November fifteenth
thereafter, the commissioner shall issue a report to the council setting forth
the actions taken by the office pursuant to the protocols issued in accordance
with subdivision a of this section.
§ 30-103 Annual snow preparedness and response report.
   a.   For purposes of this subdivision, the term "snow event" shall mean any
snowfall equal to or in excess of six inches within a period of twenty-four
hours in any of the five boroughs based on the department of sanitation's
measurements.
   b.   No later than November fifteenth, two thousand eleven, and on or before
every November fifteenth thereafter, the commissioner shall submit to the
council and make available to the public on the city's website a report
describing the city's preparation for and response to all snow events during
the preceding twelve-month period. Such report shall include but not be limited
to the following:
      (1)   a list of all snow events during the reporting period;
      (2)   a list of all city and state agencies or offices and private
entities that acted on behalf of the city that were involved in snow event
preparation and response, including a description of the responsibilities of
each such agency, office or entity. Such agencies or offices, if involved in
such preparation or response, shall include, but need not be limited to, the
department of education, office of emergency management, department of
environmental protection, fire department, office of the chief medical
examiner, department of parks and recreation, police department, department of
sanitation, department of transportation and to the extent information is
available, the state office of emergency management, New York city housing
authority, metropolitan transportation authority and port authority of New York
and New Jersey;
      (3)   an assessment of the performance of each such agency or office for
each snow event during the reporting period, including an assessment of
interagency coordination;
      (4)   a list of any snow-related emergency warnings or declarations
issued by the city or state during the reporting period and actions taken
pursuant to each such warning or declaration; and
      (5)   recommendations for improving city snow event preparation and
response including, but not limited to, revisions to snow management plans and
other relevant protocols of any city agency or office.
   c.   No later than November fifteenth, two thousand twelve, and every
November fifteenth thereafter, the report required pursuant to subdivision b of
this section shall include:
      (1)   an inventory of all city-owned snow management equipment and
resources that were used during any snow event;
      (2)   an inventory of privately-owned snow management equipment and
resources used by the city during any snow event, an assessment of how such
equipment and resources were deployed and overseen by city agencies or offices
and strategies, contracts or agreements used to ensure that such snow
management equipment and resources were available to the city; and
      (3)   the number of individuals who registered with the city to work
during any snow event, and assessment on how such individuals were deployed and
overseen by city agencies or offices and strategies, contracts or agreements
used to ensure that such individuals were available to the city.
§ 30-104 Food and water access plan.
In consultation with appropriate federal, state, and city government agencies,
the commissioner shall develop or update, no later than December first, two
thousand thirteen, a food and water access plan to be utilized after coastal
storms and other severe weather and natural disaster events where such events
may disrupt access to food and water or may impact the ability to purchase,
prepare or consume food or water. Such plan shall include, but not be limited
to the following features, provided that nothing herein shall be construed to
interfere with the ability of agencies responding to an emergency to implement
plans, modify plans, or take steps not described in any written plan, in a
manner appropriate to circumstances particular to that emergency:
   a.   a description of how the city will provide access to food and water,
including but not limited to how and to what extent the city will disseminate
information to the public about the availability of food and water services;
manage requests for support from emergency, not-for-profit entities that
provide food and water; arrange for or coordinate disaster feeding; coordinate
the efforts of food benefits programs, food donations, food business and
emergency food providers; and work to restore the public, private and non-
profit sectors' ability to provide access to food and water;
   b.   a mechanism to assess the city's food and water needs prior to and
after such conditions and incidents arise;
   c.   a description of how the city personnel responsible for implementing
such plan will be identified, including how a clear hierarchy and points of
contact of such personnel will be established;
   d.   criteria for how food and water distribution points are identified and
how such distribution points will be publicized to ensure that the public is
aware of the locations of such distribution points;
   e.   a mechanism to provide that recipients of food benefits have continued
access to such benefits during and immediately after such events and that
affected communities experiencing transportation disruptions can access
emergency food benefits locally;
   f.   identification of contracts, if any, that can be activated during and
immediately after such events for vendors that can provide and distribute food
and water, including but not limited to, hot food providers, trucks and
drivers;
   g.   criteria for assessing transportation routes that allow for the
distribution of food and water that accounts for emergency road and bridge
closures;
   h.   a mechanism to provide that, to the extent practicable, all public
communications, written or otherwise, are available in the most commonly spoken
languages of affected communities; and
   i.   a mechanism to consult community based organizations and service
providers with relevant expertise in regard to the development of such plan.
§ 30-105 Sheltering plan.
The commissioner, in consultation with relevant federal, state and local
agencies, shall develop or update a sheltering plan no later than December
first, two thousand thirteen, that anticipates the operation of shelters for
short, medium or long-term periods of time as a result of coastal storms and
other severe weather and natural disaster events. Such plan shall include, but
not be limited to the following features, provided that nothing herein shall be
construed to interfere with the ability of agencies responding to an emergency
to implement plans, modify plans, or take steps not described in any written
plan, in a manner appropriate to circumstances particular to that emergency:
   a.   a description of the types of evacuation centers and shelters, number
and location of evacuation centers, how persons are transferred from an
evacuation center to a shelter, and a mechanism to identify locations to be
used as shelters, including shelters that are adequate for habitability for
long-term stays;
   b.   a description of shelter staffing and management, including but not
limited to an explanation of how key shelter staff positions such as shelter
managers and clinical staff will be determined and how shelters will be
adequately staffed with trained medical personnel to the extent necessary for
each such shelter's needs;
   c.   a mechanism for clearly identifying to residents, volunteers and other
staff at each shelter the individuals filling key staff positions at such
shelter;
   d.   a mechanism to provide that to the extent practicable any shelter
manager coordinates with a shelter manager on the immediately following shift
at such shelter regarding requests for supplies, shelter conditions and other
significant issues at such shelter;
   e.   a mechanism to provide that there is adequate food and water at every
shelter and that food options other than shelf stable items and meals ready to
eat are available at any such shelter that is to be used for long term stays;
   f.   a reassessment of the emergency shelter supply stockpile at least
annually, as well as immediately before and after such plan is activated, to
determine whether appropriate supplies are available and adequate;
   g.   to the extent practicable, a plan for shower and laundry facilities for
persons who remain in shelters after three days;
   h.   a mechanism for tracking the daily census at each shelter, including
the number of persons with special medical needs, the number of persons who
enter and exit each day, and to the extent practicable, a general description
of the locations to which such persons exited;
   i.   a mechanism to track the medical needs of persons at shelters who
request assistance in meeting such needs, including but not limited to needed
medications and placement in the proper type of shelter;
   j.   a mechanism to advise persons who receive federal, state or city public
assistance benefits of how to avoid disruption of such benefits due to an
inability to meet program requirements as a result of their stay in such
shelter;
   k.   a mechanism to provide that all shelters are made usable to persons
with disabilities to the extent practicable and to identify facilities in the
shelter system that are accessible to persons with disabilities;
   l.   a description of how persons, including those with disabilities, are
assigned to shelter facilities; and
   m.   a mechanism to consult community based organizations and service
providers with relevant expertise in regard to the development of such plan.
§ 30-106 Community recovery plan.
The commissioner shall develop or update, no later than December first, two
thousand thirteen, a community recovery plan to be utilized before, during and
after coastal storms and other severe weather and natural disaster events. Such
plan shall specify steps that the office, along with relevant agencies and
other partners, shall take in preparation for, during and immediately after
such events. Such plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following
features, provided that nothing herein shall be construed to interfere with the
ability of agencies responding to an emergency to implement plans, modify
plans, or take steps not described in any written plan, in a manner appropriate
to circumstances particular to that emergency event:
   a.   the establishment of community recovery directors and deputy recovery
directors or other such similar positions for each of the five boroughs, where
appropriate for the geographic impact of the emergency event, including:
      (1)   the criteria for how such directors, deputies or other such similar
positions are chosen; and
      (2)   a description of the basic duties and responsibilities of such
directors, deputies or other such similar positions including, but not limited
to: the timing of deployment in the field following such events; how such
director and deputies or other such similar positions will be responsible to
act as the main points of contact for providing general services and fulfilling
the most critical needs of individuals in impacted areas; how such director,
deputies or other such similar positions will work with federal and state
representatives to assist impacted individuals with access to emergency
disaster benefits; and how such director, deputies or other such similar
positions will work with community based organizations, service providers and
volunteers in recovery assistance operations;
   b.   a description of ways to leverage the participation of community based
organizations, service providers, and volunteers with the goal of commencing a
unified recovery assistance operation as rapidly as possible;
   c.   a description of ways to leverage federal and state resources in an
expedited manner to provide that resources from all levels of government become
available as soon as practicable after such events take place;
   d.   the creation of a uniform information sharing and distribution plan to
be used by each community recovery director to properly inform residents,
elected officials and the press about the services available through the
community recovery director and his or her team on the ground, and ways to
contact community recovery personnel;
   e.   the establishment of field recovery offices in or near affected
communities as soon as practicable after such events take place;
   f.   a description of how the administrative and functional items necessary
for immediate and successful operation of field recovery offices will be
established; and
   g.   an information dissemination strategy that identifies and utilizes
major hubs and distribution centers, including partnering with non-city
distribution sites, to share information about services available to clients,
elected officials, and press, and that requires that to the extent practicable,
all public communications, written or otherwise, are available in the most
commonly spoken languages of affected communities.
§ 30-107 Small business and non-profit organization recovery plan.
   a.   (1)   The commissioner, in consultation with the commissioner of small
business services and other government or private organizations having
expertise in non-profit organization and insurance matters, shall develop or
update no later than December first, two thousand thirteen, a small business
and non-profit organization recovery plan to be utilized after coastal storms
and other severe weather and natural disaster events.
      (2)   In developing such plan, the department of small business services
shall, in consultation with other city agencies, chambers of commerce, or other
private organizations having expertise in such matters, work with small
business owners and non-profit organizations throughout New York city to
identify critical resources necessary for the continued functioning of such
small businesses and non-profit organizations during and after such events.
      (3)   The plan developed or updated in accordance with this section shall
include but need not be limited to the following features, provided that
nothing herein shall be construed to interfere with the ability of agencies
responding to an emergency to implement plans, modify plans, or take steps not
described in any written plan, in a manner appropriate to circumstances
particular to that emergency: (i) an evaluation of the potential impact of
disruptions on small businesses and non-profit organizations as a result of
such events, including a mechanism to conduct an impact analysis for major
categories of small businesses and non-profit organizations, as determined by
the commissioner of small business services, in order to identify disruptions
unique to each such category, and the implementation of measures to prevent or
mitigate such disruptions and to support recovery of the small business and
non-profit sectors; (ii) the establishment of a voluntary database of small
businesses and non-profit organizations, including but not limited to utilizing
any existing database of small businesses and non-profit organizations
maintained by the department of small business services, to provide that such
businesses and organizations receive alerts regarding such events, recovery
assistance, and other relevant information and to conduct outreach with such
small businesses and non-profit organizations to encourage their registration
in such database; (iii) conducting a survey of small business owners and non-
profit organizations after such events to identify resources necessary for
recovery, which shall include but not be limited to an assessment of small
businesses such as whether a business is open, closed or partially in
operation, damage to business facilities, lost revenues, the number of
employees affected and whether there is a plan for employees to return to such
business if such employees are unable to work, whether additional workers are
needed or hired to assist with recovery efforts, a description of the type of
assistance necessary for recovery, the type and amount of insurance that such
business has, and whether such business has filed insurance claims and the
status of such claims; (iv) strategies to inform such small businesses and non-
profit organizations about how to obtain such resources before, during and
after such events; and (v) coordination with non-profit organizations that are
capable of assisting small business owners with loan and grant applications,
and business counseling services to facilitate and expedite recovery.
   b.   To the extent practicable, all public communications, written or
otherwise, with small businesses and non-profit organizations as set forth in
this section, shall be available in the most commonly spoken languages of
affected communities.
§ 30-108 Traffic management plan.
The commissioner shall develop or update, no later than December first, two
thousand thirteen, a traffic management plan in consultation with other city
agencies and relevant governmental entities, to be utilized during and after
coastal storms and other severe weather and natural disaster events where such
events severely impact automotive, subway, and/or commuter train transportation
in the city of New York. Such plan shall include but not be limited to the
following features, provided that nothing herein shall be construed to
interfere with the ability of agencies responding to an emergency to implement
plans, modify plans, or take steps not described in any written plan, in a
manner appropriate to circumstances particular to that emergency:
   a.   the installation of back-up power capability, including but not limited
to the consideration of the effectiveness of installing solar power and other
alternative energy sources with respect to street lights and traffic control
signals to keep the roadway network functioning to the maximum possible extent
during power outages;
   b.   alternative transportation options provided by governmental and/or
private entities to be used in the event of subway service and/or major roadway
shutdowns, including but not limited to expanded bus and ferry service;
   c.   alternative bus routing, including but not limited to criteria for the
closing of streets to all traffic except buses;
   d.   the expanded use of vehicles licensed by the taxi and limousine
commission;
   e.   some accessible transportation options for persons with special needs;
   f.   closing or partially closing certain streets or designating that one or
more lanes of traffic on such streets are closed to traffic except for
emergency vehicles and/or vehicles driven by certain individuals involved in
rescue, recovery and clean-up operations;
   g.   where appropriate, recommending to the appropriate state transportation
authorities the elimination or reduction of fares on buses, subways and
ferries; and
   h.   a mechanism to provide that, to the extent practicable, all public
communications, written or otherwise, are available in the most commonly spoken
languages of affected communities.
§ 30-109 Fuel management plan.
The commissioner shall develop or update, no later than December first, two
thousand thirteen, a fuel management plan in consultation with other city
agencies and other relevant governmental entities, to be utilized during and
after coastal storms and other severe weather and natural disaster events where
such events may disrupt or have disrupted the fuel supply in the city of New
York. Such plan shall include but not be limited to the following features,
provided that nothing herein shall be construed to interfere with the ability
of agencies responding to an emergency to implement plans, modify plans, or
take steps not described in any written plan, in a manner appropriate to
circumstances particular to that emergency:
   a.   the procedures and criteria for determining when a fuel shortage exists
and for rationing of fuel in the event of a fuel shortage in the city of New
York;
   b.   the criteria for determining the amount of fuel reserves in the city of
New York that should be maintained and for what priority purposes;
   c.   the establishment and maintenance of lines of communication between the
city and the industries that provide fuel to the city of New York;
   d.   the prioritization of fuel access for persons involved in rescue,
recovery and clean-up operations, including but not limited to emergency
services and critical health, public safety and sanitation personnel;
   e.   a process for assessing transportation routes to maximize the delivery
of fuel within the city of New York; and
   f.   a mechanism to provide that, to the extent practicable, all public
communications, written or otherwise, are available in the most commonly spoken
languages of affected communities.
§ 30-110 Special medical needs shelters.
The commissioner, in consultation with relevant federal, state and local
agencies, shall develop or update a plan no later than December first, two
thousand thirteen for the tracking of persons in special medical needs shelters
established as a result of coastal storms and other severe weather and natural
disaster events. Such plan shall include but not be limited to the following
features, provided that nothing herein shall be construed to interfere with the
ability of agencies responding to an emergency to implement plans, modify
plans, or take steps not described in any written plan, in a manner appropriate
to circumstances particular to that emergency:
   a.   a mechanism to adequately track persons who enter or exit a special
medical needs shelter;
   b.   a mechanism for the dissemination of bracelets or other wearable
identification devices to be used on a voluntary basis by any person entering a
special medical needs shelter if such device has not been provided by the
state, which shall include to the extent permitted by state and federal law
such person's name, address, emergency contact information, and information
provided regarding the medical needs of such person, or an identification
number or other identifier that will enable the shelter operator to locate such
information;
   c.   a mechanism to track the medical needs of any person using a special
medical needs shelter if such mechanism has not been provided by the state and
to the extent information regarding such medical needs is available, including
but not limited to needed medications;
   d.   a mechanism for enabling persons who use special medical needs shelters
and who do not object to disclosure of their location to be contacted by their
family members and guardians, including the establishment of a designated point
of contact for such information and a description of how such mechanism will be
publicized; and
   e.   a mechanism for consulting community based organizations and service
providers with relevant expertise, including but not limited to those
representing the interests of individuals with special medical needs, in regard
to the development of such plan.
§ 30-111 Plan for outreach and recovery to vulnerable and homebound
individuals.
The commissioner, in consultation with relevant federal, state and local
agencies, shall develop or update, no later than December first, two thousand
thirteen, an outreach and recovery plan to assist vulnerable and homebound
individuals before, during and after coastal storms and other severe weather
and natural disaster events. Such plan shall include but not be limited to the
following features, provided that nothing herein shall be construed to
interfere with the ability of agencies responding to an emergency to implement
plans, modify plans, or take steps not described in any written plan, in a
manner appropriate to circumstances particular to that emergency:
   a.   a description of how the office will identify, conduct outreach to,
communicate with, and otherwise assist vulnerable and homebound individuals
before, during and after the impact of such events;
   b.   the development of a mechanism for utilizing lists of homebound and
vulnerable individuals, to the extent consistent with applicable
confidentiality requirements, which shall include: (1) the use of existing
lists of such individuals maintained by community based organizations, service
providers and relevant agencies, including but not limited to the department
for the aging, the department of health and mental hygiene, the department of
social services/human resources administration, and the New York city housing
authority; (2) the office's Advance Warning System or successor system; and (3)
a process whereby vulnerable and homebound individuals receive information
about how to request that they be included in such existing lists or system;
   c.   a description of how the office will coordinate with relevant agencies,
community based organizations and service providers to assist such individuals
before, during and after the impact of such events;
   d.   the creation of a Door-to-Door Task Force that will be responsible for
developing and implementing a strategy to locate and assist vulnerable and
homebound individuals, provide such individuals with information, and assist
with any recovery efforts that take place after such events, including the
delivery of necessary supplies and services;
   e.   a description of how information, supplies, services, and
transportation will be made available to such individuals to facilitate the
relocation of such individuals if necessary;
   f.   a mechanism to provide that, to the extent practicable, all public
communications, written or otherwise, are available in the most commonly spoken
languages of affected communities; and
   g.   a mechanism for consulting community based organizations and service
providers with relevant expertise, including but not limited to those
representing the interests of homebound and vulnerable individuals, in regard
to the development of such plan.
§ 30-112 Emergency management plan reporting and review.
   a.   The commissioner shall provide to the city council a copy of any plan
prepared by the New York city office of emergency management for the purpose of
responding to coastal storms and other severe weather and natural disaster
events, including but not limited to any plans created or updated in accordance
with sections
30-104 through
30-111 of this chapter. The commissioner shall also provide the city council
with updated versions of such plans within sixty days of plan revisions.
   b.   The commissioner shall assess any plan referenced in subdivision a of
this section whenever such plan is activated. Such assessment shall consider
the reports and recommendations issued by any task force or commission
following such activation. The commissioner shall report to the city council
any subsequent changes to such plan and provide a copy of such updated plan to
the city council, no later than sixty days after such assessment is completed.
The commissioner shall also assess any such plan at least once every two years,
whether or not such plan has been activated, and shall report to the city
council any subsequent changes to such plan and provide a copy of such updated
plan to the city council no later than sixty days after such assessment is
completed.
   c.   Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the commissioner shall
not be required to disclose to the council portions of plans or to report
changes made to plans where disclosure of such information could compromise the
safety of the public.
§ 30-113 Weather emergencies and prolonged utility outage preparedness
recommendations for residential and commercial buildings.
   a.   Coordinating with relevant agencies including the department of
buildings, the department of housing preservation and development, and the fire
department, the commissioner shall compile recommendations for how residential
and commercial property owners may prepare for and communicate certain
information to the tenants of such buildings in the event of a weather
emergency, a natural disaster event or a utility outage which is expected to
last for more than twenty-four hours. Such recommendations shall include, but
not be limited to:
      1.   Information on determining the property's flood zone and evacuation
zone;
      2.   The protective measures the building owner may provide or install to
protect against flooding or other damage;
      3.   General advice on securing items appended to the building, such as
window air conditioning units, patio furniture flower boxes, windows, doors and
other loose items, during a weather emergency or natural disaster event;
      4.   General advice for buildings in flood zones on the use of electrical
and mechanical equipment when there is a flood risk;
      5.   The types of options available to the property owner to rent
equipment after a weather emergency, a natural disaster event or pending the
restoration of utility services;
      6.   The methods that the property owner may use to communicate with
tenants during and after a weather emergency, a natural disaster event or a
utility outage which is expected to last for more than twenty-four hours and
suggestions for communicating to tenants relevant building contacts for
emergencies; and
      7.   The contact information for relevant city agencies to determine
evacuation guidelines or learn other suggestions on how to protect persons and
property during a weather emergency, a natural disaster event or a utility
outage which is expected to last for more than twenty-four hours.
§ 30-114 Localized emergency preparedness materials.
The commissioner shall develop and disseminate localized emergency preparedness
materials for communities in which there is a risk of evacuation due to coastal
storms or hurricanes to increase public awareness as to the appropriate
responses by members of the public to such risk and of the resources available
during such coastal storm or hurricane within and near such communities. Such
materials shall:
   a.   be limited to information relevant to that community, as identified by
zip code or contiguous zip codes in a geographic area;
   b.   identify any local evacuation zones, evacuation centers or other such
geographic information relevant to an evacuation;
   c.   identify and provide contact information for any local patrol precinct
or firehouse;
   d.   at the discretion of the commissioner, identify and provide contact
information for any charitable organization or not-for-profit organization that
the commissioner identifies as having the potential to provide services or
materials that may be beneficial to such community after a coastal storm or
hurricane;
   e.   provide any other information deemed relevant by the commissioner; and
   f.   be distributed within communities at risk of evacuation due to coastal
storms or hurricanes in the top ten most commonly spoken languages within each
such community as determined by the commissioner in consultation with the
department of city planning, and be made available online.
(L.L. 2015/017, 3/3/2015, eff. 6/1/2015)
§ 30-115 Emergency notifications.
   a.   Any emergency alert originated by a city office or city agency that is
issued through a commercial mobile service alert system established pursuant to
47 U.S.C. § 1201 shall, to the extent practicable and to the extent permissible
under regulations enacted pursuant to such section, be issued in no fewer than
the two most commonly spoken languages within the area covered by the emergency
alert as determined by the commissioner in consultation with the department of
city planning, provided that this subdivision does not require the issuance of
an emergency alert in a language if exigent circumstances prohibit the issuance
of an alert in such language.
   b.   Any emergency notification system operated and controlled by the office
of emergency management for the purposes of aggregating information obtained
from other offices or agencies to inform the public about emergencies or
disruptive events through e-mail, text, phone, social media platform, or
internet-based feed shall offer each notification in no fewer than the seven
most commonly spoken languages within the city as determined by the
commissioner in consultation with the department of city planning, provided
that this requirement shall not delay or prohibit the immediate issuance of
notifications in any individual language. Notifications shall be separated into
distinct messages in separate feeds for each language. A general version of
each notification may be used when a real-time translation is unavailable,
provided that priority shall be placed upon making notifications available with
the greatest specificity possible. Any dissemination limitation applicable to
an English language notification may be applied to its equivalent notification
in another language. If no potential recipient is registered for a specific
language, then a notification need not be disseminated in that language.
(L.L. 2017/031, 3/18/2017, eff. 3/18/2019)
§ 30-116 Cooling center program.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Cooling center. The term “cooling center” means a building that is air-
conditioned where members of the public may seek relief from heat during a
heat-related emergency, provided the owner or operator of such building has
provided consent.
      Heat index. The term “heat index” means a measurement of the combined air
temperature and relative humidity that estimates the human-perceived equivalent
temperature.
      Heat vulnerability index. The term “heat vulnerability index” means a
tool used by the department of health and mental hygiene to identify
neighborhoods where residents have an increased risk of negative impacts from
heat-related emergencies or other extreme heat events, considering
environmental and social factors such as surface temperatures, access to green
spaces, and air-conditioned buildings.
      Heat-related emergency. The term “heat-related emergency” means an
occurrence of high temperatures or other circumstances during which the
national weather service issues a warning or alert relating to extreme heat, or
during which the commissioner of health and mental hygiene determines that the
level of the heat index is unsafe or unhealthy for vulnerable populations.
      Urban heat island effect. The term “urban heat island effect” means the
increase in urban air temperature as compared to surrounding suburban and rural
temperature.
      Vulnerable population. The term “vulnerable population” means any group
of persons at a greater risk of harm from a heat-related emergency than a
person in the general population, as determined by the commissioner of health
and mental hygiene in consideration of factors including, but not limited to,
the heat vulnerability index.
   b.   The commissioner, in consultation with the commissioner of health and
mental hygiene, shall designate cooling centers when there is a heat-related
emergency in the city. A cooling center designated pursuant to this section
shall contain seating, provide access to restrooms and drinking water at no
cost to the public, and shall be staffed by no less than 1 natural person
during hours such cooling center is open to the public. In determining the
locations of such centers, the commissioner shall consider factors including,
but not limited to, areas in which vulnerable populations reside and the heat
vulnerability index. Where practicable, the commissioner, in consultation with
the commissioner of health and mental hygiene, shall designate no less than 7
cooling centers per 100,000 residents.
   c.   The commissioner shall post on the website of the office any health
alerts issued by the office or the department of health and mental hygiene
during a heat-related emergency, and the location and hours of operation of any
cooling center open during such heat-related emergency. The commissioner shall
post such information on or before May 1 of each year, and make such
information available in the designated citywide languages, as defined in
section
23-1101.
   d.   Comprehensive cooling and communication plan. On or before May 15,
2026, the commissioner, in consultation with the commissioner of health and
mental hygiene, the director of long-term planning and sustainability, and any
other office or agency the commissioner deems relevant, shall submit to the
speaker of the council and make available to the public on the city’s website a
plan describing how the city will provide individuals with information on the
dangers of heat exposure, access to cooling, including cooling centers
designated pursuant to this section, and how vulnerable populations can stay
cool during heat-related emergencies. The commissioner shall update such plan
by no later than May 15 of each year. Such plan shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
      1.   a mechanism to assess the city’s cooling needs generally and the
cooling needs of vulnerable populations during heat-related emergencies;
      2.   a description of how the commissioner and the commissioner of health
and mental hygiene will communicate to residents the dangers of heat exposure,
including information about the urban heat island effect, the heat index, heat-
related emergencies and other relevant information pursuant to this section;
      3.   a description of the temperature, heat index and other conditions
under which the city will make cooling centers and other heat relief mechanisms
available to the public;
      4.   information regarding access to cooling centers designated pursuant
to this section and other heat relief mechanisms including: (a) whether such
cooling centers can be safely opened; (b) the feasibility of infection and
disease control in such centers, including a description of any necessary
procedures to promote infection and disease control and any appropriate
cleaning, if applicable; (c) a list of potential locations of cooling centers
by street address, cross streets, and ZIP code; (d) the potential hours of
operations, maximum capacity, and accessibility for individuals with
disabilities for each such center; (e) the link to the cooling center finder
which also includes notation of which cooling centers are accessible; and (f)
other citywide operational strategies for cooling such as spray caps and
homeless outreach;
      5.   a description of the public education campaign required by
subdivision e of this section;
      6.   if cooling centers are not expected to be open or if they will be
insufficient to serve the needs of vulnerable populations, a description of how
the city will provide such vulnerable populations with cooling during a heat-
related emergency, including but not limited to the direct provision of, and
support for, residential cooling mechanisms, and a description of how the
commissioner will communicate this information to vulnerable populations;
      7.   a description of how the commissioner and the commissioner of health
and mental hygiene, or any other office or agency, will provide public
communications, written or otherwise, in the designated citywide languages, as
defined in section
23-1101, and whether communications in any additional languages are needed
based on the demographics of current or anticipated vulnerable populations;
      8.   an evaluation of the measures taken to reduce the impact of heat-
related emergencies and the number of heat-related deaths during the previous
summer seasons and a description of the measures the commissioner and the
commissioner of health and mental hygiene will take to further reduce the
impact of heat-related emergencies and the number of heat-related deaths in the
upcoming summer season; and
      9.   a plan for office buildings to set thermostats at or above a
specific temperature to reduce stress on the electric grid, including a
description of the heat conditions during which such a plan would be
recommended, a recommendation on the temperature or temperatures to which such
thermostats should be set, and a description of how to promote compliance with
such plan when recommended.
   e.   Public education and outreach campaign. The office, in consultation
with the department of health and mental hygiene, shall conduct a public
education and outreach campaign on heat-related emergencies and strategies for
preventing health risks associated with heat-related emergencies. Such public
education and outreach campaign shall include, but need not be limited to,
encouraging vulnerable populations to limit exposure to heat and to remain
inside a building that is air-conditioned during heat-related emergencies, and
conducting outreach in neighborhoods or areas of the city where vulnerable
populations reside. Such public education and outreach campaign shall provide
information about how to submit feedback about a cooling center, including any
obstacles to accessing such cooling center.
   f.   The office shall provide an owner or operator of a building designated
as a cooling center with a flyer or other written notice stating that such
building is a cooling center and direct or request the owner or operator to
post such flyer or notice near an entrance to such cooling center during a
heat-related emergency. Such flyer or other written notice shall be provided in
the designated citywide languages, as defined in section
23-1101, and shall include information about how to submit feedback about a
cooling center, including any obstacles to accessing such cooling center.
   g.   On or before December 31, 2026, and on or before December 31 of each
year thereafter, the department shall submit a report to the speaker of the
council and the mayor about the efforts of the office to inform the public
about the availability of and benefits provided by cooling centers during the
prior year. Such report shall include, but need not be limited to, the
following information:
      1.   The median number of cooling centers made available during any heat-
related emergency that occurred during the prior year;
      2.   A discussion of any outreach to the public by the office or the
department of health and mental hygiene regarding health hazards posed by heat-
related emergencies and the need to limit exposure to heat;
      3.   A description of any initiatives of the office or the department of
health and mental hygiene to inform the public about the availability of
cooling centers or other options for avoiding heat;
      4.   A discussion of public awareness of the availability of cooling
centers, and any recommendations for new programs or strategies to improve
public outreach and the utilization of cooling centers;
      5.   Recommendations for increasing hours of operation of cooling centers
during the evening and on weekends; and
      6.   An esimate of any additional resources needed to implement any such
recommendations, and a description of any obstacles to implementing such
recommendations.
(L.L. 2020/085, 8/28/2020, eff. 8/28/2020; Am. L.L. 2025/128, 9/13/2025, eff.
11/12/2025)
§ 30-117 Flash flood preparedness outreach and evacuation guidance.
   a.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms have
the following meanings:
      Basement. The term “basement” means a story partly below the grade plane
and having less than one-half its clear height (measured from finished floor to
finished ceiling) below the grade plane.
      Cellar. The term “cellar” means a portion of a building that is partly or
wholly underground, and having one-half or more of its clear height (measured
from finished floor to finished ceiling) below the grade plane.
      Cellar or basement dwelling. The term “cellar or basement dwelling” means
a room or space used for sleeping that is located at the basement or cellar
level of a residential building.
      Flash flood. The term “flash flood” means flooding that begins within 6
hours, and often within 3 hours, of heavy rainfall.
   b.   The office shall develop guidance for facilitating safe evacuation
before flash flood emergencies. Such guidance shall include but need not be
limited to: (i) information on how residents may avoid the dangers of flash
flooding events; (ii) guidance on how and when to safely evacuate a location
prone to flash flooding prior to a flash flood event, and (iii) existing public
or private facilities suitable for individuals seeking refuge in anticipation
of a flash flood event. Such guidance shall be included in the office’s annual
report within one year of the enactment of the local law that added this
section.
   c.   The commissioner shall establish an outreach program to increase
registration for Notify NYC alerts and to coordinate efforts across agencies to
increase public awareness regarding the appropriate responses by members of the
public to flash flood risks, including evacuation planning established pursuant
to subdivision b of this section. Such program shall include the distribution
of emergency preparedness materials and information in-person, and distribution
through mass mail, guidance for building and property owners, and any other
means the commissioner deems appropriate for locations prone to flash floods.
   d.   The program established by subdivision c of this section shall target
locations based on but not limited to the following factors:
      1.   A history of flash flood events; or
      2.   The prevalence of basement or cellar dwellings, to the extent such
information is available.
   e.   Within 1 year of the enactment of the local law that added this
section, and annually thereafter, the office shall include in their annual
report the details of the outreach program established by subdivision c,
including the locations selected for outreach.
(L.L. 2025/060, 5/10/2025, eff. 9/7/2025)
