Title 34: Department of Transportation
Chapter 1: Ferry Terminals and Vessels
§ 1-01 Definitions.
Commissioner. "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Transportation or his/
her designee, or any successor in function to the Commissioner of any successor
agency thereof.
Department. "Department" means the Department of Transportation of the City of
New York and any successor agency thereof.
Ferry. "Ferry" means any vessel that transports passengers or vehicles pursuant
to a regular schedule in either direction between the Borough of Manhattan and
the Borough of Staten Island and is owned and operated by the City of New York.
Manager. "Manager," with respect to the terminals (as defined herein), means
the Chief Operating Officer, Executive Director of Safety and Security,
Director of Terminal Operations, Director of Ferry Operations, Facility
Security Officer, Ferry Terminal Manager, Safety Manager, Security Inspector
and Ferry Terminal Supervisor as designated by the Department to exercise the
powers and functions vested in him/her by these rules in either terminal, and
his/her duly designated representatives, and, with respect to the ferries,
means the Captain designated by the Department of Transportation to exercise
the powers and functions vested in him/her by these rules and general maritime
law aboard any ferry, and his/her duly designated representatives.
Motor vehicle. "Motor vehicle" means any automobile, truck, bus, motorcycle,
moped, or other vehicle that is propelled by any power other than muscular
power.
Owner. "Owner" means any person owning, operating, or having the use of a
vehicle (as defined in § 159 of the New York Vehicle and Traffic Law), bicycle
or any other personal property.
Permission. "Permission" means permission or authorization granted by the
Commissioner or Manager except where otherwise specifically provided.
Permit. "Permit" means, unless otherwise herein provided, any written
authorization issued by or under the authority of the Commissioner or Manager
for a specialized privilege, permitting the performance of a specified act or
acts in the terminals or on the ferries.
Person. "Person" means any natural person, corporation, society, organization,
incorporated or unincorporated association, form, or partnership, and shall
include any assignee, receiver, trustee, executor, administrator or similar
representative appointed by a court, and shall mean the United States of
America or any political subdivision thereof, or any foreign government or
political subdivision thereof.
Person with a Disability. A person with a disability is an individual with a
physical or mental impairment that, on a permanent or temporary basis,
substantially limits one or more major life activities, has a record of such an
impairment, or is regarded as having such an impairment.
Personal audio device. "Personal audio device" means a portable sound
reproduction device as normally and customarily used for personal purposes,
including but not limited to a personal radio, phonograph, television receiver,
tape recorder, cassette player, compact disc player, or mp3 player.
Police officer. "Police officer" means any member of the Police Department of
the City of New York and any person designated as a peace officer pursuant to
section 2.10 of the New York State Criminal Procedure Law when acting pursuant
to his/her special duty in or at the terminals or on the ferries.
Rule. "Rule" means, unless otherwise herein provided, any rule promulgated
pursuant to Section 2903(c) of the Charter and in compliance with the
requirements of Chapter 45 of the Charter.
Service animal. A "service animal" is any animal that is specifically trained
to provide assistance to a person with a disability.
Sound reproduction device. "Sound reproduction device" means any device
intended primarily for the production or reproduction of sound, including, but
not limited to, any radio receiver, phonograph, television receiver, musical
instrument, tape recorder, or electronic sound amplifying system.
Storage. "Storage" means the use of space on the ferries or in the ferry
terminals to keep materials or possessions.
Terminals. "Terminals," used in the plural, includes both the ferry terminal
located at Whitehall Street in the Borough of Manhattan and the ferry terminal
located at St. George in the Borough of Staten Island. "Terminals" shall also
include the other ferry terminals and landings owned and/or operated by the
Department. Each terminal may also be referred to herein by its specific
location, in which case "terminal" shall mean only the terminal referred to.
Each terminal may have a different Manager. "Terminal" includes areas
approaching the ferry slips and all other city-owned real property upon which
the terminal building is situated, and the surrounding grounds thereof as
designated on the city map.
§ 1-02 Prohibited Uses.
   (a)   Gambling prohibited. No person shall gamble or conduct or engage in
any game of chance in the terminals or on the ferries unless such game of
chance is permitted by local, state or federal law and has been approved by the
Commissioner.
   (b)   Defacing or damaging terminals or ferries or property therein
prohibited. No person shall deface, mark, break, or otherwise damage any part
of the terminals or ferries or any property thereat. No person shall remove,
alter or deface any barricade, fence or sign in the terminals or on the
ferries.
   (c)   Creation of obnoxious odors, noxious gases, smoke or fumes prohibited.
No person shall create, or permit any vehicle or machine of which he/she is in
charge to create obnoxious odors, noxious gases, or excessive smoke or fumes in
the terminals or on the ferries.
   (d)   Bathing prohibited. No person shall bathe, shower, shave, launder or
change clothes or remain undressed in any public restroom, sink, washroom or
any other area in the terminals or on the ferries.
   (e)   Smoking or carrying lighted cigars, cigarettes, pipes, etc. in certain
areas prohibited. No person shall smoke or carry lighted cigars, cigarettes,
pipes, matches or any naked flame in areas of the terminals or ferries where
smoking is prohibited by the Department or by law, ordinance, rules or
regulations of the United States government, the State of New York or the City
of New York.
   (f)   Noxious conduct. No person shall urinate or defecate in any part of
the terminals or ferries other than in a urinal or toilet intended for that
purpose. No person shall spit upon the public surfaces of the terminals or
ferries including the floors and furniture.
   (g)   Lying down prohibited; sitting restricted. No person shall lie down in
any place, including benches or seating facilities, within the terminals or on
the ferries. No person shall be seated in the terminals or on the ferries
except upon seating facilities provided for that purpose. No person shall
occupy more than one seat. No person shall place personal belongings on seating
facilities so as to interfere with their use by other persons.
   (h)   No skateboarding, rollerskating, rollerblading or bicycle riding. No
person shall skateboard, roller skate, roller blade or ride a bicycle, scooter
or any other vehicle or device except a wheelchair or other similar device used
to assist a person with a disability and/or required for transit on or through
any part of the terminals or ferries. Bicycles and non-motorized scooters must
be walked through the terminals and ferries.
   (i)   Noise. No person shall make, continue, cause or permit to be made or
continued any unreasonable noise in the terminals or on the ferries.
Unreasonable noise shall mean any excessive or unusually loud sound that
disturbs the peace, comfort or repose of a reasonable person of normal
sensitivities, injures or endangers the health or safety of a reasonable person
of normal sensitivities, or which causes injury to plant or animal life, or
damage to property or business. Unreasonable noise shall include, but shall not
be limited to sound that exceeds the following prohibited noise levels:
      (1)   Sound attributable to the source measured at a level of 7dB(A) or
more above the ambient sound level at or after 10:00 p.m. and before 7:00 a.m.,
as measured at any point within a receiving property, as defined in § 24-203 of
the Administrative Code of the City of New York, or as measured at a distance
of 15 feet or more from the source in a terminal or on a ferry.
      (2)   Sound attributable to the source measured at a level of 10dB(A) or
more above the ambient sound level at or after 7:00 a.m. and before 10:00 p.m.,
as measured at any point within a receiving property, as defined in § 24-203 of
the Administrative Code of the City of New York, or as measured at a distance
of 15 feet or more from the source in a terminal or on a ferry.
      (3)   Sound attributable to a personal audio device with personal
earphones such that sound from such earphones is plainly audible to another
individual at a distance of five feet or more from the source.
   (j)   Disorderly behavior. No person shall engage in disorderly behavior in
the terminals or on the ferries, such as, but not limited to the following:
      (1)   fighting or assaulting any person; or
      (2)   interfering with, encumbering, obstructing or rendering dangerous
any part of the ferry or terminal; or
      (3)   obstructing pedestrian or vehicular traffic; or
      (4)   climbing upon any wall, fence, shelter or any structure not
specifically intended for climbing purposes; or
      (5)   engaging in any form of sexual conduct, as that term is defined in
§ 130.00 of the New York State Penal Law; or
      (6)   engaging in a course of conduct or committing acts that endanger
the safety of others; or
      (7)   engaging in any other course of conduct or committing acts
disruptive to crew members, which obstructs or impairs their ability to carry
out their duties; or
      (8)   engaging in any other course of conduct or committing acts against
other passengers, which disturbs the peace, comfort or repose of a reasonable
person of normal sensitivities, injures or endangers the health or safety of a
reasonable person of normal sensitivities; or which causes injury to plant or
animal life, or damage to property or business.
   (k)   Controlled substances. No person shall possess, distribute, sell or
solicit or consume any controlled substance or marihuana, as those terms are
defined in § 220.00 of the New York State Penal Law, on any ferry or in any
terminal.
   (l)   Loitering. No person shall engage in loitering as defined in §§ 240.36
or 240.37 or subdivisions 2,4, 5 or 6 of § 240.35 of the New York State Penal
Law on any ferry or in any terminal.
   (m)   Unlawful exposure. No person shall appear in public on any ferry or in
any terminal in such a manner that his/her genitalia are unclothed or exposed.
   (n)   Fishing. No person shall fish from any ferry or terminal.
§ 1-03 Regulated Uses.
   (a)   Permission to use terminals and ferries is conditional. Any permission
granted by the Department directly or indirectly, expressly or by implication,
to any person to enter upon or use the terminals or ferries, or any part
thereof, is conditioned upon acceptance of and compliance with this chapter, as
from time to time may be amended, and entry upon or into the terminals or
ferries by any person shall be deemed to constitute an agreement by such person
to comply with such rules; provided, further, that such rules shall apply to
premises or spaces occupied or used under the provisions of a written agreement
made with the Department unless provision is made therein that such rules do
not apply.
   (b)   Permits.
      (1)   When any provision of this section requires a permit as a condition
to the performance of an act or activity, no such act or activity shall be
implemented or commenced prior to the receipt of written authorization from the
Commissioner.
      (2)   A permit may be granted upon such terms and conditions as the
Commissioner shall reasonably impose and shall authorize the permitted acts or
activities only insofar as they are performed in strict accordance with the
terms and conditions thereof.
      (3)   Permits shall be applied for on forms prepared and provided by the
Department, which forms shall require such information as the Department may
deem appropriate for the review and evaluation of the permit application.
Applications must be received at least two business days prior to the requested
date of the act or activity.
      (4)   No person shall conduct any activity for which a permit is required
unless:
         (i)   such permit has been issued;
         (ii)   all terms and conditions of such permit have been complied
with; and
         (iii)   the permit is kept on site, so it is available for inspection
by Department employees or a police officer.
      (5)   Upon application, the Commissioner may deny a permit if:
         (i)   an applicant was previously granted a permit and on that prior
occasion, knowingly violated a material term or condition of the permit, these
rules or applicable law;
         (ii)   the date, time, and/or location requested have been previously
allotted; or
         (iii)   the issuance of the permit would cause the existence of a
dangerous condition or a condition that would interfere with operations or
traffic in the terminals or on the ferries.
      (6)   If a permit application is denied, the applicant may, within three
business days of such denial, appeal the determination by written request filed
with the designated appeals officer who may reverse, affirm or modify the
original determination and provide a written explanation of his or her finding.
However, if a permit application is denied three business days or less prior to
the requested date of the act or activity, the applicant shall have one day
from the date such denial is mailed or otherwise delivered to the applicant to
appeal such denial. The Department shall render a decision on such appeal as
soon as is reasonably practicable.
      (7)   The Commissioner may, after giving the permittee reasonable notice
and an opportunity to be heard, revoke or refuse to renew a permit (i) for
failure to comply with the terms and conditions of such permit, these rules or
other applicable law in carrying out the activity for which the permit was
issued; (ii) whenever there has been any false statement or any
misrepresentation as to material fact in the permit application or accompanying
documents upon which the issuance of the permit is based; or (iii) whenever a
permit has been issued in error contrary to paragraph 5 of subdivision b of
this section.
      (8)   The Commissioner may delay or postpone the issuance of any permit
or may temporarily suspend any permit already granted in the event of
emergencies, such as snowstorms, traffic accidents, power failures,
transportation strikes or other conditions which affect the traffic flow in any
of the areas covered by the permit such that conduct of the activities would
create a dangerous condition or would interfere with traffic in the terminals
or on the ferries.
   (c)   Use of terminals or ferries may be denied persons violating laws or
rules. The Manager shall have the authority to deny use of the terminals or
ferries to any individual violating Department rules or laws, ordinances or
regulations of the United States government, the State of New York, or the City
of New York, which relate to conduct in public places or in the terminals or
the ferries.
   (d)   Restricted areas and times. Permission to enter certain areas of the
terminals or ferries is restricted as follows:
      (1)   No person, except a person assigned to duty therein or a police
officer, shall enter, without permission, any area of the terminals or ferries
posted as being restricted to the public. If permission to enter a restricted
area is granted, such permittee shall be monitored and/or escorted at all times
in accordance with the Maritime Transportation Security Act.
      (2)   In the event that portions of the terminals are closed to all
members of the general public, any person shall, when entering or remaining in
such portions of the terminals, exhibit such authorization as shall be
prescribed by the Commissioner. Effective September 25, 2008 and in accordance
with the Maritime Transportation Security Act, all individuals in restricted
areas must display at all times a Transportation Worker Identification
Credential or other authorized identification credential, including those
issued to police officers.
   (e)   Unattended property.
      (1)   No person shall leave any property unattended in the terminals or
on the ferries.
      (2)   Unattended property will be removed and transferred to the Staten
Island Ferry's Lost and Found.
      (3)   Bicycles shall be stowed at the designated bicycle areas. Bicycles
left on racks at the terminal for longer than 48 hours shall be deemed
abandoned and will be removed and may be transferred to the Property Clerk of
the New York City Police Department or other appropriate location.
      (4)   Owners of reclaimed property may be assessed a removal and/or
storage fee.
   (f)   Distribution of commercial printed materials. No person shall, for
commercial purposes, post, distribute or display signs, advertisements,
circulars or printed or written material in the terminals or on the ferries
without having been granted a permit by the Commissioner.
   (g)   Distribution of noncommercial printed material and carrying of
placards. No person shall engage in the noncommercial distribution of leaflets,
the setting up of card tables to aid in that distribution, the carrying of
placards or the posting or displaying of noncommercial signs in the terminals
or on the ferries without having been granted a permit by the Commissioner. No
person shall distribute leaflets or other materials by leaving them unattended
in the terminals or on the ferries.
   (h)   Distribution of food, clothing, packages, or other non-printed items.
No person shall engage in the distribution of any food, clothing, packages, or
any other non-printed items, or in the setting up of card tables to aid in that
distribution in the terminals or on the ferries without having been granted a
permit by the Commissioner. No person shall distribute such items by leaving
them unattended in the terminals or on the ferries.
   (i)   Sale of merchandise, solicitation of trade, entertainment or
solicitation of contributions.
      (1)   No person, unless duly authorized by the Commissioner shall, in or
upon any area, platform, stairway, waiting room, appurtenance, or any other
area of the terminals or ferries,
         (i)   sell or offer for sale any article of merchandise, or
         (ii)   solicit any business, service or trade, including the carrying
of baggage for hire or the shining of shoes.
      (2)   No person shall engage in (i) the entertainment of persons by
singing, dancing or playing any musical instrument or (ii) the solicitation of
contributions in the terminals or on the ferries without having been granted a
permit by the Commissioner.
   (j)   Assemblies, meetings, exhibitions.
      (1)   No person shall hold or sponsor any assembly, meeting, exhibition
or other event without written approval from the Commissioner or his/her
designee. A gathering of 10 or more people shall constitute an assembly or
meeting.
      (2)   No person shall erect any structure, stand, booth, platform or
exhibit in connection with any assembly, meeting, exhibition or other event
without written approval from the Commissioner or his/her designee.
   (k)   Refuse to be deposited in appropriate receptacles. No person shall
throw, discharge or deposit trash, garbage, waste, oil or other petroleum
products or any other waste material into the harbor or into or upon any
portion of the terminals or ferries except by depositing such material in
receptacles provided therefor. The placement of all such receptacles shall be
subject to the approval of the Manager. No person shall remove refuse or other
material from such receptacles except as authorized by the Manager.
   (l)   Animals barred. No person, except a police officer or another person
authorized by the Manager, shall enter the terminals or ferries with any animal
except a service animal or an animal properly restrained for transport subject
to the discretion of the Manager. No person shall feed any animal, including
unconfined squirrels and birds, within the terminals or on any ferry.
   (m)   Passage through boarding doors restricted. No person shall pass
through the boarding doors to the ferries except:
      (1)   persons employed by or doing business with a concessionaire whose
duties require such passage;
      (2)   authorized representatives of the Department of Transportation;
      (3)   persons having permission;
      (4)   police officers;
      (5)   firefighters and emergency medical technicians employed by the New
York City Fire Department; and
      (6)   passengers immediately prior to boarding a ferry or immediately
after leaving a ferry.
   (n)   Photography or filming.
      (1)   For purposes of this subdivision, "photography or filming" shall
include the taking of photographs; the making of motion pictures; the use and
operation of television cameras, transmitting television equipment, or radio
remotes; or load-ins or load-outs supporting indoor performances.
      (2)   A permit from the Mayor's Office of Film, Theatre and Broadcasting
(MOFTB) and a separate permit from the Commissioner are both required in
circumstances under which a permit from MOFTB is required by its rules.
      (3)   As is the case with photography or filming on City streets,
sidewalks or other pedestrian passageways, a permit is not required in those
instances where a handheld device (with or without a tripod) is used, except
when the use of such handheld device (with or without a tripod) unreasonably
interferes with the use of the ferry terminal or ferry. For purposes of this
subdivision, "unreasonable interference" means the assertion of exclusive use
by any means, including physical or verbal, of an area that consists of a
radius greater than five feet from where the individual engaged in photography
or filming is located. Where such exclusive use is asserted, the individual
engaged in photography or filming shall obtain a permit from the Commissioner.
      (4)   For purposes of this subdivision, standing in a ferry terminal or
on a ferry while using a handheld device (with or without a tripod) and not
otherwise asserting exclusive use by any means, including physical or verbal,
of an area that consists of a radius greater than five feet from where the
individual engaged in photography or filming is located, is not activity that
requires a permit from MOFTB or the Commissioner.
   (o)   Fire. No person shall cook, light a fire or otherwise create a fire in
any part of the terminals or ferries, except as authorized by the Commissioner.
   (p)   Alcoholic beverages. No person shall drink or carry any open alcoholic
beverage in any part of the terminals, except on the premises of a concession
or retail establishment duly licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages if
permitted therein by the concessionaire or leasee. Alcoholic beverages may be
purchased and consumed from the concessionaire aboard a ferry in accordance
with all federal, state and local laws and rules. It shall be a violation of
these rules for any person to enter and/or remain in the terminals and/or
aboard a ferry under the influence of alcohol, to the degree that he or she may
endanger himself or herself, other persons or property, or unreasonably annoy
persons in his or her vicinity.
   (q)   Carrying of firearms or other weapons. No person, shall, without the
permission of the Manager, bring into or carry in the terminals or on the
ferries any firearms or other weapons; provided, however, that this subdivision
shall not apply to police officers and other persons authorized by federal,
state or local law to carry firearms or other weapons.
   (r)   Permission required to bring into or carry explosives, acids,
inflammables, compressed gases, etc. No person shall bring into or carry in the
terminals or on the ferries any explosives, acids, inflammables, compressed
gases or articles or materials having or capable of producing strong offensive
odor, or articles or materials likely to endanger persons or property, except
with permission of the Chief Operating Officer or the Executive Director of
Safety and Security. No person shall bring or cause to be brought into or kept
in the terminals any signal flare or any container filled with or which has
been emptied or partially emptied of oil, gas, petroleum products, paint or
varnish, except with permission of the Chief Operating Officer or the Executive
Director of Safety and Security. Bringing into the terminals or on the ferries
without special permission gasoline or other motor fuel contained in tanks
permanently attached to vehicles and not under pressure shall not be an
infraction of this regulation.
   (s)   Unauthorized interference with or use of terminal or ferry systems or
equipment prohibited. No person shall do or permit to be done anything which
may interfere with the effectiveness or accessibility of any means of escape,
the fire protection system, sprinkler system, drainage system, alarm system,
telephone system, public announcement and intercommunication system, plumbing
system, air-conditioning system, ventilation system, fire hydrants, hoses, fire
extinguishers, or other mechanical system, facility or equipment installed or
located in the terminals or on the ferries; including closed circuit television
cameras and monitors, signs and notices; nor shall any person operate, adjust
or otherwise handle or manipulate, without permission, any of the aforesaid
systems or portions thereof, or any machinery, equipment or other devices
installed or located at the terminals or on the ferries. Tags showing date of
last inspection attached to units of fire extinguishing equipment shall not be
removed therefrom nor shall any person plug a television, radio or other
electrical device into any outlet or connect any device to any utility at or in
the terminals or on the ferries.
   (t)   Storage. Storage of materials or possessions of any kind either on the
ferries or in the ferry terminals is strictly prohibited at all times. Any
materials or possessions stored on the ferries or ferry terminals will be
disposed of promptly. This provision shall not apply to any authorized storage
by a lessee, concessionaire or contractor pursuant to an agreement with the
Department.
   (u)   No sound reproduction devices. Except with prior permission of the
Commissioner, no person shall operate or use any sound reproduction device in
the terminals or on the ferries, other than a personal audio device with
personal earphones such that sound from such earphones is not plainly audible
to another individual at a distance of five feet or more from the source.
   (v)   Use of lighting or sound reproduction equipment. No person shall
without specific authorization from the Commissioner operate or use or cause to
be operated or used any lighting or sound reproduction device for commercial or
business advertising purposes or for the purpose of attracting attention to any
performance, show, sale or display of merchandise, or any business enterprise,
in front or outside of any building, place or premises in the terminals or on
the ferries.
§ 1-04 Vehicles.
No vehicles shall be permitted on the ferries except with permission from the
Chief Operating Officer.
§ 1-05 Elevators, Escalators, and Loading Docks.
   (a)   Freight prohibition. Passenger elevators and escalators may not be
used to carry freight.
   (b)   Causing an elevator or escalator to stop. No unauthorized person shall
cause an elevator or escalator to stop by means of any emergency stopping
device unless continued operation would appear to result in probable injury to
a person or persons. Any such stoppage should be reported immediately to the
Manager.
   (c)   Truck loading docks. Truck loading docks located in the terminals are
designed to accomplish the immediate transfer of merchandise between the
freight elevators and trucks. All persons will confine their use of the docks
to such purpose as directed by the Manager. No storage or holding of
merchandise on the truck loading docks awaiting the arrival of trucks or
awaiting transfer to premises or space at the terminals will be permitted.
§ 1-06 Penalty.
Failure to comply with these rules or the terms or conditions of any permit
issued shall be punishable as provided in the Administrative Code of the City
of New York.
§ 1-07 Boarding.
   (a)   All passengers must board a ferry through the boarding doors on the
ferry's upper level, unless otherwise authorized by this section.
   (b)   Notwithstanding subdivision (a), the following passengers may board a
ferry through the boarding doors on the ferry's lower level:
      (1)   a person instructed to board on the lower level by ferry personnel
or official Department-issued signage;
      (2)   a person with a disability that seriously impairs his or her
mobility who requires the use of a device to assist his or her movement, where
such device is visible to ferry personnel (e.g., a wheelchair or walker); and
      (3)   a person possessing a letter issued pursuant to subdivision (c) of
this section.
   (c)   Lower level boarding access letter.
      (1)   Applicants. The following persons may apply for lower level
boarding access:
         (i)   a person with a disability that seriously impairs his or her
mobility who requires the use of a device to assist his or her movement, where
such device is not visible to ferry personnel (e.g., a pacemaker); and
         (ii)   a person with a disability that seriously impairs his or her
mobility who does not require the use of a device to assist his or her
movement.
      (2)   Applications. An application must be submitted to the Department,
on a form provided by the Department on its website, with certification from a
physician licensed in one of the fifty states that the applicant has a
disability that seriously impairs the applicant's mobility.
         (i)   The application must include the following information:
            (A)   applicant's legal name, address, and telephone number(s);
            (B)   applicant's date of birth; and
            (C)   a government-issued identification card number for the
applicant and its expiration date.
         (ii)   Upon receipt of a completed application, including the
certification, DOT will, within 30 days of receipt, send the applicant a letter
granting lower level boarding access. The letter may be used only by the
applicant.
      (3)   Period of authorization. Any letter issued pursuant to this
subdivision shall be valid for up to two (2) years from the date of issuance.
      (4)   Revocation. The Department will revoke the letter of any person who
abuses any privilege, benefit, or consideration granted by the letter (e.g.,
altering the letter in any way or letting someone other than the applicant use
the letter).
(Added City Record 3/21/2017, eff. 4/20/2017)
Chapter 2: Highway Rules
§ 2-01 Definitions.
Administrative Code. The term "Administrative Code" means the Administrative
Code of the City of New York.
Block Segment. The term "Block Segment" means the linear stretch of the street
between the curblines of the cross streets that intersect such block.
City Electrical Equipment. The term "city electrical equipment" means city
property to which electrical connections can be made, including but not limited
to, electrical devices, wood poles and metal street light/lampposts.
City Property. The term "city property" means, for the purpose of this section,
real property and physical structures owned by the City of New York and subject
to Department of Transportation jurisdiction, including but not limited to,
roadways, sidewalks, street furniture and electrical equipment.
Commissioner. The term "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of the Department
of Transportation or his or her authorized designee.
Corrective action request or CAR. The term "corrective action request" or "CAR"
means a formal notice by the Department that work performed and/or a condition
created or maintained on a street is in violation of these rules or other
applicable law with a request that action be taken by the person to whom such
notice is addressed to correct the work and/or the condition so described.
Department. The term "Department" means the Department of Transportation.
Designated field headquarters. The term "designated field headquarters" means
an office maintained at the work site, unless some other location is approved
by the Department.
Embargo period. The term "embargo period" means a period of time designated by
the OCMC during which there shall be a temporary suspension of work (except for
emergency work) due to a holiday, special event or emergency.
Emergency. The term "emergency" means a situation endangering the public safety
or causing or likely to cause the imminent interruption of service required by
law, contract or franchise to be continuously maintained.
Emergency work. The term "emergency work" means work necessary to correct a
situation endangering the public safety or causing or likely to cause the
imminent interruption of service required by law, contract or franchise to be
continuously maintained, for example, by a government agency, a public utility,
a franchisee, etc. Such term shall not include work on new construction,
regrades of existing hardware, continuation of an existing permit that has
expired or will expire imminently or any other work which is not necessary to
correct a condition likely to cause such imminent interruption.
Intersection. The term "Intersection" means the area contained within the grid
created by extending the curblines of two or more streets at the point at which
they cross each other.
Microtrenching. A technique for installing conduit to house fiber-optic cable
in public rights-of-way to provide telecommunications services that involves
shallower and narrower cuts than conventional trenching.
Non-city Electrical Equipment. The term "non-city electrical equipment" means
property, not owned by the City, which is attached to City Property and to
which electrical connections can be made, including but not limited to,
electrical devices and wood poles.
OCMC. The term "OCMC" means the Office of Construction Mitigation and
Coordination, a unit within the Department which is responsible for providing
traffic stipulations and coordinating construction activity on City streets.
Overhead shunt. The term "overhead shunt" means a shunt that runs from the top
of a street light or traffic control device pole to another pole and/or to a
property.
Pedestrian Traffic Manager. The term "pedestrian traffic manager" means a
person authorized by the Commissioner to direct bicycle and pedestrian traffic
pursuant to these rules.
Permittee. An individual, corporation, business or other entity who secures
permits for all work regulated by the Department, pursuant to these rules.
Person. The term "person" means a natural person, partnership, corporation,
limited liability company, association or any other entity.
Protected street. The term "protected street" means a street which has been
resurfaced or reconstructed within five years prior to the date of application
for a permit.
Public Utilities. The term "public utilities" means public utility companies as
defined in the Public Service Law.
Roadway. The term "roadway" means that portion of a street designed, improved
or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the shoulder and slope.
Shunt. The term "shunt" means a temporary electrical cable or conduit that has
been installed between two points to divert current from one path, which is no
longer in use, to another path.
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curb
lines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines,
intended for the use of pedestrians.
Standard Detail Drawings. The term "Standard Detail Drawings" means the most
recent version of the standard details of construction, available from the
Department and the New York City Department of Design and Construction, which
contains drawings showing required dimensions of items to be constructed.
Standard Specifications. The term "Standard Specifications" means the most
recent version of the standard highway specifications available from the
Department and the New York City Department of Design and Construction
indicating required construction materials.  
Street. The term "street" means a public street, avenue, road, alley, lane,
highway, boulevard, concourse, parkway, driveway, culvert, sidewalk, crosswalk,
boardwalk, viaduct, square or place, except marginal streets.
Street shunt. The term "street shunt" means a shunt that runs from a street
light/lamppost or utility access cover along a roadway and/or sidewalk to a
property or other street light/lamppost.
Wrap-around shunt. The term "wrap-around shunt" means a shunt used on a street
light/lamppost or traffic signal pole that is attached to the top of the pole,
is looped or wrapped around the outside of the pole and enters the base of the
pole for electrical connection.
(Amended City Record 7/8/2016, eff. 8/7/2016)
§ 2-01.1 Compliance With the Manual on Uniform Traffic Devices.
All permittees must comply with the most recent version of the Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways (MUTCD), published by
the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA), and the New York State Supplement.
§ 2-02 Permits.
   (a)   Initial permit application. Public utilities or franchisees must apply
for permits under their corporate name and not their sub-contractors' name. The
following information shall be provided to the Department upon initial
application for a permit under these rules and shall be updated as necessary
and refiled annually:
      (1)   If the applicant is a corporation, limited liability corporation,
limited liability partnership or other entity registered with the New York
Secretary of State:
         (i)   address and telephone number of applicant;
         (ii)   name and telephone number of a contact person in the event of
an emergency;
         (iii)   affidavit acknowledging incorporation and a certified copy of
the certificate of incorporation, and proof of registration with the New York
State Department of State, Office of the Secretary of State. When completing
the permit application, applicants must supply the Department with the
identical identifying information, including but not limited to the company
name, as they have provided to the New York State Department of State, Office
of the Secretary of State;
         (iv)   names of corporate officers;
         (v)   names of two agents/employees designated to receive summonses or
notices of violation or other notices required by these rules or other
provisions of law;
         (vi)   New York City plumber's license certificate or other license
numbers, if applicable;
         (vii)   name(s) of representative(s) authorized to obtain permit(s) on
behalf of the applicant;
         (viii)   employer identification number;
         (ix)   e-mail address, if any; and
         (x)   insurance information, as set forth in subparagraphs (i) through
(viii) of paragraph 3 of subdivision (a).
      (2)   All other applicants:
         (i)   address and telephone number of applicant;
         (ii)   name(s) of representative(s) authorized to obtain permit(s) on
behalf of the applicant;
         (iii)   New York City plumber's license certificate or other license
numbers, if applicable;
         (iv)   employer identification number;
         (v)   e-mail address, if any;
         (vi)   names of two agents/employees designated to receive summonses
or notices of violation or other notices required by these rules or other
provisions of law; and
         (vii)   insurance information, as set forth in subparagraphs (i)
through (viii) of paragraph 3 of subdivision (a).
      (3)   Insurance and indemnification requirements (for all applicants):
         (i)   Each applicant shall, before applying for a permit, obtain a
Commercial General Liability (CGL) insurance policy or policies satisfying the
requirements of this subparagraph and any self-insured or uninsured entity must
provide coverage that satisfies the requirements of this subparagraph. All
coverage, whether a CGL policy or as provided by a self-insured or uninsured
entity must:
            (A)   be issued by a company or companies that may lawfully issue
the required policy and has an A.M. Best rating of at least A-7, a Standard and
Poor's rating of at least A, a Moody's Investor's Service rating of at least
A3, a Fitch Ratings rating of at least A-, or a similar rating by any other
nationally recognized statistical rating organization acceptable to the New
York City Law Department unless prior written approval is obtained from the New
York City Law Department;
            (B)   provide coverage to protect the City of New York ("City"),
and its officials and employees, and the applicant from claims for property
damage and/or bodily injury, including death, which may, pursuant to a permit
to be issued by the Department, including but not limited to a street opening
permit, arise from any operations performed by or on behalf of the applicant,
whether at, above, or below the surface of the street(s);
            (C)   provide coverage at least as broad as that provided by the
most recent edition of ISO Form CG 00 01;
            (D)   provide coverage for completed operations;
            (E)   provide coverage of at least $1,000,000 per occurrence and in
the aggregate, with a products-completed operations aggregate of at least
$1,000,000, except that with respect to applications for permits to place a
crane on a street, such minimum amount shall be no less than $3,000,000 per
occurrence and in the aggregate, with a products-completed operations aggregate
of at least $3,000,000;
            (F)   provide that the City and its officials and employees are
Additional Insureds with coverage at least as broad as set forth in the most
recent editions of ISO Form CG 20 26 and CG 20 37;
            (G)   provide that the limit of coverage applicable to the Named
Insured is equally applicable to the City and its officials and employees as
Additional Insureds.
            (H)   This policy shall not be cancelled or terminated, or modified
or changed in a way that affects the City or its officials or employees by the
issuing insurance company unless thirty (30) days prior written notice is sent
to the Named Insured and the Commissioner of the New York City Department of
Transportation, except that notice of termination for non-payment may be made
on only ten (10) days written notice.
            (I)   If the permit applicant has applied for more than one
thousand permits in the previous calendar year, the insurance policy shall
contain each of the following endorsements:
               (1)   If and insofar as knowledge of an "occurrence", "claim",
or "suit" is relevant to the City as Additional Insured under this policy, such
knowledge by an agent, servant, official or employee of the City of New York
will not be considered knowledge on the part of the City of the "occurrence",
"claim", or "suit" unless notice thereof is received by the: Insurance Claims
Specialist, Affirmative Litigation Division, New York City Law Department; and
               (2)   Any notice, demand or other writing by or on behalf of the
Named Insured to the insurance company shall also be deemed to be a notice,
demand or other writing on behalf of the City and its officials and employees
as Additional Insureds. Any response by the Insurance Company to such notice,
demand or other writing shall be addressed to the Named Insured and to the City
and its officials and employees at the following address: Insurance Claims
Specialist, Affirmative Litigation Division, New York City Law Department, 100
Church Street, New York, New York 10007.
         (ii)   Each applicant shall, before applying for a permit, obtain
Workers Compensation insurance in accordance with the laws of the State of New
York from a licensed insurance company.
         (iii)   Each applicant shall, before applying for a permit, file with
the Department proof that the applicant has insurance in place that provides
coverage set forth in this subdivision with respect to the permit period. If
the applicant chooses to meet this proof with an insurance certificate, the
insurance certificate shall set forth the coverage provided, state that
completed operations coverage is included and that the City is an additional
insured, and shall be accompanied by a sworn statement in a form prescribed by
the Department from the insurer or from a licensed insurance broker certifying
that the insurance certificate is accurate in all material respects, and that
the described insurance is in effect.
         (iv)   An applicant may obtain insurance policies applicable to more
than one permit application, in which case the proof pursuant to subparagraph
(iii) shall state that the policies cover all such permits in specified
boroughs, or throughout the City.
         (v)   The applicant shall provide a copy of any required policy within
thirty days of a request for such policy by the Department or the New York City
Law Department.
         (vi)   In its sole discretion, the Department may allow applicants
that frequently seek permits to self-insure, provided that the applicant:
            (A)   presents proof of excess or umbrella CGL coverage applicable
to its operations under such permits;
            (B)   certifies that it has a self-insurance program in place that
satisfies the requirements contained in subparagraph (i) of this paragraph (3)
and will continue it for the life of the permit and the Guarantee Period, as
defined in subparagraph (ii) of paragraph (16) of subdivision (e) of 34 RCNY §
2-11;
            (C)   agrees to provide the same defense of any suit against the
City and its officials and employees that alleges facts that bring the suit
within the scope of the coverage required in subparagraph (i) as an insurer
would be obligated to provide under the laws of New York;
            (D)   submits a statement, signed by a person authorized to bind
the applicant and acknowledged by a notary public, in which the applicant
agrees to assume full liability for satisfying all obligations set forth in
this subparagraph (vi), and
            (E)   provides the Department with the name and address of the
office or official of its self-insurance program who is responsible for
satisfying the self insurance obligations.
         (vii)   The permittee shall maintain insurance throughout the
Guarantee Period, as defined in subparagraph (ii) of paragraph (16) of
subdivision (e) of 34 RCNY §
2-11, satisfying the requirements in subparagraph (i) of this paragraph (3) and
providing coverage to protect the City and its officials and employees, the
Department and the applicant from all claims for property damage and/or bodily
injury, including death, which may arise from any defects discovered during
such Guarantee Period.
         (viii)   The permittee shall notify in writing the CGL insurance
carrier, and, where applicable, the worker's compensation and/or other
insurance carrier, of any loss, damage, injury, or accident, and any claim or
suit arising from any operations performed by or on behalf of the permittee for
which the Department has issued it a permit, immediately, but not later than 20
days after such event. The permittee's notice to the CGL insurance carrier must
expressly specify that "this notice is being given on behalf of the City of New
York as Additional Insured as well as the Named Insured." The permittee's
notice to the insurance carrier shall contain the following information: the
name of the permittee, the number of the permittee, the date of the occurrence,
the location (street address and borough) of the occurrence, and the identity
of the persons or things injured, damaged or lost.
         (ix)   The permittee shall indemnify, defend and hold the City and its
officials and employees harmless against any and all claims, liens, demands,
judgments, penalties, fines, liabilities, settlements, damages, costs and
expenses of whatever kind or nature (including, without limitation, attorneys'
fees and disbursements), known or unknown, contingent or otherwise, allegedly
arising out of or in any way related to the operations of the permittee and/or
its failure to comply with any of the requirements set forth herein or law.
Insofar as the facts and law relating to any claim would preclude the City and
its officials and employees from being completely indemnified by the permittee,
the City and its officials and employees shall be partially indemnified by the
permittee to the fullest extent provided by law.
         (x)   A failure by the City of New York or the Department to enforce
any of the foregoing requirements shall not constitute a waiver of such
requirement or any other requirement.
         (xi)   The applicant shall submit to the department proof of its
insurance on fully-executed ACORD 25 and ACORD 855 forms, or equivalent forms
containing the same information, regarding applicant’s insurance.
      (4)   Permit bonds.
         (i)   A permit bond shall be submitted by all permittees to the permit
office at the time of permit issuance to cover all costs and expenses that may
be incurred by the City as a result of the activity for which the permit is
issued or for the purpose of otherwise safeguarding the interests of the City.
The permit bond shall be in the form prescribed by the Department. Such permit
bonds described above shall cover all permitted activities described herein.
         (ii)   For a permit bond submitted for the purpose of performing
street openings and excavations pursuant to 34 RCNY §
2-11, such permit bond shall be submitted in the amount of $10,000.00 for a
single location within the City of New York per calendar year, $50,000.00 for
two to fifty locations within the City of New York per calendar year, and
$100,000.00 for fifty-one to one hundred locations within the City of New York
per calendar year. Permittees who are issued permits for more than one hundred
locations per calendar year shall submit a permit bond in the amount of
$250,000.00.
         (iii)   Bonds shall be valid through the permit's guarantee period as
set forth in these rules.
         (iv)   The issuer of the bond shall give the Department at least 30
days written notice prior to expiration or cancellation of such bond.
         (v)   A receipt demonstrating full payment of the bond shall be filed
with the Department.
         (vi)   A separate bond need not be filed for each location, provided
such coverage is in force for all operations in the entire borough, City or
state.
         (vii)   A notice of continuation of certificate shall be received
every calendar year for the continuation of an existing bond.
         (viii)   For permits with the exception of those set forth in
subparagraph (ii) above and sidewalk construction permits issued pursuant to 34
RCNY §
2-09, a permit bond shall be submitted in the amount of $5,000 for a single
location within the City of New York per calendar year or in the amount of
$25,000 for multiple locations within the City of New York per calendar year.
In the event that a permittee will also secure street opening and excavation
permits within the City of New York during the same calendar year, the
permittee's compliance with subparagraph (ii) above shall be sufficient to
demonstrate compliance with this section.
      (5)   Deposits.
         (i)   A deposit of $5,000.00, in the form of money order or certified
check, shall be required from permittees when outstanding balances for permit
fees, backcharge fees, corrective action requests (CARs) or other charges
exceed $3,000.00 for a period longer than forty-five (45) calendar days.
         (ii)   Such permittees shall maintain a deposit balance of $5,000.00
at all times until the deposit is refunded pursuant to subparagraph (iv),
below. If the balance of such cash deposit falls below $5,000.00, all review of
permit applications and permit issuance may cease, except in cases of emergency
work.
         (iii)   Any amounts owed by permittees for permit fees, CAR fees,
backcharge fees or other charges payable pursuant to law for a period longer
than forty-five (45) calendar days shall be deducted from the deposit after
notice to the permittee.
         (iv)   Deposits shall be refunded after one year (365 consecutive
calendar days) of full compliance with all applicable laws, rules and
specifications.
   (b)   General conditions for all permits.
      (1)   Permit applications for the following work shall be reviewed by
OCMC prior to the issuance of permits:
         (i)   work to be performed for sewer and water system construction;
         (ii)   work to be performed in Manhattan;
         (iii)   work required on primary and secondary arteries;
         (iv)   permits to close streets;
         (v)   any other activity deemed necessary by the Commissioner.
      (2)   Permits for emergency work. Permits for emergency work shall be
issued in accordance with 34 RCNY §
2-11.
      (3)   Before issuing a permit the Department may demand that permittee
show proof of required approvals from other governmental entities.
      (4)   Street closings lasting more than 180 days. Permits that will
result in a publicly mapped street being fully closed for more than 180
consecutive calendar days shall be issued in accordance with all the
requirements of 34 RCNY §
2-16.
   (c)   Display of permits and signs at work site.
      (1)   Unless otherwise authorized, permits shall be kept at the work site
or designated field headquarters at all times and shall be made available for
inspection upon request of any police officer or any authorized employee of the
Departments of Environmental Protection, Buildings, Police and Transportation
or any other City employees specifically authorized by the Commissioner to
enforce these rules. Such permits cannot be posted on construction fences,
sidewalk sheds, construction containers or any other construction equipment.
      (2)   Signage along a single street excavation, a series of excavations
or trenches. 
         (i)   Permittees must post signs at any single street excavation or
trench and/or at every 25-foot interval for a series of street excavations or
trenches, indicating the following:
            (A)   the name of the permittee conducting the work;
            (B)   the name of the entity for whom the work is being conducted;
            (C)   the name(s) of the subcontractor(s);
            (D)   the permittee's telephone number for complaints;
            (E)   the contractor's telephone number, if not the permittee;
            (F)   the permit number;
            (G)   the purpose of the excavation or street opening; and
            (H)   the start and scheduled completion dates of the work.
         (ii)   Such signs must be conspicuously displayed and face the nearest
curb line. Such signs must be easily visible and readable by pedestrians, and
must conform to the Department's requirements.
      (3)   Construction Project Informational Signs. Permittees must post
Construction Project Informational Signs for any project with a projected
completion time of three months or more, or as otherwise directed by the
Commissioner.
         (i)   At least one Construction Project Informational Sign must be
posted on each block segment where the project is located, and must be easily
visible and readable by pedestrians, unless otherwise directed by the
Commissioner. The sign(s) must be kept in good condition, and must conform with
the Construction Project Informational Sign requirements available at the
Department's Permit Offices and on the Department's website.
         (ii)   Such signs must contain the following information:
            (A)   the names of the entities responsible for the project,
including but not limited to the contractor, developer, and property owner;
            (B)   the telephone number, email address, and website for such
entities responsible for the project;
            (C)   the name of the project and the project number (if any);
            (D)   the address of the project;
            (E)   the nature of the project;
            (F)   a brief description of the project; and
            (G)   the start and scheduled completion dates of the project.
         (iii)   Construction Project Informational Signs are not required for
any construction or demolition project requiring a New York City Department of
Buildings permit and whose site is enclosed with a fence or contains a sidewalk
shed. Such signs must comply with the applicable requirements of the New York
City Building Code and the rules of the New York City Department of Buildings.
      (4)   Permittees' identification numbers on temporary signs. Permittees
must affix their Department issued five-digit identification number using a
waterproof label or sticker on all temporary signs, including but not limited
to temporary construction, raised plow, parking or regulatory signs. The
lettering must be in Arial font black ink, 3/4 inch in height and width, placed
at the lower right-hand corner of the front and the lower left and right-hand
corner of the back of the sign as shown below. The labels/stickers must be
visible/legible at all times. Permittees must replace any worn out or faded
labels/stickers.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4a77823de8d2ee472adfbde019448cdce82c4f8a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-17630.jpg]
   (d)   Corrective action request (CAR).
      (1)   A CAR may be served by mail and/or by e-mail on the person
responsible for the work and/or the condition which requires correction at his
or her last known address, e-mail address or at the address or e-mail address
for such person contained in the records of the Department. Where a CAR is
served for a violation of § 19-147 of the Administrative Code, in the case of a
utility company, the CAR may be given orally or in writing to a person or at a
place designated by the utility and the utility shall respond within twenty-
four (24) hours.
      (2)   Any corrective action required by the CAR shall be performed within
thirty (30) days of the issuance of the CAR unless such issuance is protested
as provided herein. Entities must obtain the required permit as noted on the
CAR prior to performing the corrective action. Failure to obtain such a permit
may result in a violation and the CAR will remain open until all conditions are
satisfied.
      (3)   Within fourteen (14) days after the date of mailing of the CAR, the
respondent may protest the issuance of the CAR in the manner directed on the
CAR. If the respondent fails to timely protest the CAR and the Department
issues a summons for an uncorrected condition, the respondent may be issued a
summons for failing to respond to the CAR in a timely manner. If a protest is
timely submitted and granted by the Department, the CAR fee will be waived.
      (4)   Protests shall be reviewed by the Department and a final
determination regarding the protest shall be made within a reasonable period of
time.
      (5)   If a protest is denied, any corrective action required by the CAR
shall be performed within thirty (30) days after the date of such denial.
      (6)   In the event that the original permit has expired before the
corrective action is undertaken, a new permit, as noted on the CAR, shall be
obtained in order to complete the required work. The new permit shall not
affect the guarantee period, which will relate back to the original permit.
      (7)   Where a CAR relates to a violation of § 19-147 of the
Administrative Code and no corrective action is taken within the applicable
time or where an imminent danger to life or safety exists, the Department may
perform the work required by a CAR or the work necessary to avert the danger
and charge the cost to the person responsible for restoring, replacing or
maintaining the pavement, sidewalk, curb, gutter or street hardware in
accordance with such section.
      (8)   Notwithstanding the above, where a condition exists that creates an
imminent danger to pedestrians or vehicles, the Department may issue a priority
CAR, which shall require corrective action to be taken within three (3) hours
of issuance of the CAR by telephone call. The Department may also issue a
priority CAR via email requiring corrective action to be taken within three (3)
hours of issuance; however, should a priority CAR be issued via email, a
follow-up telephone call must also be placed to the permittee.
      (9)   In the event that a CAR is issued within the guarantee period, the
corrective action shall still be taken even after the expiration of the
guarantee period.
   (e)   Orders.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided by these rules or other applicable
law, any orders issued by the Commissioner may be served personally or by mail
addressed to the last known address of the person to whom the order is directed
or to the address for such person set forth in the records of the Department or
by delivery or mailing to a person or a location designated by the person to
whom the order is directed.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided by these rules, a person to whom an
order is directed shall have an opportunity to be heard within five business
days after a timely request for such opportunity is received by the Department.
A request shall be made within the time and in the manner directed on the
order. If, after considering the written objections of the respondent, the
Commissioner affirms the order, the work required by the order shall be
completed within 30 days after notice of such determination is mailed to the
respondent.
      (3)   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, an order to cease and
desist may be given orally or in writing to the persons executing the work and
shall require immediate compliance therewith.
      (4)   In accordance with § 19-151 of the Administrative Code where a
respondent fails to comply with an order issued by the Commissioner, including
an order to cease and desist, within the applicable time, the Commissioner may
execute the work required to be executed in such order. All costs and expenses
of the City for such work may be recovered from the persons who are found to be
liable for the violation.
      (5)   In addition, failure to comply with an order issued by the
Commissioner may result in criminal or civil penalties in accordance with § 19-
149 or 19-150 of the Administrative Code.
   (f)   Fees.
      (1)   The fees for permits and CARs are specified in 34 RCNY §
2-03.
      (2)   Permits shall be valid for fifteen calendar days, unless otherwise
specified on the permit. Permits may be extended for 14 days upon presentation
of proof that circumstances beyond the permittee's control caused a delay in
the work and payment of an additional fee. In the event a permittee fails to
complete the work within the time period specified in the permit, another
permit may be issued for a period of time to be specified by the Commissioner.
There shall be a separate permit fee for each such additional permit.
      (3)   Payment of all fees shall be received upon application for the
permit or, where applicable, no later than thirty calendar days after the
billing date.
   (g)   Notice of street operations.
      (1)   Permittees and owners of underground facilities shall comply with
state Industrial Code Rule No. 53 relating to Construction, Excavation and
Demolition Operations at or Near Underground Facilities.
      (2)   Permittees shall notify the Police Department and the
communications center of the Fire Department of all construction activities
requiring street closing at least twenty-four hours in advance of the
commencement of non-emergency work.
      (3)   In the event that any non-emergency construction work results in
the closing of
         (i)   more than two-thirds (2/3) of the moving lanes per direction on
any street for more than 15 minutes per hour between the hours of 1 a.m. and 5
a.m., or
         (ii)   half (50%) or more of the moving lanes per direction on any
street or limited access roadway, for a duration of more than four minutes or
two traffic light cycles of the nearest traffic signal, whichever is less,
during all other hours, the permittee shall post at the site of the closing a
public notification seven (7) calendar days prior to such closing in a manner
directed by OCMC.
      (4)   Underground facility owners will be responsible for any surface
defects caused by their facility underneath the roadway.
   (h)   Work site safety. All obstructions on the street shall be protected by
barricades, fencing, railing with flags, lights, and/or signs, placed at proper
intervals and at prescribed hours pursuant to 34 RCNY §
2-01.1. During twilight hours the flags shall be replaced with amber lights.
Permittees shall also comply with any additional work site safety requirements
set forth in these rules or in the permit.
   (i)   Waivers.
      (1)   Except where expressly prohibited by law, the Commissioner may, in
his/her discretion, waive or modify these rules, in the interests of public
safety and convenience.
      (2)   Requests for waivers shall be submitted in writing to the
Commissioner.
   (j)   Suspension of application review. The Commissioner may suspend review
of applications for permits pending:
      (1)   payment by an applicant of outstanding fines, civil penalties or
judgments imposed or entered against such applicant by a court or the
environmental control board,
      (2)   payment by an applicant of outstanding fees or other charges
lawfully assessed by the Commissioner against such applicant pursuant to these
rules or other applicable law and/or
      (3)   satisfactory compliance by an applicant with a CAR or order issued
by the Commissioner.
   (k)   Permit revocation and refusal to renew permit.
      (1)   The Commissioner may, after giving the permittee notice and an
opportunity to be heard, revoke or refuse to renew a permit:
         (i)   for failure to comply with the terms or conditions of such
permit, these rules or other applicable law in carrying out the activity for
which the permit was issued;
         (ii)   whenever there has been any false statement or any
misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application or accompanying
papers upon which the issuance of the permit was based; or
         (iii)   whenever a permit has been issued in error and the conditions
are such that the permit should not have been issued.
      (2)   Prior to taking any of the actions listed in paragraph (1) above,
the Commissioner shall give the permittee an opportunity to be heard upon not
less than two days notice.
      (3)   Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of paragraph (2) above,
if the Commissioner determines that an imminent peril to life or property
exists, the Commissioner may revoke a permit without affording the permittee an
opportunity to be heard prior to such revocation. Upon request of the
permittee, the Commissioner shall afford the permittee an opportunity to
present his or her objections to such action within five days after such
request is received by the Department.
   (l)   Refusal to issue permit. The Commissioner may refuse to issue a permit
to an applicant:
      (1)   who has exhibited a pattern of disregard for the rules or orders of
the Department or the terms or conditions of permits issued by the Department
or for other applicable law,
      (2)   who has been found liable by a court or in a proceeding before the
environmental control board of a violation of a rule or order of the Department
or the terms or conditions of a permit issued by the Department or other
applicable law, which violation caused an imminent peril to life or property.
   (m)   Embargo periods.
      (1)   All routine work shall be suspended during an embargo period unless
approval for the work is granted by OCMC. Such suspension shall not apply to
emergency work, for which an emergency number shall be obtained by the
permittee pursuant to the provisions of 34 RCNY §§
2-07 and
2-11. Information regarding embargo periods is on file at each borough permit
office and is available upon request. It is the responsibility of each
permittee to obtain such information prior to the commencement of any work. It
shall be a violation of these rules to do any work on the street during an
embargo period without the prior approval of OCMC or an emergency number.
      (2)   A request for approval to work during an embargo shall be submitted
on a form provided by the Commissioner, along with a fee as specified in 34
RCNY §
2-03. Payment of the application fee shall not guarantee that approval to work
during the embargo period will be granted and application fee is in addition to
any required permit fees.
   (n)   Voiding and reissuing of permits. Permits may be voided and reissued
only within three business days of issuance. See 34 RCNY §
2-03 for the fee for reissuance. Permits reissued after three business days
shall be subject to the full permit fee.
(Amended City Record 7/8/2016, eff. 8/7/2016; amended City Record 7/20/2022,
eff. 8/19/2022; amended City Record 6/26/2023, eff. 7/26/2023)
§ 2-03 Schedule of Fees.
All fees shall be paid in accordance with the following fee schedule:
 
Permit or Fee Other Charges Maximum Duration Maximum Distance Maximum Width per
Activity                    per Permit       per Permit       Permit
                                                                                   Other      Maximum       Maximum     Maximum
Permit or Activity                                                     Fee         Charges    Duration per  Distance    Width per
                                                                                              Permit        per Permit  Permit
Street Opening Permits – General:
                                                                                                            300 linear
Normal street                                                          $135.00                15 days       ft. (lin.   12 feet
                                                                                                            ft.)
                                                                                   $245.00                  300 lin.
Protected street                                                       $135.00     inspection 15 days       ft.         12 feet
                                                                                   fee
Emergency work                                                         $45.00                 2 business    300 lin.    12 feet
                                                                                              days          ft.
Specific Types of Street Opening Permits:
Open sidewalk to install foundation                                    $135.00                30 days       300 lin.    sidewalk
                                                                                                            ft.         (SW) width
                                                                       $135.00,               30 days (90
Major installations – electric conduit                               $380.00                days with     300 lin.    12 feet
                                                                       protected              OCMC          ft.
                                                                       street                 approval.)
                                                                       $135.00,               30 days (90
Major installations – gas pipe                                       $380.00                days with     300 lin.    12 feet
                                                                       protected              OCMC          ft.
                                                                       street                 approval.)
                                                                       $135.00,               30 days (90
Major installations – steam pipe                                     $380.00                days with     300 lin.    12 feet
                                                                       protected              OCMC          ft.
                                                                       street                 approval.)
                                                                       $135.00,               30 days (90
Major installations – telephone line                                 $380.00                days with     300 lin.    12 feet
                                                                       protected              OCMC          ft.
                                                                       street                 approval.)
                                                                       $135.00,
Transformer vault-in roadway                                           $380.00                15 days to 30 300 lin.    variable
                                                                       protected              days          ft.
                                                                       street
Transformer vault-in sidewalk                                          $135.00                15 days to 30 300 lin.    SW width
                                                                                              days          ft.
Installation and/or Removal of poles                                   $135.00                30 days       2 sw flags  SW width
                                                                       $135.00,               30 days (90
Major installations – water                                          $380.00                days with     300 lin.    12 feet
                                                                       protected              OCMC          ft.
                                                                       street                 approval.)
                                                                       $135.00,               30 days (90
Major installations – cable                                          $380.00                days with     300 lin.    12 feet
                                                                       protected              OCMC          ft.
                                                                       street                 approval.)
                                                                       $135.00,               30 days (90
Major installations – sewer                                          $380.00                days with     300 lin.    12 feet
                                                                       protected              OCMC          ft.
                                                                       street                 approval.)
                                                                       $135.00,               30 days (90               Variable
Rapid transit construct/alteration                                     $380.00                days with     300 lin.    or SW
                                                                       protected              OCMC          ft.         width
                                                                       street                 approval.)
Installation of public telephone stanchion                             $135.00                30 days       Not         SW width
                                                                                                            Applicable
                                                                                                            As per      As per
Installation of newsstand                                              $135.00                30 days       approved    approved
                                                                                                            plans       plans
                                                                                   $10.00
                                                                                   minimum
                                                                                   for
                                                                       $135.00,    tunneling
                                                                       $380.00     and/or     15 days to 30 300 lin.
Repair water connections/mains                                         protected   jacking.   days          ft.         12 feet
                                                                       street      Excess
                                                                                   over 1st
                                                                                   10 ft.,
                                                                                   $1.00 per
                                                                                   ft.
                                                                       $135.00,
Repair sewer connections/main                                          $380.00                15 days to 30 300 lin.    12 feet
                                                                       protected              days          ft.
                                                                       street
                                                                       $135.00,
Repair water and sewer connection/mains                                $380.00                15 days to 30 300 lin.    12 feet
                                                                       protected              days          ft.
                                                                       street
Install or replace fuel oil line                                       $135.00                15 days       300 lin.    SW width
                                                                                                            ft.
                                                                                                            300 lin.    As per
Vault construction, alteration, or repair                              $135.00                30 days       ft.         approved
                                                                                                                        plan
                                                                                                            As
Reset, replace, install or repair curb                                 $135.00                30 days       required,   Not
                                                                                                            up to 300   applicable
                                                                                                            lin. ft.
                                                                                                            300 lin.
                                                                                                            ft. & as    As per
Pave roadway                                                           $135.00                15 days       per         approved
                                                                                                            approved    plan
                                                                                                            plan
                                                                                                            300 lin.    Variable
Tree pit                                                               $135.00                30 days       ft.         based on
                                                                                                                        SW width
                                                                       $135.00,
Construct or alter utility access chamber                              $380.00                15 days       300 lin.    12 feet
                                                                       protected                            ft.
                                                                       street
Adjust hardware casting                                                $135.00                15 days       300 lin.    12 feet
                                                                                                            ft.
                                                                                              Uninterrupted 300 lin.
Access to utility chamber in restricted zone during restricted hours   $30.00                 emergency     ft.         12 feet
                                                                                              period
                                                                       $135.00,
Repair gas connections/mains                                           $380.00                30 days       300 lin.    12 feet or
                                                                       protected                            ft.         SW width
                                                                       street
                                                                       $135.00,
Repair steam connection/mains                                          $380.00                30 days       300 lin.    12 feet or
                                                                       protected                            ft.         SW width
                                                                       street
                                                                       $135.00,
Repair electric/communication lines                                    $380.00                30 days       300 lin.    Not
                                                                       protected                            ft.         applicable
                                                                       street
                                                                       $135.00,
Test pits, cores or boring                                             $380.00                15 days       300 lin.    12 feet
                                                                       protected                            ft.
                                                                       street
                                                                       $135.00,                                         As per
Conduit construction (cable, telecommunication) & franchise            $380.00                15 days       300 lin.    approved
                                                                       protected                            ft.         plans
                                                                       street
                                                                       $135.00,               30 days (90   As per
Major installation - franchise                                         $380.00                days with     approved    SW width
                                                                       protected              OCMC          plans
                                                                       street                 approval.)
Erect canopy                                                           $135.00                30 days       Not         Not
                                                                                                            applicable  applicable
Install street furniture                                               $135.00                30 days       Not         Not
                                                                                                            applicable  applicable
                                                                                   Inspection
                                                                                   fee of
                                                                                   $25.00 for
                                                                                   1st 400
                                                                                   cubic                    Not
Land fill                                                              $135.00     yards.     30 days       applicable  12 feet
                                                                                   Excess
                                                                                   over 400
                                                                                   cy at
                                                                                   $0.05 per
                                                                                   cy.
                                                                       $135.00,
Private sewer                                                          $380.00                30 days       300 lin.    Not
                                                                       protected                            ft.         applicable
                                                                       street
Install fence                                                          $135.00                30 days       300 lin.    Not
                                                                                                            ft.         applicable
                                                                       $135.00,
Install traffic signals                                                $380.00                30 days       300 lin.    12 feet or
                                                                       protected                            ft.         SW width
                                                                       street
                                                                       $135.00,
Install or repair petroleum pipelines/monitoring and recovery systems  $380.00                30 days       300 lin.    SW width
                                                                       protected                            ft.
                                                                       street
Installation of fire alarm box                                         $135.00                30 days       Not
                                                                                                            applicable
                                                                                                                        As per
Fee for review of request to work during an embargo period             $135.00                                          Division
                                                                                                                        of
                                                                                                                        Franchises
                                                                                                            As per
Installation of bus shelter                                            $135.00                30 days       Division of
                                                                                                            Franchises
Construction Activity Permits
Types of Construction Activity Permits:
                                                                                                            300 linear
                                                                                   $300.00                  ft. but not
                                                                                   per month                more than
Place material on street                                               $50.00      inspection 3 months      80%         8 feet
                                                                                   fee                      frontage
                                                                                                            may be
                                                                                                            encumbered.
                                                                                                            2 crossings
                                                                                                            at 12 ft.
Crossing sidewalk                                                      $50.00                 3 months      wide within SW width
                                                                                                            300 linear
                                                                                                            ft.
                                                                       $50.00 per  $100.00                              Not more
                                                                       week or     per                                  than one
Place crane on street                                                  part        inspection 1 week        Variable    third
                                                                       thereof.    fee                                  width of
                                                                                                                        roadway
Place equipment other than crane on street                             $50.00                 3 months      300 lin.    12 feet
                                                                                                            ft.
Place shanty or trailer on street                                      $50.00                 3 months      Variable    12 feet
Temporary pedestrian walk in roadway                                   $50.00                 3 months      300 lin.
                                                                                                            ft.
Install or change pavement markings, construction signs and supports   $50.00                 90 days
Hang temporary festoon/holiday lighting and/or other temporary         $50.00                 90 days
lighting
Temporary closing of roadway                                           $50.00                 3 months
Temporary sidewalk closing                                             $50.00                 3 months
Placement of containers for construction waste debris                  $50.00                 90 days       300 lin.    12 feet
                                                                                                            ft.
Sidewalk Construction Permits:
                                                                                                            300 lin.
Repair/construct sidewalk                                              $70.00                 30 days       ft. or per  SW width
                                                                                                            block and
                                                                                                            lot
Licenses:
Vault License                                                          $35.00      $2.00 per
                                                                                   sq. ft.
Canopy Permits                                                         $50.00                 1 year
Canopy in connection with a sidewalk cafe license                      $25.00                 1 year
Miscellaneous Charges and Fees:
Subpoenas                                                              $15.00
Removal of banners, canopies, signs and other encroachments and        cost of
obstructions                                                           labor and
                                                                       materials
Storage fee for removed banners, canopies, signs and other             $15.00 per
encroachments and obstructions                                         day
CARs                                                                   $40.00
Backcharges and JETS                                                   $134.00 per
                                                                       sq. yd.
Extension of Permit                                                    $40.00                 14 days
Place commercial refuse container on street                            $30.00                 5 consecutive             9 feet
                                                                                              days
Application review fee for placement of commercial refuse container on $30.00 per
street in restricted area as defined in 34 RCNY §                     application
2-14(f)(4)
                                                                                              duration of
Reissuance of permit within three business days                        $15.00                 original
                                                                                              permit
Renew temporary security structure                                     $50.00                 Six months    300 lin.    Not
                                                                                                            ft.         applicable
Filing of Sidewalk, Curb and Roadway Application (SCARA) – Plan Type No fee                 one year
Filing of SCARA – Plan Type B                                        $35.00                 one year
                                                                       filing fee
Filing of SCARA – Plan Type C                                        $2.00 per              one year
                                                                       lin. ft.
Filing of SCARA – Plan Type D                                        $4.00 per              one year
                                                                       lin. ft.
Filing of SCARA – Plan Type E                                        $4.00 per              one year
                                                                       lin. ft.
Filing of SCARA – Plan Type F                                        $8.00 per              one year
                                                                       lin. ft.
Install temporary security structure                                   $50.00                 One year      300 lin.    Not
                                                                                                            ft.         applicable
City adjustment of street hardware to meet pavement                    $125.00                Not           Not         Not
                                                                                              applicable    applicable  applicable
                                                                                                            Building to
                                                                                                            nearest
Install overhead shunt                                                 $0.00                  90 days       pole or     Not
                                                                                                            pole to     applicable
                                                                                                            nearest
                                                                                                            other pole
Install street shunt                                                   $50.00                 90 days       300 lin.    Not
                                                                                                            ft.         applicable
Install wrap-around shunt                                              $0.00                  90 days       Per shaft   Not
                                                                                                                        applicable
 
(Amended City Record 7/8/2016, eff. 8/7/2016)
§ 2-04 Canopies.
   (a)   Permit required. No person shall erect or maintain a canopy over the
sidewalk without obtaining a permit from the Commissioner. The canopy shall be
adequate for public safety and convenience and shall respect the special
circumstances of the particular site or street and shall not detract from
public use of the sidewalk. Canopy permits may be issued for the entrance to a
building, or place of business within a building.
   (b)   Permit fees.
      (1)   The fee for the issuance of a canopy permit shall be $50 per year.
      (2)   The fee for the issuance of a canopy permit in connection with a
sidewalk cafe license shall be $25.
   (c)   Conditions.
      (1)   Canopy permits shall not be issued for:
         (i)   placement on streets listed in subdivision f of this section;
         (ii)   placement within the following: fifteen feet of fire hydrants
or bus stop zones; beneath a fire escape or so located as to obstruct operation
of fire escape drop ladders or counter-balanced stairs or so as to obstruct any
exit from a building; within the area created by extending the building line to
the curb (the "corner") or within the area from ten feet of either side of the
corner (the "corner quadrant"); five feet of tree pit edges, four feet of
street lights and utility hole or transformer vault covers or gratings; three
feet of parking meters; or
         (iii)   placement without written approval from the property owner; or
         (iv)   placement without written approval from the Department of
Consumer Affairs for locations licensed by the Department of Consumer Affairs;
or
         (v)   placement at locations deemed by the Commissioner as inadequate
with respect to public safety and convenience.
      (2)   Canopies shall not be permitted above underground street access
covers, vault covers, gratings, or cellar doors which require access.
      (3)   Canopy design and construction shall be in accordance with Standard
Detail Drawing #H-1029.
      (4)   Owners shall be responsible for the removal of a canopy within ten
days when so directed by the Commissioner for necessary street construction.
      (5)   Advertising on a canopy is prohibited. The house or street number
and/or firm name or filed trade name may appear on a canopy as prescribed by
the Zoning Resolution of the City of New York. However, descriptive words
contained in the firm name or filed trade name tending to advertise the
business conducted on the premises are prohibited. Lettering may include logo
art for the purpose of business identification only.
      (6)   All canopy permits shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the
entrance for which the permit is issued.
   (d)   Maintenance.
      (1)   Canopies shall be well maintained at all times.
      (2)   The covering shall be kept clean, free from accumulation of snow
and ice and free from rips and tears, discoloration, fading, sagging, graffiti,
etc.
      (3)   Canopies with metal frameworks shall be painted as needed, but at
least every five years.
      (4)   All structural members shall be kept free of rust and surface
imperfections (smooth to the touch).
   (e)   Permit expiration, renewal and transferability.
      (1)   Each permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance, unless
revoked sooner by the Commissioner. Applications for renewal of canopy permits
shall be made at least one month prior to permit expiration dates.
      (2)   Canopy permits shall not be transferable from person to person or
from the location of original issue.
      (3)   Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of this section relating
to the location of a canopy, where a permit was issued for a canopy erected
prior to May 19, 1995 under the rules in effect prior to that date, a renewal
permit may be issued for the continued maintenance of such canopy at such
location provided that:
         (i)   The canopy is at the same location and was not altered on or
after May 19, 1995;
         (ii)   The canopy is not on a street listed as restricted in
subdivision f of this section; and
         (iii)   The department performs an on-site inspection and determines
that the canopy does not present a hazard to public safety and convenience. For
the purposes of this provision, hazards for which the department will refuse
the renewal of a permit shall include, but not be limited to, the location of a
canopy within fifteen feet of a fire hydrant or bus stop, beneath or
obstructing a fire escape or within a corner or corner quadrant.
   (f)   Placement of canopies. The following categories of restricted streets
are established:
      (1)   Fully Restricted Streets. No canopy may be erected or maintained on
the below listed streets:
         (i)   Borough of Manhattan:
            (A)   Fifth Avenue: West 34th Street to West 59th Street
            (B)   Sixth Avenue: West 34th Street to West 59th Street
            (C)   34th Street: West side of Fifth Avenue to East side of Eighth
Avenue
            (D)   42nd Street: East side of Eighth Avenue to West side of Third
Avenue
            (E)   Seventh Avenue: South side of 33rd Street to North side of
34th Street
            (F)   Broadway: Chambers Street to Battery Place
            (G)   Whitehall Street: Beaver Street to Water Street
            (H)   Wall Street: Broadway to South Street
            (I)   Broad Street: Wall Street to Water Street
            (J)   Sixth Avenue: West 4th Street to West 8th Street
            (K)   West 8th Street: Sixth Avenue to Fifth Avenue
            (L)   East 8th Street: Fifth Avenue to Fourth Avenue
            (M)   Astor Place: Broadway to 3rd Avenue
            (N)   St. Mark's Place: 3rd Avenue to 2nd Avenue
            (O)   72nd Street: Broadway/Amsterdam Avenue to Columbus Avenue
      (2)   Partially Restricted Streets. The erection or maintenance of
canopies on the streets listed below is limited to one building entrance only,
except that hotels and apartment houses may erect and maintain canopies over
all their entrances and restaurants may erect and maintain a canopy over one
entrance separate and distinct from the building entrance, if any.
         (i)   Borough of Manhattan
            (A)   Fifth Avenue: West 12th Street to West 34th Street
            (B)   Madison Avenue: East 23rd Street to East 96th Street
            (C)   Park Avenue: East 46th Street to East 60th Street
            (D)   43rd Street to 60th Street: Sixth Avenue to Lexington Avenue
            (E)   Riverside Drive: George Washington Bridge to West 135th
Street
            (F)   Morningside Avenue: West 116th Street to West 125th Street
            (G)   Central Park West: West 60th Street to West 75th Street
            (H)   South Street Seaport
            (I)   Nassau Street Mall
         (ii)   Borough of Brooklyn
            (A)   Ocean Parkway: Belt Parkway to Prospect Park
            (B)   Ocean Avenue: Flatbush Avenue to Avenue Z
            (C)   Plaza Street: Eastern Parkway to Prospect Park West
            (D)   Eastern Parkway: Plaza Street to Ralph Avenue
            (E)   Fulton Street Mall
            (F)   Stuyvesant Avenue: Fulton Street to Madison Avenue
            (G)   Kings Highway: Bay Parkway to Rockaway Parkway
         (iii)   Borough of the Bronx
            (A)   Grand Concourse: 158 Street to 179 Street
            (B)   Pelham Parkway: Cruger Avenue to Hutchinson River Parkway
         (iv)   Borough of Queens
            (A)   Jamaica Avenue: 168 Street to Cross Island Parkway
            (B)   Hillside Avenue: 179 Street to the City Line
         (v)   Borough of Richmond
            (A)   Hylan Boulevard: Fingerboard Road to Tysens Lane
            (B)   Victory Boulevard: Bay Street to Willowbrook Road
            (C)   Richmond Avenue: Richmond Terrace to Forest Avenue
            (D)   New Dorp Lane: Richmond Road to Hylan Boulevard
   (g)   Design criteria.
      (1)   Size limitations of canopies.
         (i)   Width. Canopy width is limited to the width of the building
entrance or the place of business, as defined by the doors leading into the
building or place of business, but in no case shall the width be less than 4
feet nor more than 10 feet, unless authorized in writing by the Commissioner or
as required by the Commissioner.
         (ii)   Height. The bottom of any portion of the canopy covering shall
not be less than eight feet above the sidewalk and the top of any portion of
the canopy covering shall not exceed 12 feet above the sidewalk, unless
authorized in writing by the Commissioner.
         (iii)   Length. The canopy shall extend from the building line to
within a minimum of eighteen inches and a maximum of twenty-four inches from
the face of the curb line.
      (2)   Canopy shall be fully roofed.
      (3)   Certification by the manufacturer that the covering is flameproof
shall be submitted with the permit application. Where certification is
unobtainable from the manufacturer, certification by the installer may be
submitted instead.
      (4)   Lettering on covering.
         (i)   The height of lettering on any side of a canopy shall not exceed
12 inches, as specified in the Zoning Resolution.
         (ii)   The painting, imprinting, or stenciling authorized in the above
paragraph (4)(i) shall be limited to a single horizontal line of lettering, and
with a cumulative surface area not exceeding twelve (12) square feet per side.
It shall be lawful to paint, imprint or stencil directly upon a canopy within
the character and area limitations prescribed by the Zoning Resolution of the
City of New York.
      (5)   Lighting and Illumination.
         (i)   The area under the canopy shall be lighted to a minimum of
thirty foot candles when the canopy is within twenty feet of a lamppost.
Illumination shall be limited to the underside of the canopy. Neon lights are
not permitted. Fluorescent light fixtures shall have the bulbs covered so they
are not visible. Illumination sources shall be installed so that they do not
protrude below the bottom of any portion of the canopy covering.
         (ii)   All electrical work shall be done by a licensed electrician.
      (6)   Side curtains are not permitted.
      (7)   Supporting framework shall be constructed of metal members.
         (i)   Vertical uprights shall be of sufficient size and strength and
shall be no less than a standard steel pipe, one and one-quarter inches in
diameter and not exceeding three inches in diameter. Where a special
construction is used instead of pipe, the design shall be equivalent to the
above valid minimum pipe standard approved by the Commissioner. The vertical
uprights shall be imbedded in an independent concrete footing of adequate size,
designed to sustain all anticipated loads.
         (ii)   Intermediate vertical upright supports are not permitted except
for additional upright supports at the face of the building. Such additional
upright supports shall not extend more than 18 inches of the property line.
         (iii)   Diagonal bracing at vertical upright supports is not
permitted, except where required for wind bracing. Permissible wind bracing
supports shall be constructed parallel to the curb line and shall extend
outward no more than eighteen inches from the vertical upright.
   (h)   Application.
      (1)   Applications for canopy permits shall include:
         (i)   A statement of the basic construction details including the
following:
            (A)   type, description and color of the canopy covering;
            (B)   type, diameter and gauge of all supporting members;
            (C)   description of the frame, wind bracing assembly and sidewalk
and building fastenings;
            (D)   description of proposed lettering on canopy covering,
including exact wording and dimensions thereof;
            (E)   five inch by seven inch photograph of the proposed site.
         (ii)   A sketch showing the canopy dimensions, location and all street
facilities within fifteen feet of both sides of the canopy.
         (iii)   A certificate that the covering is flameproof.
         (iv)   Consent of the Landmarks Preservation Commission for the
erection of a canopy in a designated landmark historic district or attached to
a building that has Landmark's historic designation.
         (v)   [Reserved.]
      (2)   Permit requirements. All permits are subject to applicable
provisions contained in 34 RCNY §
2-02.
   (i)   Removal of unauthorized canopies. Pursuant to § 19-124 of the
Administrative Code, the Commissioner may serve an order upon the owner of any
premises requiring the removal of any unauthorized canopy. Upon the owner's
failure to comply with such order within the time specified, the Commissioner
may remove such canopy or cause the same to be removed, at the owner's sole
cost and expense.
   (j)   Miscellaneous. No attachments of any kind or in any manner are
permitted on a canopy, including, but not limited to:
      (1)   Temporary or permanent signs
      (2)   Balloons
      (3)   Streamers
      (4)   Flags
      (5)   Banners
      (6)   Pennants
(Amended City Record 7/8/2016, eff. 8/7/2016)
§ 2-05 Construction Activity.
   (a)   Permit required.
      (1)   A separate construction activity permit is required for each of the
following activities, except where otherwise provided by these rules or by
permit stipulations:
         (i)   Placing construction material on street during working hours
         (ii)   Placing construction equipment other than cranes or derricks on
the street during working hours
         (iii)   Temporarily closing sidewalk
         (iv)   Constructing temporary pedestrian walk in roadway
         (v)   Temporarily closing roadway
         (vi)   Placing shanty or trailer on street
         (vii)   Crossing a sidewalk
         (viii)   Placing crane or derrick on street during working hours
         (ix)   Storing construction material on the street during non-working
hours
         (x)   Storing construction equipment on the street during non-working
hours
      (2)   Permits for construction activity involving building operations
shall be obtained only by the general contractor or the construction manager.
   (b)   Permit requirements. All permits are subject to applicable provisions
contained in 34 RCNY §
2-02.
   (c)   Conditions.
      (1)   Permits shall be kept on the job site or at the designated field
headquarters at all times and shall be made available for inspection.
      (2)   All obstructions on the street shall be protected by barricades,
fencing, railing with flags, lights, and/or signs, placed at proper intervals
and at prescribed hours pursuant to 34 RCNY §
2-02(h). During twilight hours the flags shall be replaced with amber lights.
      (3)   All permittees shall notify the Police Department and the
communications center of the Fire Department of all construction activities
requiring street closing at least twenty-four hours in advance of the
commencement of non-emergency work.
      (4)   Permittees may be required to obtain approval(s) from OCMC or from
a designee of the Commissioner.
      (5)   All permittees shall comply with the provisions of subdivision (g)
of 34 RCNY §
2-02, if applicable.
   (d)   Conditions for the placement or storage of construction material and
equipment (other than cranes) on the street.
      (1)   Sidewalks shall be kept clear for pedestrian passage and the
curbline shall be kept clear and unobstructed for drainage purposes.
      (2)   The street shall be protected with proper covering to prevent
damage (e.g.: planking, skids, plating, pneumatic tires) before construction
material or equipment, including containers, are placed on the street. All
planking and skids for containers must be a minimum of 1 ½" to a maximum of 3"
thick. Overall size must be a minimum of 12"×12" and the placement of the
protective covering must not exceed the outer dimensions of the container.
Protection shall be placed directly under each steel wheel or roller of the
container to adequately distribute the weight. Placement of all protection
shall be performed and completed upon delivery by the managing agent,
distributor, or owner of the container.
      (3)   The name, address and telephone number of the owner shall be
printed on two sides of each container used for construction debris. This
requirement does not apply to conex containers (commonly referred to as
shipping or cargo containers), which are not permitted on City streets unless
otherwise authorized by the Commissioner.
      (4)   Each container shall be stored in an area designated by the
Commissioner for the storage of construction material.
      (5)   All containers shall be clearly marked on all four sides with high
intensity fluorescent paint, reflectors, or other markings capable of producing
a warning glow when struck by the head lamps of a vehicle or other source of
illumination at a distance of three hundred feet.
      (6)   No temporary hoist or scaffold shall be erected on or over a
roadway without review of site plans by OCMC, approval of such plans by the
Commissioner and a permit from the Department of Buildings.
      (7)   No temporary fence which extends more than three feet onto the
street shall be erected on the sidewalk without the Commissioner's approval of
the location and a permit from the Department of Buildings.
      (8)   Construction material or equipment shall not be stored or placed
within:
         (i)   five feet of railroad tracks;
         (ii)   three feet of any city-owned electrical systems equipment
including, but not limited to, signal and lamp posts, ITS systems, cameras,
panel and/or junction boxes, provided that access to the equipment is
maintained at all times;
         (iii)   fifteen feet of hydrants or water sampling stations;
         (iv)   the area created by extending the building line to the curb
(the "corner") or within the area from ten feet of either side of the corner
(the "corner quadrant");
         (v)   any "No Standing" zone; or
         (vi)   stored at a height greater than five (5) feet, unless such
construction material or equipment is a nondivisible load which exceeds five
(5) feet in height, or unless otherwise authorized by the Commissioner.
      (9)   Permittees shall comply with all rules or permit conditions
relating to interference with access to subway facilities, fire alarms, street
signs, parking meters, emergency telephones, water main valves, utility
facilities and any city-owned electrical equipment including, but not limited
to, cameras, ITS, street light and signal poles, panel and/or junction boxes.
      (10)   Space shall be provided within the storage area for loading and
unloading construction materials and for all other permissible operations.
      (11)   The storage area shall be clearly delineated on all sides with
barricades, fencing, railing or other safety devices reflectorized and/or
illuminated pursuant to 34 RCNY §
2-02(h).
      (12)   For the purpose of mixing mortar, concrete or other materials, or
to bend steel reinforcement bars, surface protection shall be provided.
      (13)   Mortar boxes for hand mixing shall not extend beyond the area
permitted for the storage of materials on the street.
      (14)   Storage space shall not exceed eighty percent of each linear
frontage of the plot on which the buildings are to be constructed, altered or
demolished; nor shall more than one-third of the roadway width, with a maximum
of one lane measured from the curb, be encumbered with construction material
unless a street closing permit is obtained.
      (15)   The Commissioner may direct that construction material stored or
placed within the street line, particularly in a critical area, be confined to
the sidewalk frontage area where the building is to be constructed, altered or
demolished. The permittee shall enclose the sidewalk storage area with a four
foot high barricade or fence pursuant to 34 RCNY §
2-02(h) and shall provide adequate lighting and a minimum of five feet of clear
pedestrian passage. A temporary partial sidewalk closing permit shall be
required.
      (16)   All equipment hoses, cables, or wires carried overhead across the
sidewalk shall have fourteen (14) feet minimum clearance.
      (17)   All equipment hoses, cables, or wires placed on the sidewalk while
in use shall be bridged and protected by warning signs and/or lights.
      (18)   A construction activity permit shall be required for a truck crane
(boom truck) with telescopic, hydraulic or folding booms, over fifty feet and
not more than one hundred thirty-five feet with a maximum rated capacity of
three tons. A valid copy of a current "Crane Approval and Operations
Certificate (CD)" shall be obtained from the Department of Buildings when a
"Certificate of On-site Inspection" is not required.
      (19)   The permittee must maintain any protective covering placed on the
street while construction materials or equipment is on the street.
   (e)   Temporarily closing sidewalk. A temporary partial sidewalk closing
permit shall be required when more than three feet from the property line is
obstructed by a fence. A temporary full sidewalk closing permit shall be
required when a minimum clear sidewalk passage of five feet cannot be
maintained for pedestrians.
   (f)   Temporary pedestrian walkway in roadway.
      (1)   The Commissioner may require permittees to construct temporary
pedestrian walkways on the roadway when adequate pedestrian passage cannot be
maintained on the sidewalk.
      (2)   If a pedestrian walkway in the roadway is not required, warning
signs advising pedestrians to use the opposite sidewalks shall be placed and
maintained at each corner or as otherwise directed.
   (g)   Temporarily closing roadway.
      (1)   A roadway closing permit is required for closing one or more lanes
of the roadway.
      (2)   A roadway closing permit is required during blasting operations and
the firing of shots.
   (h)   Placement of shanties or trailers on the street.
      (1)   A permit shall be required to place a construction shanty, trailer,
or similar structure on the street.
      (2)   Placement of shanties or trailers is subject to the same
restrictions as the placement of equipment.
      (3)   Construction shanties or trailers shall be placed within the
storage area provided for construction materials.
      (4)   Shanties and trailers shall be removed from the street when the
building structure first floor level is covered by a roof, second floor or a
second floor slab, unless otherwise directed by the Commissioner.
      (5)   Use of a shanty or trailer anywhere on a street as a renting or
sales office shall be prohibited.
      (6)   No lettering or symbols shall be placed on a shanty or trailer
except for the name and telephone number of the contractor.
      (7)   The shanty or trailer shall be lighted or have reflectorized
striping on the exterior.
         (i)   Crossing a sidewalk.
      (1)   A permit for crossing a sidewalk shall be obtained for the delivery
or removal of any construction material or equipment on the street by vehicle
or motorized equipment across a sidewalk where there is no approved drop curb
(driveway).
      (2)   A maximum of two sidewalk crossings shall be allowed per each three
hundred linear feet.
   (j)   Placement of cranes and derricks on street. For the purposes of these
rules the terms "crane" and "derrick" shall be as defined in the New York City
Building Code.
      (1)   Permit requirements.
         (i)   Building operations.
            (A)   A crane permit shall be required for all cranes and derricks
operating in the street on building construction or related activity under the
jurisdiction of the Department of Buildings, with the exception of: truck
cranes with telescopic, hydraulic or folding booms, over fifty feet and not
more than one hundred thirty-five feet with a maximum rated capacity of three
tons, for which a construction activity permit has been issued.
            (B)   A crane permit shall be required for assist cranes with a
maximum rated capacity greater than twenty tons to assemble, operate, or
disassemble any crane on a street. Assist cranes with a maximum rated capacity
of twenty tons or less shall require a Construction Activity Permit.
            (C)   All permittees shall comply with the rules for power operated
cranes, derricks and cableways of the Department of Buildings.
         (ii)   Street operations.
            (A)   A crane permit shall be required for all cranes and derricks
operating in the street with a maximum rated capacity greater than twenty (20)
tons and which are not related to building operations.
            (B)   A construction activity permit shall be required for all
cranes and derricks with a rated capacity of twenty tons or less when used for
street related activity and where the activity is not under the jurisdiction of
the Department of Buildings. A written statement shall be submitted by the
owner of the structure, building or premises, general contractor, construction
manager, or authorized agent stating that he/she visited the site and that
there are no excavations or retaining walls and that no vaults or subsurface
construction exists at the site. If there are excavations, retaining walls,
vaults or subsurface construction existing at the site, then an affidavit shall
be submitted from a Professional Engineer indicating (1) that the sidewalk or
roadway and the supporting subgrade can safely bear the crane and crane load,
(2) that any existing vaults or other subsurface structures are capable of
supporting the crane and load, and (3) that the sheeting or retaining walls
supporting any excavations adjoining the street area are capable of supporting
the crane and load.
      (2)   Application. All applicants for a permit shall file the following:
         (i)   A standard application including the following information:
            (A)   location of the work site;
            (B)   nature of the work to be performed;
            (C)   date of commencement of crane operation and estimated
completion date;
            (D)   length of the crane's boom. (Approval of the Department of
Buildings is required for cranes with booms over two hundred fifty feet in
length, contingent upon passing a satisfactory assembled inspection for each
phase. For such cranes, a special review and approval meeting must be held with
the Department of Buildings and the applicant.);
            (E)   model and serial numbers of cranes to be used;
            (F)   crane/derrick application form #M12;
            (G)   approval or permit from the Department of Buildings in the
case of new structures, renovations or modifications made to a building, or
placement of a sign structure; and
            (H)   daily or annual overdimensional permit.
         (ii)   A sketch showing:
            (A)   proposed location of the crane in the work area;
            (B)   area to be designated for pedestrian passageway;
            (C)   measures to be taken from safeguarding and protecting
pedestrians and for maintaining vehicular traffic, including OCMC stipulations.
         (iii)   The following documentation from the Department of Buildings:
            (A)   "Crane Approval and Operations Certificate (CD)" (for all
cranes and derricks).
            (B)   "Application for a Certificate of On-Site Inspection (Crane
Notice)".
            (C)   All plans/amendments related to the operation and movement of
the crane.
      (3)   Placement. All cranes may be placed partially or entirely on the
street, in the discretion of the Commissioner, subject to the following
conditions and requirements:
         (i)   A crane shall not occupy more than one third of the roadway
width except in accordance with the stipulations set forth in the street
closing permit.
         (ii)   The extreme outer limit of the crane, in any operating or
storage position, shall be at least twelve feet from the opposite curb. The
Commissioner may issue a street closing permit when a minimum of twelve feet
cannot be maintained.
         (iii)   Cranes equipped with steel tracks shall be supported by:
            (A)   steel plates; or
            (B)   timber platforms not less than six inches thick and covering
the entire base of the crane.
         (iv)   The crane and loads shall not exceed 3,500 lbs. per square
foot.
         (v)   For cranes equipped with rubber tires:
            (A)   the pressure applied to the street surface through outriggers
or other elements of the crane shall not exceed 3,500 lbs. per square foot;
            (B)   the pressure shall be distributed by timber mats, wood
planking or steel plates, extending not less than twelve inches beyond the base
of the outriggers on all sides and sufficiently thick to uniformly distribute
the load pressure including the weight of the crane.
         (vi)   Each permittee shall ensure that the surface upon which the
crane will rest is capable of supporting the above pressures. The permittee
shall further expand the size and thickness of the timber platforms, mats and
steel plates beyond the minimum requirements stipulated above for all types of
cranes, so as not to exceed the bearing capacity of the street. This shall
apply to structural streets and streets over underground facilities/structures
as well.
         (vii)   An alternate means of distributing the load may be approved by
the Department of Buildings when a "Certificate of On-Site Inspection" is
required.
         (viii)   When any part of the crane requiring a "Certificate of On-
Site Inspection" is placed on the street, a statement by a New York State
licensed professional engineer shall be filed with the Borough Permit Office
certifying:
            (A)   that the street area and the supporting subgrade can bear the
crane load safely. Should the street condition require that the crane and load
be distributed over a larger area than afforded by the elements of the crane,
the New York State licensed professional engineer shall furnish full
dimensional details of load distribution;
            (B)   that the engineer has taken all necessary measures to
ascertain that there is no vault underneath the sidewalk area or that if a
vault does exist its roof is sufficiently strong to support the load to be
imposed thereon.
            (C)   that the sheeting or retaining walls supporting any
excavations adjoining the street bearing the load capacity are capable of
supporting the area carrying the crane and load. When the crane is used to
excavate adjacent to itself, the New York State licensed professional engineer
shall specify the sheeting or retaining wall reinforcement required to support
the crane and load.
      (4)   Master or special rigger/sign hanger. A "Certificate of Crane On-
Site Inspection" is not required for a master or special rigger or a master or
special sign hanger working within the purview of his/her license issued by the
New York City Department of Buildings. Permissible work under the supervision
of a master or special rigger or a master or special sign hanger includes:
         (i)   the hoisting or lowering of any article on the outside of any
existing/completed building;
         (ii)   the removal or installation of boilers and tanks; and
         (iii)   the erection, maintenance or removal of signs or sign
structures.
      (5)   Safety requirements.
         (i)   For purposes of safety, a flagperson(s) shall be assigned at all
times during the operation of the crane to coordinate all crane operations with
pedestrian and vehicular traffic and to give proper warnings to the crane
operator. Exceptions may be granted under the following conditions:
            (A)   Where OCMC traffic stipulations provide for the crane to be
operated in an area that has been closed to vehicular and pedestrian traffic,
and
            (B)   Where the full outward swing of the crane actually does not
exceed beyond the barricade and the sidewalk area within the swing of the crane
carriage or boom is securely barricaded pursuant to 34 RCNY §
2-02(h) to prevent pedestrian traffic or an adequate covered pedestrian walkway
is provided.
         (ii)   When a crane is stored on a street it shall be clearly marked
with adequate lighting or with high intensity fluorescent paint, reflectors, or
other markings capable of producing a warning glow when struck by the head
lamps of a vehicle or other source of illumination up to a distance of three
hundred feet.
         (iii)   It shall be unlawful for any person other than a crane
operator licensed by the Department of Buildings to operate a crane on a
street.
      (6)   Permits for the placements of a crane on the street may be issued
for the area from the northern street line of 66th Street to the extreme
southernmost tip of Manhattan as specified on the map in subdivision l and in
the following limited cases:
         (i)   When erecting from the street:
            (A)   a tower or climbing crane which will be operated within
building site property lines; or
            (B)   a temporary platform or permanent plaza within a building
site for the placement of a street crane.
         (ii)   When erecting a structure/building on a building site from the
street within one hundred and ten working days when use of a tower or climbing
crane is not practicable.
         (iii)   Temporary crane permits are issued for the erection of a
structure for a maximum of one hundred ten working days. Crane usage shall be
apportioned between the various stages of erection by the building owner, the
general contractor or the construction manager. A working day is defined as
each day covered by an active permit, not by the days a crane operates. Several
cranes operating simultaneously at the same site shall be credited with one
working day for each day covered by the active permit. The one hundred and ten
day limit shall not be exceeded. However, extensions may be granted by the
Commissioner in extraordinary circumstances.
         (iv)   Permittees shall be required to delineate the street area
authorized for use in blue thermoplastic tape or paint. Upon expiration or
revocation of the permit, the permittee shall remove the paint or markings and
restore the area to its original condition.
      (7)   Letter of Credit. To ensure full compliance with all crane permit
terms and stipulations the following requirements and procedures apply:
         (i)   Permittees are required to file a $40,000 Irrevocable Stand-by
Letter of Credit.
         (ii)   The form of the Letter of Credit and the bank upon which it is
drawn shall be approved by the Commissioner.
         (iii)   The term of such Letter of Credit shall be at least one year.
Such Letter of Credit may cover multiple crane permit locations.
         (iv)   If the permittee fails to remove a crane when required or
otherwise violates a permit condition, the terms of the Letter of Credit shall
provide that the Commissioner may demand a payment of $1,000 a day for the
first five days and $2,500 for each day thereafter.
         (v)   A Letter of Credit shall not be required in the following
circumstances:
            (A)   contractors with licensed operators performing rigging
operations, i.e. hoisting or lowering materials or equipment on or off existing
buildings;
            (B)   in special cases, contractors with licensed operators
performing rigging operations in conjunction with new building construction;
            (C)   contractors with licensed operators performing work on
elevated railroad or bridge structure engaged in street construction such as
pavement removal, trenching or bulkheading, or in the installation and/or
repair of underground shafts, sewers and water facilities.
   (k)   Format to be used for Irrevocable Stand-By Letter of Credit. 
Beneficiary
The City of New York Department of Transportation
Manhattan Street Maintenance Office
Battery Maritime Building, 4th floor
New York, New York 10004
Sir/Madam:
By order of our client (name and address of Permittee), we issue this Stand-By
Irrevocable Letter of Credit No. . . . . in your favor for $40,000.00 (Forty
Thousand U.S. Dollars) effective immediately for our client's performance under
the required Crane Permit(s) for the placement of cranes at the following
location(s):
____________________________________________
____________________________________________
Funds under this Irrevocable Letter of Credit are available by Sight Draft
drawn on us accompanied by:
   1.   A statement signed by the Commissioner of the New York City Department
of Transportation or an authorized representative stating that:
      "(Permittee Name) has failed to comply with the terms and conditions
agreed to under the permit(s) issued or has failed to remove a crane when
required. For this violation the City of New York, acting through its
Department of Transportation, is demanding a payment of $1,000.00 (One Thousand
U.S. Dollars) a day for the first five days of violation. After five days,
payment for the continuing violation is $2,500.00 (Two Thousand Five Hundred
U.S. Dollars) a day."
      "This(these) violation(s) has(have) existed for . . . days and demand is
now made for payment of (enter total amount). We have notified (Permittee name
and address) in writing that this certification is being presented."
   2.   A copy of notice given to (Permittee name) referred to in No. 1 above.
   3.   The original of this Irrevocable Letter of Credit and Amendments, if
any.
      The Sight Draft shall bear the following clause:
      "DRAWN UNDER (Bank Name), LETTER OF CREDIT NUMBER . . . . . DATED . . . .
. . . . . ."
      This Irrevocable Letter of Credit expires at (Bank office address) at the
close of business on . . . . .
      This Irrevocable Letter of Credit sets forth in full the terms of our
undertaking and such undertaking shall not in any way be modified, amended, or
amplified by reference to any document, instrument or agreement referred to
herein or to which this Irrevocable Letter of Credit relates and any such
reference shall not be deemed to incorporate herein by reference any document,
instrument or agreement.
      We agree with you that drafts drawn in compliance with the terms of this
Credit shall be honored on presentation.
      This Irrevocable Letter of Credit is subject to the Uniform Customs and
Practice for Documentary Credits (1993 Revision), International Chamber of
Commerce Publication No. 500.
   (l)   Crane Restricted Area 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4a77823de8d2ee472adfbde019448cdce82c4f8a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-294.gif]
 
   (m)   Pedestrian Traffic Managers.
      (1)   Permittees must deploy pedestrian traffic managers when required by
the department for any of the construction activities set forth in this 34 RCNY
§
2-05. Such requirement shall be set forth in a permit stipulation and may be
required where:
         (i)   the permitted construction activity is located within a high
pedestrian volume area, which significantly impacts pedestrian circulation;
and/or
         (ii)   conflicts between pedestrians, bicycles and/or vehicles occur
as a result of the construction activity.
      (2)   When deployed and during their employment and active service, all
pedestrian traffic managers must have either:
         (i)   a minimum of five years of law enforcement experience, or
         (ii)   a minimum of five years of certified flagger experience and
pedestrian traffic manager training.
      (3)   Law enforcement experience may include but not be limited to New
York City Police Department, New York City Department of Corrections, New York/
New Jersey Port Authority Police, New York State Police, military police, or
other comparable municipal law enforcement agencies. Flagger certification must
be from an accredited organization.
(Amended City Record 7/8/2016, eff. 8/7/2016)
§ 2-06 Land Contour Work.
   (a)   Permit required.
      (1)   A permit shall be obtained from the Commissioner to perform land
contour work which includes the clearing, grubbing, grading, filling or
excavation of vacant lots and other specified land parcels.
      (2)   The provisions of these rules are also applicable to the disposal
site for excavated materials.
      (3)   All permits are subject to applicable provisions contained in 34
RCNY §
2-02.
   (b)   Conditions.
      (1)   No condition shall be created or maintained that interferes with or
obstructs existing drainage, unless an alternate drainage plan is provided for
in the above plans, subject to approval by the Department of Environmental
Protection. The applicant shall provide for conduction of surface waters as
required by the Commissioner to the nearest approved Department of
Environmental Protection collection point.
      (2)   Watercourses, drainage ditches, conduits and other like or unlike
means of carrying off water or disposing of surface water shall not be
obstructed by refuse, waste, construction materials, earth, stones, tree
stumps, branches, or by any other means that may interfere with surface
drainage or cause the impoundment of surface waters either within or beyond the
area where land contour work is performed.
      (3)   All excavations shall be drained. The drainage shall be maintained
until the completion of the excavation and pumping shall be used where
necessary.
      (4)   Fill material shall consist of inert, inorganic matter, suitably
compacted. No materials shall be used other than clean earth, ashes, dirt,
concrete, rock, gravel, stone, slag, or sand. Rocks and masonry shall not be
larger than one-quarter of a cubic yard. No material larger than three inches
in dimension may be placed within two feet of the surface. For public safety
and health, the Commissioner may require a smooth graded surface treated
according to the Standard Specifications with asphalt paving mixture, compacted
cinders, stone screening, soil cement mixtures, or seeded or sodded lawn
treatment, or other material as required by the Commissioner.
      (5)   Sodding or planting, where required, shall be completed within
thirty days of work completion or as may be permitted by the Commissioner.
Safeguards shall be provided to prevent soil erosion in the interval preceding
sodding or planting.
      (6)   Work beyond lot lines shall be subject to the requirements of these
rules.
      (7)   A minimum safety factor of two shall be used against earth slides
within the property and the adjacent property. Where two parallel streets are
at unequal elevations, the land grading between these two streets generally
should be at a constant slope. Where possible the ground should be graded back
from the front property line at a grade level with the street for a distance
equal to the normal zoning set-back requirement but not less than twenty-five
feet before commencing a slope.
   (c)   Exceptions. A permit is not required for grading work to be performed
pursuant to a Department of Buildings permit for the erection of one or more
structures, provided that the permit authorizes the grading, and that the work
is performed entirely within the building site area.
   (d)   Application.
      (1)   The application shall state the following:
         (i)   name of the land surveyor or New York State licensed
professional engineer;
         (ii)   description of the land contour work;
         (iii)   work limits and number of linear feet in the work area;
         (iv)   cubic yards of fill to be placed;
         (v)   that work areas exceeding ten thousand square feet shall be
supervised by a New York State licensed professional engineer. The application
shall note the name, address, and telephone number of the New York State
licensed professional engineer;
         (vi)   whether streets adjacent to the land are finally mapped and
with whom title of the streets is vested. Prescriptive streets as determined by
the corporation counsel shall be deemed as finally mapped.
      (2)   Applicants for a Land Contour permit shall be the property owner or
the owner's authorized representative. The permit application shall be
accompanied by:
         (i)   a statement of property ownership or of authorization by the
property owner if work is to be performed by a contractor;
         (ii)   a statement from the surveyor or New York State licensed
professional engineer which states that the work will not cause adverse
drainage conditions to the property and adjacent land;
         (iii)   a plan prepared by a land surveyor or New York State licensed
professional engineer.
      (3)   Applicants shall submit a plan at a minimum scale of 1 in.= 50 ft.
or the scale required by the Commissioner. The original mylar plus one paper
print filed at the time of permit application shall be drawn according to the
Standard Specifications. The plans shall show the following:
         (i)   name of the land surveyor or New York State licensed
professional engineer;
         (ii)   existing watercourses, drainage ditches, conduits and other
drainage facilities, or like or unlike means of carrying off water, or
disposing of property surface water, and the area three hundred feet beyond the
property and any additional information as required by the Commissioner;
         (iii)   existing and proposed grades of the area to be filled or
excavated, plotted in contours spaced at five feet intervals or at other
intervals as required by the Commissioner;
         (iv)   direction of all surface water flow before and after completion
of land contour work;
         (v)   statement of the slopes to be maintained and a cross section of
the slopes;
         (vi)   soil investigation, including, but not limited to, locating the
elevation of the ground water table, whenever required by the Commissioner;
         (vii)   lines and grades of abutting streets which are legally mapped;
         (viii)   profile of the existing grade, legal grade and final grade of
the abutting street;
         (ix)   substitute for existing drainage as noted below, subject to
approval of the Department of Environmental Protection:
            (A)   interference with or obstruction of surface course causing
drainage to flow in a direction other than a general direction and drainage
pattern existing prior to the land contour work tending to cause impoundment or
flooding either within or beyond the area on which contour work is performed;
            (B)   increase of surface course drainage in the direction and
drainage pattern existing prior to the land contour work tending to cause
impoundment or flooding either within or beyond the area in which contour work
is performed; and
            (C)   interference or obstruction of existing watercourses,
drainage ditches, conduits and other like or unlike means of carrying off water
or disposing of surface water;
         (x)   proposed provisions for maintenance of existing drainage or for
any substitute that shall drain the property adequately and shall provide
safeguards against health hazards according to criteria established in
consultation with the Department of Health as noted below:
            (A)   flooding: proposed provisions to eliminate existing
conditions of surface water impoundment. The entire area under examination
shall be provided within the property. The plans shall indicate the provisions
taken to avoid direct flooding of adjacent properties or intrusion of surface
water to existing or planned individual sewage disposal systems; and
            (B)   small water impoundment: proposed provisions to avoid small
water impoundment which may become the breeding area or harborage of insects
and other pests. Pests are defined as members of the class insecta and members
of the Phylum Arthropoda including spiders, mites, ticks, mosquitoes,
centipedes and wood lice.
         (xi)   provisions for disposal of excavation material.
      (4)   Certification shall be required from a New York State licensed
professional engineer that drainage for a three hundred foot radius around the
site will not be adversely affected by grading, and that existing watercourses,
if any, will not be disturbed.
   (e)   Approval required.
      (1)   Sites designated as Wetlands shall have prior approval from the New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation.
      (2)   Sites in designated Natural Areas or in South Richmond shall
require prior approval from the City Planning Commission.
      (3)   The Commissioner may require that land contour plans be reviewed
and approved by the Department of Environmental Protection.
(Amended City Record 7/8/2016, eff. 8/7/2016)
§ 2-07 Underground Street Access Covers, Transformer Vault Covers and Gratings.
   (a)   General conditions.
      (1)   Except for work on the critical roadways during restricted times
listed in subdivision c of this section, and subject to these rules,
underground street access covers, transformer vault covers and gratings may be
opened to perform subsurface work without the prior authorization of the
Department. During a Department declared embargo, sidewalks shall be included
in the restrictions listed in paragraph (5) of subdivision (c) of this section.
      (2)   A permittee must obtain an emergency number from the Department if
they are opening an underground street access cover to perform emergency work
during an embargo period.
      (3)   Except when emergency work is being performed, if excessive traffic
congestion occurs on a roadway where underground street access covers,
transformer vault covers or gratings have been opened, any police officer or
other person authorized to enforce these rules may direct that the cover or
grating openings be closed and the affected traffic lane opened until the
traffic congestion eases. It shall be a violation of these rules to disobey
such a direction.
      (4)   The opening of covers and gratings shall not restrict more than a
maximum of 11 feet of roadway. If such opening results in a full roadway
closure, the Police Department, the Communication Centers of the Fire
Department and the Department of Transportation shall be notified
simultaneously with the closing. If such opening falls under the provisions of
subdivision (g) of 34 RCNY §
2-02, the entity opening the covers or gratings shall comply with all the
requirements of such subdivision.
      (5)   Except for emergency work or where required due to the nature of
the work, no more than two consecutive covers or gratings shall be opened at
any time on a block segment, including the adjacent intersection.
      (6)   A permit is required to store material or equipment on the street
during non-working hours whether or not the cover or grating opening is in a
critical roadway. No such permit shall be required to store tool carts on the
sidewalk. No tool cart shall be stored on a sidewalk unless a minimum passage
of five feet is maintained on the sidewalk for pedestrians. No tool cart stored
on a sidewalk or roadway shall obstruct any hydrant, water sampling station,
bus stop or driveway. A permit is required to store tool carts on the roadway.
All tool carts shall display the name, address and telephone number of the
entity that placed them on the sidewalk or roadway.
      (7)   Where subsurface work requiring the opening of covers and gratings
on a sidewalk is performed and a five foot minimum passageway on the sidewalk
cannot be maintained for pedestrians, a temporary sidewalk closing permit shall
be obtained.
      (8)   Flagpeople. Unless otherwise directed by the Commissioner,
permittees whose work results in the closing of a moving traffic lane and
requires traffic to be temporarily diverted to a travel lane in the opposite
direction, shall, at all times while actively working at the site, post a
flagperson or flagpersons or utilize an authorized plan for the maintenance and
protection of traffic at the point where traffic is diverted to assist
motorists, bicyclists, and pedestrians to proceed around the obstructed lane. 
   (b)   Maintenance requirements.
      (1)   The owners of covers or gratings on a street are responsible for
monitoring the condition of the covers, gratings and concrete pads installed
around such covers or gratings and the area extending twelve inches outward
from the edge of the cover, grating, or concrete pad, if such pad is installed.
      (2)   The owners of covers or gratings shall replace or repair any cover
or grating found to be defective and shall repair any defective street
condition found within an area extending twelve inches outward from the
perimeter of the cover or grating. Such owner must obtain a permit to maintain
a steel plate that is covering such cover or grating or such street condition.
      (3)   Street hardware shall be flush with the surrounding street surface.
Street hardware which is greater than 1/2" above or below the street surface as
measured by a six foot straight edge centered on the hardware shall be replaced
or adjusted at the owner's expense.
      (4)   Owners of underground facilities shall only use covers with their
name or registered markings clearly displayed for identification purposes.
      (5)   Covers shall be clearly identified with markings that are
registered with the Department. The owners of covers which are in good
condition but lack identifying markings shall place the assigned color code or
tag next to the cover or grating in lieu of replacement.
      (6)   Underground street access covers, transformer vault covers, and
gratings shall not be placed in any street over an opening unless they are of a
type approved by the Commissioner.
   (c)   Work in critical roadways.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in paragraphs 2 and 3 of this
subdivision, no person shall perform subsurface work requiring cover and
grating openings in the critical roadways listed in paragraph 5 of this
subdivision at the locations and during the hours specified in such paragraph.
      (2)   No person shall perform emergency work requiring cover or grating
openings in the critical roadways listed in paragraph 5 of this subdivision at
the locations and during the hours specified in such paragraph without an
emergency authorization number from the Department.
      (3)   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, subsurface work requiring
cover or grating openings may be performed at any time in traffic lanes which
are obstructed by street construction authorized by the Commissioner, i.e., by
the installation of water mains, sewers, street lighting, traffic control
devices, cranes, construction debris containers, or other construction
equipment.
      (4)   Authorization for emergency work requiring cover and grating
openings in critical roadways during restricted hours.
         (i)   An authorization number shall be obtained by the owner of the
cover or grating or the authorized agent of the owner by faxing the required
DOT request for authorization number form to the Department's Emergency
Authorization Unit, unless otherwise directed by the Commissioner. Required
information shall include, but not be limited to the following:
            (A)   Name of permittee
            (B)   Permittee ID #
            (C)   Location of emergency (including borough)
            (D)   Type of emergency (including interruption of service)
         (ii)   Authorization numbers shall be kept on site and shall be
presented upon the request of any police officer or other City employee
authorized by the Commissioner to enforce these rules. Any additional
information regarding the emergency work that is requested at the site by a
Department inspector shall be provided by the permittee and/or the persons
performing such work.
         (iii)   The fee for obtaining an authorization number shall be thirty
dollars ($30.00). Such fee shall be paid within fifteen days of billing. The
owner shall be responsible for payment of all fees imposed pursuant to this
paragraph.
         (iv)   Emergency work shall be performed on an around-the-clock basis
until the emergency is eliminated, at which time the emergency authorization
number expires, as specified in subparagraph (ii) of paragraph (2) of
subdivision (g) of 34 RCNY §
2-11.
         (v)   The person performing such emergency work shall inform the
Department's Emergency Authorization Unit within twelve hours of the completion
of such emergency work.
      (5)   Critical roadways: Work restrictions apply Monday through Friday
(except for the holidays of New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day,
Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day) at the locations (including
intersections) and during the hours listed below:
         (i)   Manhattan
            (A)   East/West Roadways – Restricted Access 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
               1.   8th Street – Avenue of the Americas to Third Avenue
               2.   9th Street – Avenue of the Americas to First Avenue
               3.   14th Street – Joe DiMaggio Highway to FDR Drive
               4.   20th Street – Avenue C to First Avenue
               5.   23rd Street – Joe DiMaggio Highway to FDR Drive/Avenue C
               6.   25th Street – FDR Drive to First Avenue
               7.   30th Street – Joe DiMaggio Highway to FDR Drive
               8.   31st Street – Tenth Avenue to Second Avenue
               9.   32nd Street – Seventh Avenue to Second Avenue
               10.   33rd Street – Joe DiMaggio Highway to First Avenue
               11.   34th Street – Joe DiMaggio Highway to FDR Drive
               12.   35th Street – Eleventh Avenue to FDR Drive
               13.   36th Street – Eleventh Avenue to FDR Drive
               14.   37th Street – Eleventh Avenue to FDR Drive
               15.   38th Street – Eleventh Avenue to FDR Drive
               16.   39th Street – Joe DiMaggio Highway to First Avenue
               17.   40th Street – Joe DiMaggio Highway to First Avenue
               18.   41st Street – Joe DiMaggio Highway to Avenue of the
Americas
               19.   42nd Street – Joe DiMaggio Highway to FDR Drive
               20.   43rd Street – First Avenue to Lexington Avenue
               21.   43rd Street – Vanderbilt Avenue to Joe DiMaggio Highway
               22.   44th Street – First Avenue to Lexington Avenue
               23.   44th Street – Vanderbilt Avenue to Joe DiMaggio Highway
               24.   45th Street – First Avenue to Joe DiMaggio Highway
               25.   46th Street – First Avenue to Eighth Avenue
               26.   47th Street – First Avenue to Eighth Avenue
               27.   48th Street – First Avenue to Eighth Avenue
               28.   49th Street – FDR Drive to Joe DiMaggio Highway
               29.   50th Street – Beekman Place to Joe DiMaggio Highway
               30.   51st Street – First Avenue to Eighth Avenue
               31.   52nd Street – First Avenue to Eighth Avenue
               32.   53rd Street – FDR Drive to Eighth Avenue
               33.   54th Street – First Avenue to Eighth Avenue
               34.   55th Street – Sutton Place to Joe DiMaggio Highway
               35.   56th Street – Sutton Place to Joe DiMaggio Highway
               36.   57th Street – Sutton Place to Joe DiMaggio Highway
               37.   58th Street – Sutton Place to Eleventh Avenue
               38.   59th Street – Fifth Avenue to Sutton Place
               39.   59th Street – West Side Highway to Columbus Avenue
               40.   60th Street – FDR Drive to Fifth Avenue
               41.   61st Street – FDR Drive to Fifth Avenue
               42.   62nd Street – FDR Drive to Fifth Avenue
               43.   63rd Street – FDR Drive to Fifth Avenue
               44.   65th Street – Central Park West to Fifth Avenue
(Transverse Roadway)
               45.   65th Street – West End Avenue to York Avenue
               46.   66th Street – Central Park West to Fifth Avenue
(Transverse Roadway)
               47.   66th Street – West End Avenue to York Avenue
               48.   71st Street – FDR Drive to York Avenue
               49.   72nd Street – Central Park West to Fifth Avenue
(Transverse Roadway)
               50.   72nd Street – Central Park West to Henry Hudson Parkway
               51.   72nd Street – Park Avenue to Fifth Avenue
               52.   73rd Street – FDR Drive to York Avenue
               53.   79th Street – Central Park West to Fifth Avenue
(Transverse Roadway)
               54.   79th Street – Henry Hudson Parkway to Broadway
               55.   79th Street – Park Avenue to Fifth Avenue
               56.   79th Street – York Avenue to FDR Drive
               57.   81st Street – Amsterdam Avenue to Central Park West
               58.   84th Street – Park Avenue to Fifth Avenue
               59.   85th Street – Park Avenue to Fifth Avenue
               60.   86th Street – Amsterdam Avenue to Central Park West
               61.   86th Street – Central Park West to Fifth Avenue
(Transverse Roadway)
               62.   92nd Street – FDR Drive to First Avenue
               63.   95th Street – Riverside Drive to Broadway
               64.   96th Street – FDR Drive to Fifth Avenue
               65.   96th Street – Henry Hudson Parkway to Central Park West
               66.   97th Street – Central Park West to Fifth Avenue
(Transverse Roadway)
               67.   97th Street – FDR Drive to Fifth Avenue
               68.   97th Street – Henry Hudson Parkway to Central Park West
               69.   106th Street – First Avenue to FDR Drive
               70.   116th Street – First Avenue to FDR Drive
               71.   125th Street – Henry Hudson Parkway to FDR Drive
               72.   135th Street – St. Nicholas Avenue to Harlem River Drive
               73.   138th Street – Malcolm X Boulevard to Harlem River Drive
               74.   145th Street – Riverside Drive to Harlem River Drive
               75.   155th Street – Riverside Drive to Harlem River Drive
               76.   158th Street – Henry Hudson Parkway to Broadway
               77.   165th Street – Riverside Drive to Broadway
               78.   178th Street – Fort Washington Avenue to Amsterdam Avenue
               79.   179th Street – Fort Washington Avenue to Amsterdam Avenue
               80.   181st Street – Riverside Drive to Amsterdam Avenue
               81.   207th Street – Broadway to Ninth Avenue
               82.   Ann Street – Park Row to Gold Street
               83.   Avenue of the Finest – Rose Street to Pearl Street
               84.   Barclay Street – West Street to Broadway
               85.   Battery Place – West Street to Broadway
               86.   Bayard Street – Baxter Street to Bowery
               87.   Beach Street – Varick Street to Avenue of the Americas
               88.   Beekman Street – Park Row to South Street
               89.   Broome Street – Varick Street to Clinton Street
               90.   Canal Street – West Street to Essex Street/East Broadway
               91.   Catherine Street – Bowery/Division Street to South Street
               92.   Central Park South – Broadway to Fifth Avenue
               93.   Chambers Street – River Terrace to Centre Street
               94.   Christopher Street – Joe DiMaggio Highway to Greenwich
Avenue/Avenue of the Americas
               95.   Clarkson Street – Joe DiMaggio Highway to Seventh Avenue
               96.   Cartlandt Street – Church Street to Broadway
               97.   Delancey Street – Clinton Street to Bowery
               98.   Dey Street – Church Street to Broadway
               99.   Division Street – Bowery to Canal Street
               100.   Dominick Street – Avenue of the Americas to Hudson Street
               101.   Dover Street – Pearl Street to South Street
               102.   Dover Street – Pell Street to Bowery
               103.   Duane Street – Greenwich Street to Lafayette Street
               104.   Dyckman Street – Henry Hudson Parkway to Harlem River
Drive
               105.   East Broadway – St. James Place to Grand Street
               106.   East Drive – Central Park South to Central Park North
               107.   Exchange Alley – Broadway to Hanover Street
               108.   Frankfort Street – Park Row to Pearl Street
               109.   Fulton Street – Church Street to South Street
               110.   Grand Street – Varick Street to South Street
               111.   Harrison Street – West Street to Hudson Street
               112.   Hester Street – Centre Street to Essex Street
               113.   Houston Street – Joe DiMaggio Highway to FDR Drive
               114.   John Street – Broadway to South Street
               115.   Kenmare Street – Lafayette Street to Bowery
               116.   Liberty Street – South End Avenue to Pearl Street
               117.   Madison Street – Avenue of the Finest to Grand Street
               118.   Maiden Lane – Broadway to South Street
               119.   Montgomery Street – East Broadway to South Street
               120.   Murray Street – North End Avenue to Broadway
               121.   Park Place – Greenwich Street to Broadway
               122.   Pearl Street – Lafayette Street to St. James Place
               123.   Pine Street – Broadway to South Street
               124.   Reade Street – Greenwich Street to Centre Street
               125.   Rector Street – West Street to Broadway
               126.   Robert F. Wagner Senior Place – Pearl Street to South
Street
               127.   Spring Street – Joe DiMaggio Highway to Bowery
               128.   Spruce Street – Park Row to Gold Street
               129.   St. Marks Place – Third Avenue to First Avenue
               130.   Thomas Street – Hudson Street to Broadway
               131.   Vesey Street – North End Avenue to Broadway
               132.   Walker Street – Beach Street to Canal Street
               133.   Wall Street – Broadway to South Street
               134.   Warren Street – Greenwich Street to Broadway
               135.   Watts Street – Broome Street to Hudson Street
               136.   West Drive – Central Park South to Central Park North
               137.   Worth Street – Hudson Street to Park Row (Chatham Square)
               Note: All service roads abutting highways, parkways, expressway,
etc. are considered to be critical streets from 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
            (B)   North/South Roadways – Restricted Access 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m.
               1.   Allen Street – East Broadway to Houston Street
               2.   Amsterdam Avenue – 59th Street to 72nd Street
               3.   Avenue C – 14th Street to 34th Street
               4.   Avenue of the Americas – Church Street to Central Park
South
               5.   Battery Park Underpass – Joe DiMaggio Highway to South
Street
               6.   Bowery – Worth Street to Third Avenue/6th Street
               7.   Broad Street – South Street to Wall Street
               8.   Broadway – Battery Place to 79th Street
               9.   Central Park West – 59th Street to 66th Street
               10.   Centre Street – Park Row to Kenmare Street
               11.   Chrystie Street – Canal Street to Houston Street
               12.   Church Street – Liberty Street to Canal Street
               13.   Cleveland Place – Kenmare Street to Lafayette Street
               14.   Clinton Street – Grand Street to Broome Street
               15.   Columbus Avenue – 59th Street to 66th Street
               16.   Eighth Avenue – Hudson Street to Central Park South
               17.   Eleventh Avenue – Joe DiMaggio Highway to 59th Street
               18.   Essex Street – Canal Street to Houston Street
               19.   FDR Drive – Whitehall Street to 125th Street
               20.   Fifth Avenue – Washington Square North to 139th Street
               21.   First Avenue – Houston Street to 66th Street
               22.   First Avenue Tunnel – 41st Street to 49th Street
               23.   Fourth Avenue – Bowery to 14th Street
               24.   Gold Street – Maiden Lane to Frankfort Street
               25.   Greenwich Street – Battery Place to Gansevoort Street
               26.   Harlem River Drive – 125th Street to Dyckman Street
               27.   Henry Hudson Parkway – 59th Street to Henry Hudson Bridge
               28.   Hudson Street – Chambers Street to 14th Street
               29.   Irving Place – 14th Street to 20th Street
               30.   Joe DiMaggio Highway – Battery Place to 59th Street
(*Restricted Access 6:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.)
               31.   Lafayette Street – Centre Street to 8th Street
               32.   LaGuardia Place – Houston Street to Washington Square
South
               33.   Lexington Avenue – Gramercy Park North to 129th Street
               34.   Madison Avenue – 23rd Street to 138th Street
               35.   Nassau Street – Wall Street to Spruce Street
               36.   Ninth Avenue – Gansevoort Street to 59th Street
               37.   Norfolk Street – Grand Street to Delancey Street
               38.   Park Avenue – 42nd Street to 66th Street
               39.   Park Avenue South – 17th Street to 42nd Street
               40.   Park Avenue Tunnel – 33rd Street to 40th Street
               41.   Park Row – Broadway to Worth Street
               42.   Pearl Street – State Street to Lafayette Street
               43.   Pike Street – South Street to East Broadway
               44.   Second Avenue – Houston Street to 66th Street
               45.   Seventh Avenue – 11th Street to Central Park South
               46.   Seventh Avenue South – Houston Street to 11th Street
               47.   South Street – Whitehall Street to Montgomery Street
               48.   St. James Place – Pearl Street to Bowery
               49.   State Street – Whitehall Street to Battery Place
               50.   Suffolk Street – Grand Street to Delancey Street
               51.   Sutton Place/Sutton Place South – 53rd Street to 59th
Street
               52.   Tenth Avenue – Joe DiMaggio Highway to 59th Street
               53.   Third Avenue – Bowery/6th Street to 66th Street
               54.   Trinity Place – Morris Street to Liberty Street
               55.   Union Square East – 14th Street to 17th Street
               56.   Union Square West – 14th Street to 17th Street
               57.   University Place – 8th Street to 14th Street
               58.   Vanderbilt Avenue – 42nd Street to 47th Street
               59.   Varick Street – West Broadway to Houston Street
               60.   Washington Street – Joseph P. Ward Street to 14th Street
               61.   Water Street – Whitehall Street to Fulton Street
               62.   West Broadway – Vesey Street to Houston Street
               63.   West End Avenue – 59th Street to 72nd Street
               64.   Whitehall Street – South Street to Broadway
               65.   William Street – Broad Street to Spruce Street
               66.   York Avenue – 59th Street to 73rd Street
               Note: All service roads abutting highways, parkways, expressway,
etc. are considered to be critical streets from 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
            (C)   North/South Roadways – Restricted Access 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m. / 4:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m.
               1.   Adam Clayton Powell Boulevard – Central Park North to 155th
Street
               2.   Amsterdam Avenue – 72nd Street to 181st Street
               3.   Broadway – 79th Street to Ninth Avenue/Harlem River
               4.   Dyckman Street – Harlem River Drive to Henry Hudson Parkway
               5.   East End Avenue – 79th Street to 90th Street
               6.   FDR Drive Southbound Service Road – 92nd Street to 97th
Street
               7.   First Avenue – 66th Street to 125th Street
               8.   Fort Washington Avenue – Broadway/158th Street to 181st
Street
               9.   Lenox Avenue – Central Park North to 145th Street
               10.   Riverside Drive – 72nd Street to Dyckman Street
               11.   Second Avenue – 66th Street to 128th Street/Harlem River
Drive
               12.   St. Nicholas Avenue – Central Park North to 181st Street
               13.   Tenth Avenue – Dyckman Street to Broadway
               14.   Third Avenue – 66th Street to 128th Street
               15.   West End Avenue – 72nd Street to 106th Street
               16.   York Avenue – 73rd Street to 92nd Street
            (D)   North/South Roadways – Restricted Access 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m.
               1.   Central Park West (southbound) – 110th Street/Cathedral
Parkway to 72nd Street
               2.   Columbus Avenue (southbound) – Cathedral Parkway/110th
Street to 66th Street
               3.   Frederick Douglass Boulevard (southbound) – 155th Street to
110th Street
               4.   Park Avenue (southbound) – 135th Street/Harlem River Drive
to 66th Street
            (E)   North/South Roadways – Restricted Access 4:00 p.m. to 8:00
p.m.
               1.   Central Park West (northbound) – 72nd Street to 110th
Street/Cathedral Parkway
               2.      Frederick Douglass Boulevard (northbound) – 110th
Street/Cathedral Parkway to 155th Street
               3.   Park Avenue (northbound) – 66th Street to 135th Street/
Harlem River Drive
         (ii)   Brooklyn
            (A)   Restricted Access 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
               1.   Adams Street – Fulton Street to Prospect Street
               2.   Belt Parkway (Shore Parkway) – Gowanus Expressway to Queens
County Line
               3.   Boerum Place – Atlantic Avenue to Fulton Street
               4.   Brooklyn-Queens Expressway – Gowanus Expressway to
Kosciusko Bridge
               5.   Cadman Plaza West – Old Fulton Street to Pierrepont Street
               6.   Court Street – Pierrepont Street to Atlantic Avenue
               7.   DeKalb Avenue – Carlton Avenue to Fulton Street
               8.   Flatbush Avenue – Concord Street/Manhattan Bridge to Grand
Army Plaza
               9.   Fourth Avenue – Shore Road to Flatbush Avenue
               10.   Furman Street – Old Fulton Street to Atlantic Avenue
               11.   Gowanus Expressway – Verrazano Bridge to Brooklyn-Queens
Expressway/Battery Tunnel
               12.   Hamilton Avenue – Third Avenue to Van Brunt Street
               13.   Hicks Street East (northbound) – Hamilton Avenue to
Atlantic Avenue
               14.   Jackie Robinson Parkway – Jamaica Avenue to County Limits
               15.   Jay Street – Fulton Street to Prospect Street
               16.   Joralemon Street – Clinton Street to Flatbush Avenue
               17.   Myrtle Avenue – Jay Street to Carlton Avenue
               18.   Nostrand Avenue – Kings Highway to Flatbush Avenue
               19.   Ocean Parkway – Church Avenue to Brighton Beach Avenue
               20.   Old Fulton Street – Furman Street to Cadman Plaza West
               21.   Prospect Expressway – Gowanus Expressway to Church Avenue
               22.   Sands Street – Navy Street to Adams Street
               23.   Smith Street – Atlantic Avenue to Fulton Street
               24.   Third Avenue – 65th Street to Flatbush Avenue
               25.   Tillary Street – Cadman Plaza West to Navy Street
               26.   Willoughby Street – Carlton Avenue to Adams Street
               Note: All service roads abutting highways, parkways, expressway,
etc. are considered to be critical streets from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
            (B)   Restricted Access 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. / 4:00 p.m. to 7:00
p.m.
               1.   17th Street – Third Avenue to Fifth Avenue
               2.   39th Street – Second Avenue to Dahill Road
               3.   65th Street – Second Avenue to Avenue P
               4.   86th Street – Fourth Avenue to McDonald Avenue
               5.   92nd Street – Seventh Avenue to Fourth Avenue
               6.   Atlantic Avenue – Furman Street to Eldert Lane
               7.   Avenue U – Ocean Parkway to Ralph Avenue
               8.   Bay Parkway – Shore Parkway to Ocean Parkway
               9.   Bay Ridge Avenue – Shore Road to Seventh Avenue
               10.   Bedford Avenue – Flatbush Avenue to Broadway
               11.   Borinquen Place – Union Avenue to Marcy Avenue
               12.   Brighton Beach Avenue – Ocean Parkway to Coney Island
Avenue
               13.   Broadway – Kent Avenue to Jamaica Avenue
               14.   Bushwick Avenue – Jamaica Avenue to Metropolitan Avenue
               15.   Caton Avenue – Fort Hamilton Parkway to Bedford Avenue
               16.   Church Avenue – Chester Avenue to Kings Highway
               17.   Columbia Street – Atlantic Avenue to Hamilton Avenue
               18.   Coney Island Avenue – Park Circle to Brighton Beach Avenue
               19.   Cooper Street – Broadway to Irwin Avenue
               20.   Cropsey Avenue – 14th Avenue to Neptune Avenue
               21.   Division Street – Kent Avenue to Williamsburg Street East
               22.   Eastern Parkway – Grand Army Plaza to Atlantic Avenue
               23.   Emmons Avenue – Shore Boulevard to Knapp Street
               24.   Empire Boulevard – Flatbush Avenue to Utica Avenue
               25.   Fifth Avenue – Fourth Avenue/97th Street to Flatbush
Avenue
               26.   Flatbush Avenue – Grand Army Plaza to Gil Hodges Memorial
Bridge
               27.   Flatlands Avenue – Kings Highway to Pennsylvania Avenue
               28.   Flushing Avenue – Carlton Avenue to Cypress Avenue
               29.   Fort Hamilton Parkway – 92nd Street to Park Circle
               30.   Fulton Street – Flatbush Avenue to Broadway
               31.   Gerritsen Avenue – Avenue U to Nostrand Avenue
               32.   Grand Street – Roebling Street to Gardner Avenue
               33.   Greenpoint Avenue – Manhattan Avenue to Kingsland Avenue
               34.   Havemeyer Street – Broadway to Metropolitan Avenue
               35.   Highland Boulevard – Bushwick Avenue to Robert Place
               36.   Humboldt Avenue – Greenpoint Avenue to Maspeth Avenue
               37.   Jamaica Avenue – Broadway to Eldert Lane
               38.   Kent Avenue – Williamsburg Street West to Calver Street
               39.   Kings Highway – Avenue P to Eastern Parkway
               40.   Kingsland Avenue – Greenpoint Avenue to Maspeth Avenue
               41.   Knapp Street – Emmons Avenue to Nostrand Avenue
               42.   Liberty Avenue – Eastern Parkway to 75th Street
               43.   Linden Boulevard – Bedford Avenue to 78th Street
               44.   Manhattan Avenue – Broadway to Commercial Street
               45.   Marcy Avenue – Broadway to Metropolitan Avenue
               46.   Marcy Avenue – Fulton Street to Flushing Avenue
               47.   McGuinness Boulevard – Ash Street/Pulaski Bridge to Meeker
Avenue
               48.   Meeker Avenue – Gardner Avenue to Metropolitan Avenue
               49.   Metropolitan Avenue – Kent Avenue to Scott Avenue
               50.   Myrtle Avenue – Carlton Avenue to Wychoff Avenue
               51.   Nassau Street – Flatbush Avenue to Carlton Avenue
               52.   Neptune Avenue – Cropsey Avenue to Shore Boulevard
               53.   New Utrecht Avenue – 86th Street to 39th Street
               54.   New York Avenue – Foster Avenue to Fulton Street
               55.   North Conduit Avenue – Atlantic Avenue to Sutter Avenue
               56.   Nostrand Avenue – Emmons Avenue to Kings Highway
               57.   Ocean Avenue – Emmons Avenue to Flatbush Avenue
               58.   Park Avenue – Navy Street to Classon Avenue
               59.   Parkside Avenue – Park Circle to Ocean Avenue/Flatbush
Avenue
               60.   Pennsylvania Avenue – Belt Parkway to Jamaica Avenue
               61.   Prospect Avenue – Fort Hamilton Parkway to Third Avenue
               62.   Ralph Avenue – Avenue U to Flatlands Avenue
               63.   Remsen Avenue – Seaview Avenue to Utica Avenue
               64.   Rockaway Parkway – Canarsie Veteran's Circle to East New
York Avenue
               65.   Rodney Street – Broadway to Metropolitan Avenue
               66.   Roebling Street – South 5th Street to Metropolitan Avenue
               67.   Second Avenue – Wakeman Place to 60th Street
               68.   Seventh Avenue – 86th Street to 65th Street
               69.   South Conduit Avenue – Atlantic Avenue to Sutter Avenue
               70.   Stillwell Avenue – Surf Avenue to Avenue P
               71.   Surf Avenue – West 17th Street to Ocean Parkway
               72.   Third Avenue – Shore Road to 65th Street
               73.   Utica Avenue – Flatbush Avenue to Eastern Parkway
               74.   Washington Avenue – Lincoln Road to Flushing Avenue
            (C)   Restricted Access 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.
               1.   Hicks Street – Atlantic Avenue to Old Fulton Street
               2.   Smith Street – Hamilton Avenue to Atlantic Avenue
            (D)   Restricted Access 4:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m.
               1.   Court Street – Atlantic Avenue to Hamilton Avenue
               2.   Hicks Street West (southbound) – Congress Street to
Hamilton Avenue
         (iii)   Bronx
            (A)   Restricted Access 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
               1.   Bronx River Parkway – Bruckner Expressway to 238th Street
               2.   Bruckner Boulevard – Third Avenue to Bronx River Avenue
               3.   Bruckner Expressway – Major Deegan Expressway to Hutchinson
River Parkway
               4.   Cross Bronx Expressway – Throgs Neck Expressway to Major
Deegan Expressway
               5.   East 138th Street – Exterior Street to Bruckner Boulevard
               6.   Henry Hudson Parkway – Henry Hudson Bridge to Westchester
County Line
               7.   Hutchinson River Parkway – Bronx-Whitestone Bridge to
Westchester County Line
               8.   Major Deegan Expressway – Bruckner Expressway to
Westchester County Line
               9.   Mosholu Parkway – Henry Hudson Parkway to Dr. Theodore
Kazimiroff Boulevard
               10.   New England Thruway – Hutchinson River Parkway to
Westchester County Line
               11.   Sheridan Expressway – Bruckner Expressway to Cross Bronx
Expressway
               12.   Throgs Neck Expressway – Throgs Neck Bridge to Bruckner
Expressway
               Note: All service roads abutting highways, parkways, expressway,
etc. are considered to be critical streets from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
            (B)   Restricted Access 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. / 4:00 p.m. to 7:00
p.m.
               1.   Bailey Avenue – Sedgwick Avenue to Van Cortlandt Park South
               2.   Barretto Avenue – Garrisson Avenue to Bruckner Boulevard
               3.   Bartow Avenue – Gun Hill Road to Hutchinson River Parkway
East
               4.   Baychester Avenue – East 241st Street to Hutchinson River
Parkway West
               5.   Boston Road – Third Avenue to Ropes Avenue
               6.   Broadway – West 225th Street to West 262nd Street
               7.   Bronx Boulevard – East 233rd Street to Burke Avenue
               8.   Bronx Park East – Burke Avenue to White Plains Road
               9.   Bronx River Avenue – Story Avenue to Westchester Avenue
               10.   Bruckner Boulevard – Bronx River Avenue to Westchester
Avenue
               11.   Brush Avenue – Cross Bronx Expressway to Lafayette Avenue
               12.   Burnside Avenue – Sedgwick Avenue to Webster Avenue
               13.   Castle Hill Avenue – East Tremont Avenue to Hart Street
               14.   City Island Avenue – Sutherland Street to Belden Street
               15.   City Island Road – Pelham Parkway to Sutherland Street
               16.   Conner Avenue – Tillotson Avenue to East 233rd Street
               17.   Co-op City Boulevard – Tillotson Avenue to Bartow Avenue
               18.   Dewey Avenue – Balcom Avenue to Hollywood Avenue
               19.   Dr. Theodore Kazimiroff Boulevard – East Fordham Road to
Bronx Park East
               20.   Dyre Avenue – Lustre Street to Boston Road
               21.   East 149th Street – River Avenue to Southern Boulevard
               22.   East 161st Street – Jerome Avenue to Third Avenue
               23.   East 163rd Street – Webster Avenue to Bruckner Boulevard
               24.   East 177th Street – Ferris Avenue to Harding Avenue
               25.   East 177th Street – Rodman Place to Rosedale Avenue
               26.   East 222nd Street – Bronx Boulevard to Baychester Avenue
               27.   East 233rd Street – Jerome Avenue to Boston Road
               28.   East 241st Street – Bullard Avenue to Baychester Avenue
               29.   Eastchester Road – East 222nd Street to Williamsbridge
Road
               30.   Edson Avenue – Boston Road to East Gun Hill Road
               31.   Edward L. Grant Highway – Jerome Avenue to University
Avenue
               32.   Featherbed Lane – University Avenue to Macombs Road
               33.   Ferris Avenue – Bronx Whitestone Bridge Plaza to Lafayette
Avenue
               34.   Fordham Road – Cedar Avenue to Boston Road
               35.   Garrisson Avenue – Leggett Avenue to Edgewater Road
               36.   Grand Avenue – Macombs Road to West 177th Street
               37.   Grand Concourse – 138th Street to Mosholu Parkway
               38.   Gun Hill Road – Mosholu Parkway Service Road to Stillwell
Avenue
               39.   Hunts Point Avenue – Halleck Street to Bruckner Boulevard
               40.   Hutchinson River Parkway East – Baychester Avenue to
Bartow Avenue
               41.   Hutchinson River Parkway West – Baychester Avenue to
Bartow Avenue
               42.   Jarvis Avenue – Burke Avenue to Country Club Road
               43.   Jerome Avenue – East 161st Street to East 233rd Street
               44.   Kingsbridge Road – Bailey Avenue to East Fordham Road
               45.   Lafayette Avenue – Brush Avenue to Ellsworth Avenue
               46.   Lafayette Avenue – Edgewater Road to Bruckner Boulevard
               47.   Leggett Avenue – Garrisson Avenue to Bruckner Boulevard
               48.   Longwood Avenue – Garrisson Avenue to Bruckner Boulevard
               49.   Melrose Avenue – East 149th Street to Brook Avenue
               50.   Metropolitan Avenue – Westchester Avenue to Castle Hill
Avenue
               51.   Middletown Road – Westchester Avenue to Bruckner Boulevard
               52.   Morris Park Avenue – East 177th Street to Eastchester Road
               53.   Mosholu Avenue – West 254th Street to Broadway
               54.   Mosholu Parkway Service Road – Webster Avenue to West Gun
Hill Road/Van Cortlandt Park South
               55.   Nereid Avenue – Bronx Boulevard to Seton Avenue
               56.   Pelham Parkway – Boston Road to Burr Avenue
               57.   Pelham Parkway – Hutchinson River Parkway to City Island
Road
               58.   Riverdale Avenue – West 252nd Street to West 263rd Street
               59.   Rosedale Avenue – Sound View Avenue to East Tremont Avenue
               60.   Sedgwick Avenue (Dr. Martin Luther King Boulevard) –
Jerome Avenue to Mosholu Parkway
               61.   Shore Road – City Island Road to Park Drive
               62.   Sound View Avenue – Metcalf Avenue to White Plains Road
               63.   Southern Boulevard – Bruckner Boulevard to East Fordham
Road
               64.   Third Avenue – Bruckner Boulevard to Webster Avenue/West
Fordham Road
               65.   Throgs Neck Boulevard – Harding Avenue to Layton Avenue
               66.   Tillotson Avenue – Eastchester Road to Hutchinson Avenue
               67.   Tremont Avenue – Sedgwick Avenue to Schurz Avenue
               68.   Union Port Road – White Plains Road to Westchester Avenue
               69.   University Avenue – Sedgwick Avenue (Dr. Martin Luther
King Boulevard) to Kingsbridge Road
               70.   Van Cortlandt Park South – Broadway to Mosholu Parkway
Service Road
               71.   Webster Avenue – Brook Avenue to Nereid Avenue
               72.   West 225th Street – Broadway to Bailey Avenue
               73.   West 230th Street – Broadway to Bailey Avenue
               74.   West 230th Street – East Henry Hudson Parkway to West
Henry Hudson Parkway Service Roads
               75.   West 231st Street – Broadway to Bailey Avenue
               76.   West 232nd Street – East Henry Hudson Parkway to West
Henry Hudson Parkway Service Roads
               77.   West 233rd Street – Broadway to Bailey Avenue
               78.   West 234th Street – Broadway to Bailey Avenue
               79.   West 238th Street – Broadway to Bailey Avenue
               80.   West 239th Street – East Henry Hudson Parkway to West
Henry Hudson Parkway Service Roads
               81.   West 246th Street – East Henry Hudson Parkway to West
Henry Hudson Parkway Service Roads
               82.   West 252nd Street – East Henry Hudson Parkway to West
Henry Hudson Parkway Service Roads
               83.   West 256th Street – East Henry Hudson Parkway to West
Henry Hudson Parkway Service Roads
               84.   Westchester Avenue – Third Avenue to Bruckner Expressway
               85.   White Plains Road – East 243rd Street to Sound View Avenue
               86.   Whitlock Avenue – Westchester Avenue to East 163rd Street
               87.   Williamsbridge Road – White Plains Road to Westchester
Avenue
               88.   Willis Avenue – Bruckner Boulevard to 149th Street
         (iv)   Queens
            (A)   Restricted Access 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
               1.   Belt Parkway – Laurelton Parkway to Brooklyn County Line
               2.   Brooklyn-Queens Expressway – Kosciusko Bridge to Grand
Central Parkway
               3.   Clearview Expressway – Cross Island Parkway to Grand
Central Parkway
               4.   Cross Island Parkway – Bronx-Whitestone Bridge Approach to
Southern State Parkway
               5.   Grand Central Parkway – Triboro Plaza to Nassau County Line
               6.   Jackie Robinson Parkway – Brooklyn County Line to Grand
Central Parkway/Van Wyck Expressway Interchange
               7.   JFK Expressway – Belt Parkway to JFK Airport
               8.   Laurelton Parkway – Southern State Parkway to Belt Parkway
               9.   Long Island Expressway – Brooklyn-Queens Expressway to
Nassau County Line (*Restricted Access 6:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
               10.   Nassau Expressway – Rockaway Boulevard to Belt Parkway
               11.   Queens Plaza North – Northern Boulevard to Crescent Street
               12.   Queens Plaza South – Crescent Street to Jackson Avenue
               13.   Van Wyck Expressway – Grand Central Parkway/Whitestone
Expressway to JFK Airport
               14.   Whitestone Expressway – Cross Island Parkway to Grand
Central Parkway/Van Wyck Expressway Interchange
               Note: All service roads abutting highways, parkways, expressway,
etc. are considered to be critical streets from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
            (B)   Restricted Access 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. / 4:00 p.m. to 7:00
p.m.
               1.   14th Avenue – College Point Boulevard to Francis Lewis
Boulevard
               2.   21st Street – Borden Avenue to Ditmars Boulevard
               3.   27th Street – Queens Plaza South to 44th Drive
               4.   31st Drive – Astoria Boulevard to Ditmars Boulevard
               5.   31st Street – 39th Avenue to Ditmars Boulevard
               6.   34th Avenue – Vernon Boulevard to Northern Boulevard
               7.   37th Avenue – 108th Street to 114th Street
               8.   37th Avenue – College Point Boulevard to Union Avenue
               9.   38th Avenue – College Point Boulevard to Union Avenue
               10.   39th Avenue – College Point Boulevard to Union Avenue
               11.   39th Street – Northern Boulevard to Hunters Point Avenue
               12.   44th Drive – Vernon Boulevard to Jackson Avenue
               13.   48th Street – Greenpoint Avenue to Northern Boulevard
               14.   49th Avenue – Vernon Boulevard to 21st Street
               15.   50th Avenue – Vernon Boulevard to 21st Street
               16.   51st Avenue – Hunters Point Avenue to 58th Street
               17.   58th Street – Maspeth Avenue to Queens Boulevard
               18.   69th Road – Queens Boulevard to Park Drive East
               19.   69th Street – Broadway to Metropolitan Avenue
               20.   73rd Avenue – Kissena Boulevard to Springfield Boulevard
               21.   80th Street – Cooper Avenue to Furmanville Avenue
               22.   82nd Street – Ditmars Boulevard to Roosevelt Avenue
               23.   94th Street – Ditmars Boulevard to 32nd Avenue
               24.   108th Street – Astoria Boulevard to Queens Boulevard
               25.   114th Street – Northern Boulevard to 44th Avenue
               26.   130th Avenue – 238th Street to Brookville Boulevard
               27.   130th Street – South Conduit Avenue to North Conduit
Avenue
               28.   150th Street – Rockaway Boulevard to South Conduit Avenue
               29.   164th Street – Hillside Avenue to Northern Boulevard
               30.   225th Street – North Conduit Avenue to South Conduit
Avenue
               31.   Archer Avenue – 138th Street to Merrick Boulevard
               32.   Astoria Boulevard – 82nd Street to Northern Boulevard
               33.   Astoria Boulevard North – 31st Street to 82nd Street
               34.   Astoria Boulevard South – 31st Street to 82nd Street
               35.   Atlantic Avenue – Eldert Lane to 94th Avenue
               36.   Beach 20th Street – Seagirt Boulevard to Mott Avenue
               37.   Beach Channel Drive – Cronstone Avenue to Horton Avenue
               38.   Bell Boulevard – 158th Street to 86th Avenue
               39.   Booth Memorial Avenue – College Point Boulevard to Long
Island Expressway
               40.   Borden Avenue – Vernon Boulevard to Greenpoint Avenue
               41.   Braddock Avenue – Springfield Boulevard to Jericho
Turnpike
               42.   Broadway – Vernon Boulevard to Queens Boulevard
               43.   Brookville Boulevard – South Conduit Avenue to Francis
Lewis Boulevard
               44.   Caldwell Avenue – 69th Street to Dry Harbor Road
               45.   Central Avenue – Mott Avenue to Virginia Street
               46.   College Point Boulevard – 14th Avenue to Long Island
Expressway
               47.   Commonwealth Boulevard – Littleneck Parkway to Hillside
Avenue
               48.   Continental Avenue – Metropolitan Avenue to Queens
Boulevard
               49.   Cooper Avenue – Irving Avenue to Woodhaven Boulevard
               50.   Crescent Street – 39th Avenue to 44th Drive
               51.   Cronston Avenue – Beach 169th Street to Beach Channel
Drive
               52.   Cross Bay Boulevard – Woodhaven Boulevard to Rockaway
Beach Boulevard
               53.   Cypress Hills Street – Fresh Pond Road to Jamaica Avenue
               54.   Ditmars Boulevard – 21st Street to Astoria Boulevard
               55.   Douglaston Parkway – Northern Boulevard to Winchester
Boulevard
               56.   Dry Harbor Road – Furmanville Avenue to Woodhaven
Boulevard
               57.   Edgemere Avenue – Fernside Place to Rockaway Beach
Boulevard
               58.   Eliot Avenue – Metropolitan Avenue to Queens Boulevard
               59.   Elmhurst Avenue – 108th Street to Broadway
               60.   Farmers Boulevard – Hollis Avenue to Rockaway Boulevard
               61.   Flushing Avenue – Cypress Avenue to Grand Avenue
               62.   Francis Lewis Boulevard – 15th Avenue to Hooks Creek
Boulevard
               63.   Fresh Pond Road – Maspeth Avenue to Myrtle Avenue
               64.   Grand Avenue – 47th Street to Queens Boulevard
               65.   Greenpoint Avenue – Review Avenue to Queens Boulevard
               66.   Guy R. Brewer Boulevard – Jamaica Avenue to Rockaway
Boulevard
               67.   Hempstead Turnpike – Jamaica Avenue to Cross Island
Parkway
               68.   Hillside Avenue – Myrtle Avenue to Langdale Street
               69.   Hollis Avenue – Jamaica Avenue to Springfield Boulevard
               70.   Hollis Court Boulevard – Utopia Parkway to Francis Lewis
Boulevard
               71.   Hollis Hill Terrace – 73rd Avenue to 86th Avenue
               72.   Home Lawn Street – Hillside Avenue to 82nd Road
               73.   Hook Creek Boulevard – Francis Lewis Boulevard to Merrick
Boulevard
               74.   Hoyt Avenue North – 21st Avenue to 31st Street
               75.   Hoyt Avenue South – 21st Avenue to 31st Street
               76.   Hunters Point Avenue – 21st Street to 51st Avenue
               77.   Jackson Avenue – 51st Avenue to Queens Boulevard
               78.   Jamaica Avenue – Eldert Lane to Jericho Turnpike
               79.   Jewel Avenue – 108th Street to 73rd Avenue
               80.   Junction Boulevard – 32nd Avenue to Queens Boulevard
               81.   Kissena Boulevard – Main Street to Parsons Boulevard
               82.   Laurel Hill Boulevard – Review Avenue to Queens Boulevard
               83.   Lefferts Boulevard – South Conduit Avenue to Queens
Boulevard
               84.   Liberty Avenue – 75th Street to Farmers Boulevard
               85.   Linden Boulevard – Rockaway Boulevard to Cross Island
Parkway
               86.   Linden Place – 23rd Avenue to Northern Boulevard
               87.   Little Neck Parkway – Jamaica Avenue to Marathon Parkway
               88.   Main Street – Northern Boulevard to Queens Boulevard
               89.   Marathon Parkway – Littleneck Parkway to Commonwealth
Boulevard
               90.   Maurice Avenue – Maspeth Avenue to 69th Street
               91.   Merrick Boulevard – Hillside Avenue to Hook Creek
Boulevard
               92.   Metropolitan Avenue – Onderdonk Avenue to Jamaica Avenue
               93.   Myrtle Avenue – Wychoff Avenue to Jamaica Avenue
               94.   North Conduit Avenue – Sutter Avenue to Hook Creek
Boulevard
               95.   Northern Boulevard – Queens Plaza North to City Limits
               96.   Park Drive East – Union Turnpike to 136th Street
               97.   Parsons Avenue – Parsons Boulevard to Utopia Parkway
               98.   Parsons Boulevard – North Drive to Jamaica Avenue
               99.   Queens Boulevard – Jackson Avenue to Jamaica Avenue
               100.   Queens Plaza East – Queens Boulevard to 39th Avenue
               101.   Queens Plaza North – Crescent Street to 21st Street
               102.   Queens Plaza South – Vernon Boulevard to Crescent Street
               103.   Rockaway Beach Boulevard – Beach 149th Street to Beach
Channel Drive
               104.   Rockaway Boulevard – Eldert Lane to 3rd Street
               105.   Rockaway Freeway – Beach Channel Drive to Regina Avenue
               106.   Rockaway Point Boulevard/Rockaway Breezy Boulevard –
Beach 222nd Street to Beach 193rd Street
               107.   Roosevelt Avenue – Queens Boulevard to Northern Boulevard
               108.   Sanford Avenue – College Point Boulevard to Northern
Boulevard
               109.   Seagirt Boulevard – Edgemere Avenue to Beach 6th Street
               110.   Skillman Avenue – Hunters Point Avenue to Roosevelt
Avenue
               111.   South Conduit Avenue – Sutter Avenue to Hook Creek
Boulevard
               112.   South Road – Sutphin Boulevard to Liberty Avenue
               113.   Spencer Avenue – 86th Avenue to Springfield Boulevard
               114.   Springfield Boulevard – Northern Boulevard to 47th Avenue
               115.   State Road – Beach 193rd Street to Beach 169th Street
               116.   Steinway Street – Ditmars Boulevard to Northern Boulevard
               117.   Sutphin Boulevard – Hillside Avenue to Rockawy Boulevard
               118.   Thomson Avenue – Jackson Avenue to Van Dam Street
               119.   Union Street – Sanford Avenue to Willets Point Boulevard
               120.   Union Turnpike – Myrtle Avenue to Langdale Street
               121.   Utopia Parkway – 14th Avenue to 82nd Road
               122.   Van Dam Street – Greenpoint Avenue to Skillman Avenue
               123.   Vernon Boulevard – 21st Street to 51st Avenue
               124.   West Alley Road – 230th Street to Douglaston Parkway
               125.   Willets Point Boulevard – Union Street to Utopia Parkway
               126.   Woodhaven Boulevard – Queens Boulevard to Liberty Avenue
               127.   Yellowstone Boulevard – Woodhaven Boulevard to Queens
Boulevard
         (v)   Staten Island
            (A)   Restricted Access 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
               1.   Amboy Road – Richmond Road to Arden Avenue
               2.   Arthur Kill Road – Richmond Road to Bloomingdale Road
               3.   Bay Street – School Road to Richmond Terrace
               4.   Forest Avenue – Victory Boulevard to Richmond Avenue
               5.   Forest Hill Road – Richmond Avenue to Willowbrook Road
               6.   Hylan Boulevard – Midland Avenue to Tysens Lane
               7.   Richmond Road – Targee Street to Arthur Kill Road
               8.   Richmond Terrace – Bay Street to Morningstar Road
               9.   Staten Island Expressway – Verrazano Narrows Bridge to
Goethals Bridge
               10.   Todt Hill Road – Richmond Road to Westwood Avenue
               11.   Travis Avenue – Richmond Avenue to South Avenue
               12.   Victory Boulevard – Bay Street to West Service Road
               13.   West Shore Expressway – Richmond Parkway to Staten Island
Expressway
               14.   Woolley Avenue – Willowbrook Road to North Gannon Avenue
               Note: All service roads abutting highways, parkways, expressway,
etc. are considered to be critical streets from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
            (B)   Restricted Access 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. / 4:00 p.m. to 7:00
p.m.
               1.   Amboy Road – Arden Avenue to Main Street
               2.   Arden Avenue – Hylan Boulevard to Arthur Kill Road
               3.   Arthur Kill Road – Bloomingdale Road to Main Street
               4.   Bloomingdale Road – Amboy Road to Arthur Kill Road
               5.   Bradley Avenue – Brielle Avenue to Victory Boulevard
               6.   Brielle Avenue – Manor Road to Rockland Avenue
               7.   Castleton Avenue – Jersey Street to Port Richmond Avenue
               8.   Clarke Avenue – Amboy Road to Arthur Kill Road
               9.   Clove Road – Hylan Boulevard to Richmond Road
               10.   Clove Road – Narrows Road South to Richmond Terrace
               11.   Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Expressway – Victory Boulevard
to Bayonne Bridge
               12.   Fahy Avenue – South Avenue to Richmond Avenue
               13.   Fingerboard Road – Hylan Boulevard to Bay Street
               14.   Forest Avenue – Richmond Avenue to South Avenue
               15.   Giffords Lane – Amboy Road to Arthur Kill Road
               16.   Goethals Road North – Richmond Avenue to Western Avenue
               17.   Howard Avenue – Clove Road to Louis Street
               18.   Huguenot Avenue – Hylan Boulevard to Arthur Kill Road
               19.   Hylan Boulevard – Bay Street to Midland Avenue
               20.   Hylan Boulevard – Tysens Lane to Arden Avenue
               21.   Jewett Avenue – Victory Boulevard to Richmond Terrace
               22.   Korean War Memorial Parkway/Richmond Parkway – Outerbridge
Crossing to Arthur Kill Road
               23.   Little Clove Road – Clove Road to Victory Boulevard
               24.   Manor Road – Rockland Avenue to Forest Avenue
               25.   Midland Avenue – Father Capodanno Boulevard to Richmond
Road
               26.   Morningstar Road – Forest Avenue to Richmond Terrace
               27.   Narrows Road North – Fingerboard Road to Clove Road
               28.   Narrows Road South – Clove Road to Lily Pond Avenue
               29.   Nelson Avenue – Hylan Boulevard to Amboy Road
               30.   New Dorp Lane – Mill Road to Richmond Road
               31.   North Gannon Avenue – Slosson Avenue to Victory Boulevard
               32.   Ocean Terrace – Manor Road to Milford Drive
               33.   Page Avenue – Hylan Boulevard to South Bridge Street
               34.   Port Richmond Avenue – Forest Avenue to Richmond Terrace
               35.   Richmond Avenue – Forest Avenue to Hylan Boulevard
               36.   Richmond Hill Road – Richmond Road to Richmond Avenue
               37.   Richmond Terrace – South Avenue to Morningstar Road
               38.   Rockland Avenue – Richmond Road to Richmond Avenue
               39.   Schmidts Lane – Manor Road to Slosson Avenue
               40.   Seguine Avenue – Hylan Boulevard to Amboy Road
               41.   Slosson Avenue – Westwood Avenue to Martling Avenue
               42.   South Avenue – Chelsea Road to Richmond Terrace
               43.   South Gannon Avenue – Victory Boulevard to Manor Road
               44.   West Fingerboard Road – Hylan Boulevard to Richmond Road
               45.   Western Avenue – Gulf Avenue to Richmond Terrace
               46.   Willowbrook Road – Victory Boulevard to Forest Avenue
               47.   Windsor Road – Little Clove Road to Slosson Avenue
            (C)   Restricted Access 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.
               1.   Father Capodanno Boulevard (northbound) – Midland Avenue to
Ocean Avenue
               2.   Lily Pond Avenue (northbound) – Ocean Avenue to Tompkins
Avenue
               3.   School Road (northbound) – Tompkins Avenue to Bay Street
               4.   Targee Street – Richmond Road to Van Duzer Street
            (D)   Restricted Access 4:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m.
               1.   Ebbitts Street – Mill Road to Hylan Boulevard
               2.   Father Capodanno Boulevard (southbound) – Ocean Avenue to
Lincoln Avenue
               3.   Lily Pond Avenue (southbound) – Tompkins Avenue to Ocean
Avenue
               4.   Lincoln Avenue – Father Capodanno Boulevard to Hylan
Boulevard
               5.   School Road (southbound) – Bay Street to Tompkins Avenue
               6.   St. Paul's Avenue – Hyatt Street to Van Duzer Street
               7.   Tysens Lane – Mill Road to Hylan Boulevard
               8.   Van Duzer Street – St. Paul's Avenue to Richmond Terrace
(Amended City Record 7/8/2016, eff. 8/7/2016; amended City Record 3/6/2019,
eff. 4/5/2019)
§ 2-08 Newsracks.
   (a)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall
have the following meanings:
      (1)   Newsrack. "Newsrack" shall mean any self-service or coin-operated
box, container or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the
display, sale or distribution of newspapers or other written matter to the
general public.
      (2)   Person. "Person" shall mean a natural person, partnership,
corporation, limited liability company or other association.
      (3)   Sidewalk. "Sidewalk" shall mean that portion of a street between
the curb lines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property
lines, but not including the curb, intended for the use of pedestrians.
      (4)   Crosswalk. "Crosswalk" shall mean that part of a roadway, whether
marked or unmarked, which is included within the extension of the sidewalk
lines between opposite sides of the roadway at an intersection.
      (5)   Crosswalk area. "Crosswalk area" shall mean that area of the
sidewalk bounded by the extension of the lines of a crosswalk onto the sidewalk
up to the building or property line.
      (6)   Corner area. "Corner area" shall mean that area of a sidewalk
encompassed by the extension of the building lines to the curb on each corner.
      (7)   Board. "Board" shall mean the environmental control board of the
city of New York.
      (8)   Multiple-vending newsrack. A newsrack designed to hold two or more
different publications.
      (9)   Owner. When applied to newsracks, "owner" shall mean a person who
owns or is in control of one or more newsracks placed, installed or maintained
on a sidewalk. Each newsrack shall have a single owner for purposes of
complying with this section and the provisions of § 19-128.1 of the New York
City Administrative Code.
   (b)   Placement.
      (1)   Manner.
         (i)   Newsracks shall be weighted down on all sidewalks in such a way
as to insure that the newsrack cannot be tipped over.
         (ii)   Newsracks shall not be bolted to the sidewalk, except that
multiple-vending newsracks may be bolted pursuant to a permit from the
Department, except as provided in paragraph 2 of this subdivision b.
         (iii)   A newsrack may not be chained to property owned or maintained
by the city, except that newsracks may be chained to lampposts (except for
decorative lampposts). A newsrack so chained must not be in an unlawful
location as specified in subdivision (c) of this section. To the extent an
owner seeks to chain such newsrack to property not owned or maintained by the
city, the consent of the owner of or person responsible for such property is
required. In all cases where the use of chains to secure newsracks is
permitted, such chains shall be made of galvanized steel with a plastic or
rubber protective coating, at least 0.14 inches thick, and shall allow a
distance of no more than eight (8) inches between the newsrack and the street
furniture to which it is chained.
      (2)   Distinctive sidewalks. Multiple-vending newsracks may be bolted to
sidewalks comprised of distinctive material, including, but not limited to,
granite, terrazzo or bluestone, pursuant to a permit from the Department and
provided that the written permission of the property owner or other entity that
installed the distinctive sidewalk is obtained in advance of such bolting.
      (3)   Sidewalk repair and restoration. An owner shall be responsible for
any damage caused or repairs necessitated by the installation, presence or
maintenance of such newsrack. Such owner also shall be responsible for any
damage caused or repairs necessitated by the removal of a newsrack by either
such owner or by an authorized officer or employee of the Department or of any
city agency who is designated by the Commissioner, or by a police officer. Such
repairs shall be made promptly and in accordance with the Standard
Specifications, Standard Detail Drawings, and Instructions for Filing Plans and
Guidelines for the Design of Sidewalks, Curbs, Roadways and Other
Infrastructure Components, or as otherwise directed by the Commissioner.
      (4)   Notification to the Department of location of newsracks.
         (i)   Where a newsrack has been placed or installed on a sidewalk
before September 13, 2004, the owner shall, by November 1, 2004, have notified
the Department by facsimile, electronically or by other means as directed by
the Commissioner and on a form approved or provided by the Commissioner, of
            (A)   the location of such newsrack;
            (B)   the name of the newspaper(s) or written matter to be offered
for distribution in such newsrack; and
            (C)   the name, address, telephone number, and e-mail address of
the owner. The name and address shall be identical to the name and address for
mailing of process in the owner's Certificate of Incorporation or Application
for Authority to do business in New York State. The owner shall represent that
such newsracks comply with the provisions of this section and § 19-128.1 of the
New York City Administrative Code.
         (ii)   Any other owner shall, at least seven (7) days prior to the
installation of its first newsrack, provide to the Department the
indemnification notification and insurance certification required pursuant to
subdivision f of this section and the information required in clauses (B) and
(C) of subparagraph (i) of this paragraph.
         (iii)   Subsequent to the initial notification required by
subparagraphs (i) and (ii) of this paragraph, notification shall be made on an
annual basis by November 1 of each year and shall include the information in
clauses (A), (B), and (C) of subparagraph (i) of this paragraph.
         (iv)   If the number of newsracks owned or controlled by an owner
increases or decreases by ten (10) percent or more of the number of newsracks
that have been included in the most recent notification required to be
submitted by such owner, such owner shall also be required to submit the
information in clauses (A), (B), and (C) of subparagraph (i) of this paragraph
within seven (7) days of such change.
         (v)   An owner shall advise the Department of any change in his, her
or its name, address, telephone number, or email address within seven (7) days
of such change including any changes to the Certificate of Incorporation or
Application for Authority to do business in New York State.
   (c)   Unlawful locations. No owner shall install, use or maintain any
newsrack in any of the following locations:
      (1)   within fifteen (15) feet of any fire hydrant;
      (2)   in any driveway or within five (5) feet of any driveway;
      (3)   in any curb cut designed to facilitate street access by disabled
persons or within two feet of any such curb cut;
      (4)   within fifteen (15) feet of the entrance or exit of any railway
station or subway station, except that a newsrack that otherwise complies with
this subdivision may be placed against the rear of the station entrance or
exit, but not against the sides;
      (5)   within any bus stop;
      (6)   within a crosswalk area;
      (7)   within a corner area or within five (5) feet of any corner area;
      (8)   on any surface where such installation or maintenance will cause
damage to or interference with the use of any pipes, vault areas, telephone or
electrical cables or other similar locations;
      (9)   on any cellar door, grating, utility maintenance cover or other
similar locations;
      (10)   on, in or over any part of the roadway of any public street;
      (11)   unless eight (8) feet of sidewalk width is preserved for
unobstructed pedestrian passage;
      (12)   in any park or on any sidewalk immediately contiguous to a park
where such sidewalk is an integral part of the park design;
      (13)   on any area of lawn, flowers, shrubs, trees or other landscaping
or in such a manner that use of the newsrack would cause damage to such
landscaping;
      (14)   where such placement, installation or maintenance endangers the
safety of persons or property;
      (15)   at any distance less than eighteen (18) inches or more than
twenty-four (24) inches from the face of the curb, measured to the side of the
newsrack closest to the curb (This paragraph shall not apply to a newsrack
placed against the rear of the entrance or exit of a subway or railway as
provided in paragraph 4, above.);
      (16)   within five (5) feet of a canopy; and
      (17)   within fifteen (15) feet of a sidewalk newsstand.
   (d)   Size, shape and appearance.
      (1)   Dimensions. No newsrack may be higher than fifty (50) inches, wider
than twenty-four (24) inches or deeper than twenty-four (24) inches.
Notwithstanding the above, no multiple-vending newsrack shall be higher than
sixty (60) inches, wider than ninety (90) inches or deeper than thirty-six (36)
inches.
      (2)   Identifying information required. The owner shall affix his, her or
its name, address, telephone number and e-mail address, if any, on the newsrack
in a readily visible location and shall conform such information to any changes
required to be reported to the department in accordance with the provisions of
paragraph (4) of subdivision (b) of this section. In no event shall a post
office box be considered an acceptable address for purposes of this paragraph.
      (3)   Advertisements prohibited. The surfaces of the newsrack shall not
include any advertisement, whether painted, posted, or otherwise affixed
thereto, or be used for promotional purposes, except for announcing the name
and/or website of the newspaper or other written matter offered for
distribution in such newsrack.
      (4)   Electricity. No electricity shall be run into a newsrack nor shall
any connection for electrical purposes be installed in or on a newsrack.
   (e)   Maintenance. The owner shall be responsible for the following:
      (1)   Certification. The owner shall certify to the commissioner on forms
prescribed by the commissioner that each newsrack has been repainted, or that
best efforts have been made to remove graffiti and other unauthorized writing,
painting, drawing or other markings or inscriptions, at least once during the
immediately preceding four (4) month period. Such certification shall be
submitted on January 15, May 15 and September 15 of each year for the four (4)
month period ending on the last day of the preceding month. A separate
certification form shall be submitted for the newsracks dispensing a particular
publication.
      (2)   Logs and records. Each owner shall maintain for each publication a
separate log in which the measures taken to remove graffiti and other
unauthorized writing, painting, drawing or other markings or inscriptions and
the dates and times when they are taken are recorded in accordance with a
format approved or set forth by the commissioner. Records shall be maintained
for a period of three (3) years documenting the use of materials, employees,
contractors, other resources and expenditures used for the purpose of
demonstrating the repainting or best efforts to remove graffiti and other
unauthorized writing, painting, drawing or other markings or inscriptions. Such
logs and records shall be made available to the department for inspection and
copying during normal and regular business hours and shall be delivered to the
department upon request.
      (3)   Refuse. No refuse shall accumulate in a newsrack nor shall any
newsrack deteriorate into an unsanitary condition. The owner shall remove
refuse within forty-eight (48) hours of receipt of a notice of correction from
the Commissioner, which shall be deemed to have been received five (5) days
from the date on which it was mailed by the Commissioner.
      (4)   Damage. A damaged newsrack or one in need of repair shall be
repaired, replaced or removed within seven (7) business days of receipt of a
notice of correction regarding such damage or need for repair, except that if
such damaged newsrack poses a danger to persons or property, it shall be made
safe within twenty-four (24) hours following receipt of such notice of
correction, which shall be deemed to have been received five (5) days from the
date on which it was mailed by the Commissioner.
      (5)   Continuous use. In no event shall the owner fail to keep such
newsrack supplied with written matter for a period of more than seven (7)
consecutive days without securing the door so as to prevent the deposit of
refuse therein. Notwithstanding the securing of the door, in no event shall
such newsrack remain empty for a total period of more than thirty (30)
consecutive days. Any newsrack empty for longer than such period shall be
deemed abandoned.
   (f)   Indemnification and insurance.
      (1)   Indemnification. The owner of a newsrack placed or installed on any
sidewalk shall indemnify and hold the City harmless from any and all losses,
costs, damages, expenses, claims, judgments or liabilities that the City may
incur by reason of the placement, installation or maintenance of such newsrack,
except to the extent such damage results from the negligence or intentional act
of the city. In addition to the insurance certificate submitted pursuant to
paragraph 3 of this subdivision f, the owner shall submit by regular mail an
indemnification notification on a form provided by the Commissioner.
      (2)   Insurance. The owner shall procure and maintain, for as long as the
newsrack remains on City property, a commercial general liability insurance
policy from an insurer licensed to do business in the State of New York in his
or her or its name, which names the City of New York, its departments, boards,
officers, employees and agents as additional insureds for the specific purpose
of indemnifying and holding harmless those additional insureds from and against
any losses, costs, damages, expenses, claims, judgments or liabilities that
result from or arise out of the placement, installation and/or maintenance of
such newsrack. The minimum limits of such insurance coverage shall be no less
than $300,000 combined single limit for bodily injury, including death, and
property damage, dedicated exclusively to the liabilities relating to such
newsracks, except that any person who maintains an average of 100 or more
newsracks at any one time shall maintain a minimum insurance coverage of $1
million dedicated exclusively to such liabilities. All insurance policies shall
be endorsed to provide that (a) the City shall have no obligation whatever to
provide notice to the insurance company of any occurrence or claim, and that
the City's notice to the insurance company of the commencement of a lawsuit
against the City, if required, shall be deemed timely if received within 180
days thereof; and (b) notice by any other insured of the commencement of any
lawsuit against such insured shall constitute notice on behalf of the City as
well.
      (3)   Insurance certificate. An insurance certificate shall be submitted
to the Commissioner by the owner within sixty (60) days after the effective
date of § 19-128.1 of the New York City Administrative Code, and thereafter, by
December 31 of each year or by the expiration date of the policy, whichever is
earlier, certifying that the insurance required by paragraph 2 of this
subdivision f is in place for all newsracks owned by such person. When a
newsrack that is not covered by such insurance is placed or installed on a
sidewalk after the effective date of such § 19-128.1, the owner shall, within
sixty (60) days after the effective date of § 19-128.1 of the New York City
Administrative Code or within ten (10) days of the installation of such
newsrack, whichever is later, provide to the Department the insurance
certification required pursuant to this subdivision f. Acceptance by the
Commissioner of any insurance certificate, whether or not conforming to the
requirements of paragraph 2 of this subdivision f, shall not relieve the owner
of his, her or its obligation to actually provide such insurance. The
certificate shall provide that no cancellation, termination or alteration shall
be made without thirty (30) days' advance written notice to the Department.
   (g)   Violations and removal. Violations of the provisions of § 19-128.1 of
the Administrative Code or these rules shall be enforced and the newsracks
shall be removed by the Commissioner pursuant to provisions of subdivision f of
such § 19-128.1 and any other applicable provisions of law. The City shall
charge the owner for the cost of removal and storage. The charge for removal
shall be $50 per newsrack. The storage charge shall be $1.40 per newsrack per
day.
   (h)   Notices. All notices of violation required to be served on the owner
pursuant to these rules or § 19-128.1 of the Administrative Code shall be
served as required by law. Notices of correction shall be served upon the
address provided pursuant to the registration provisions in these rules. In the
absence of the required registration information, service shall be made on the
entity identified on the newsrack or in the publication found in the newsrack.
(Amended City Record 7/8/2016, eff. 8/7/2016)
§ 2-09 Sidewalk, Curb and Roadway Work.
   (a)   Compliance with requirements. Owners or builders installing or
repairing roadway pavement, sidewalk and curb in connection with uses other
than those requiring a Certificate of Occupancy (C of O) or letter of
completion from the New York City Department of Buildings shall comply with the
following requirements:
      (1)   The Sidewalk, Curb & Roadway Application (SCARA) and all
appropriate forms, plans and certifications shall be submitted to the
Department.
      (2)   All public infrastructure work shall be designed and installed in
compliance with current highway engineering practice, the latest version of
this publication, and the latest versions of these other Department
publications: Standard Specifications, Standard Detail Drawings, and
Instructions for Filing Plans & Guidelines for the Design of Sidewalks, Curbs,
Roadways and Other Infrastructure Components.
   (b)   Professional self-certification.
      (1)   A property owner may install the required street infrastructure
without prior review of the plan(s) by the Department under a process of
professional self-certification. Plan review by the Department will not be
required when a Professional Engineer, Registered Architect or Registered
Landscape Architect self-certifies that the proposed infrastructure work
complies strictly with the requirements of the publications listed above in
paragraph (2) of subdivision (a) of this section.
      (2)   If a submittal is not professionally self-certified, full
Department review and approval must be obtained before work can begin.
   (c)   Coordination with capital projects – all city, state and federal
agencies and public authorities. In some cases, the required infrastructure
work may be proposed for installation by an agency or authority under a capital
improvement project. It shall be the sole responsibility of every applicant to
examine all capital plans to see whether any such work is planned. If so, the
applicant shall coordinate the improvements with the appropriate agency or
authority.
   (d)   Required submissions.
      (1)   Every applicant shall submit three (3) original SCARAs (no
photocopies) for each project. See Instructions for Filing Plans & Guidelines
for the Design of Sidewalk, Curbs, Roadways and Other Infrastructure
Components.
      (2)   Every applicant shall submit the following:
         (i)   The correct Plan Type as required by SCARA.
         (ii)   The correct Certification Block as required by SCARA.
         (iii)   Written approval from the Landmarks Preservation Commission or
the Art Commission of the City of New York, if applicable (applicant must check
to see if the project is in a landmarked area or historic district).
         (iv)   Material testing, if required by SCARA.
         (v)   Maintenance agreement, if required by SCARA.
         (vi)   Statement of Professional Certification to accompany SCARA
(optional).
   (e)   Waiver.
      (1)   A property owner may request a waiver of any requirement of the
Department.
      (2)   The request shall be prepared in writing by a professional
architect, engineer or landscape architect and shall have an original seal and
signature affixed.
      (3)   It shall be submitted to the Department's Bureau of Permit
Management & Construction Control.
      (4)   Supplementary materials must be submitted to support the waiver
request, such as maps, drawings, traffic reports, calculations, affidavits,
etc. No consideration will be given without complete and adequate
documentation.
      (5)   A waiver may be granted at the discretion of the Commissioner,
except where prohibited by law.
   (f)   Sidewalk.
      (1)   Property owners' responsibility. Property owners shall, at their
own cost, install, repave, reconstruct and maintain in good repair, at all
times, the sidewalk abutting their properties, including, but not limited to,
the intersection quadrant for corner property, in accordance with Department
requirements. Upon failure of a property owner to install, repave, reconstruct
or repair the sidewalk pursuant to a Notice of Violation issued by the
Department after an inspection, the Department may perform the work or cause it
to be performed and shall bill the property owner pursuant to § 19-152 of the
New York City Administrative Code. If the property owner wishes to protest the
violation, he/she may make a request at the appropriate borough office within
the time specified in the notice of violation and the Department shall provide
a reinspection by a different departmental inspector than the one who conducted
the first inspection. The findings of the second inspection supersede the
findings of the first inspection.
      (2)   Permit required.
         (i)   A permit is required to install, repave, reconstruct or repair
any sidewalk where the work involves an area of more than twenty-five square
feet. Where the work involves an area of twenty-five square feet or less, a
permit is only required where the purpose of the work is to remove a violation.
         (ii)   A sidewalk closing permit shall be required if a minimum width
of five feet cannot be maintained on the sidewalk for unobstructed pedestrian
passage.
         (iii)   An applicant shall file:
            (A)   An application for a sidewalk construction permit stating the
location of the sidewalk work, including driveway, if applicable, and the start
and estimated completion dates. All subway gratings, utility covers and
castings situated in the sidewalk area which are not at proper grade or are in
a dangerous condition shall be noted in the application;
            (B)   A plan for the restoration of the sidewalk, approved by the
Department of Buildings, where the existing sidewalk is the structural roof of
a vault or other opening.
         (iv)   An owner of the abutting property who files an affidavit
stating therein that he/she will not employ any person or persons to repair the
sidewalk for him/her, shall not be required to submit a commercial general
liability insurance policy or workers' compensation insurance.
      (3)   Permit requirements. All permits are subject to applicable
provisions contained in 34 RCNY §
2-02.
      (4)   General sidewalk requirements.
         (i)   Except as otherwise authorized, all sidewalks not in C4-
4 through C4-7, C5 or C6 commercial districts, as defined in the Zoning
Resolution of the City of New York, shall be of untinted concrete. However, all
sidewalks in C4-4 through C4-7, C5 and C6 commercial districts shall be of
pigmented concrete with saw-cut type joints as set forth in the Standard
Specifications. In such commercial districts, any sidewalk installation or
replacement constituting 50 percent or more of the total square footage of
sidewalk abutting a property shall be of pigmented concrete in conformance with
the Standard Specifications. For the purposes of these rules and unless
otherwise stated, the word "concrete" shall mean untinted and pigmented
concrete, as applicable. Sidewalks shall consist of a single course of
concrete, 4 in. in thickness, laid upon a foundation 6 in. in thickness; in
driveways and corner quadrants the concrete slab shall be 7 in. in thickness.
         (ii)   The foundation material shall consist of clean 3/4 in. broken
stone, recycled concrete, gravel or clean granular materials meeting the
Standard Specifications and Standard Detail Drawings. The foundation material
shall be tamped and compacted according to the Standard Specifications.
         (iii)   The sidewalk shall be constructed of concrete mix as per the
Standard Specifications and Standard Detail Drawings, unless otherwise
authorized.
         (iv)   Sidewalk cores. 
            (A)   Cores shall be required for all sidewalks in excess of 100
lineal feet. A core shall be required for each 500 square feet of sidewalk or
fraction thereof. A minimum of 2 cores is required. Core evaluation reports by
an approved laboratory shall be submitted to the Department.
            (B)   In the case of a one- or two-family dwelling on a corner lot
and/or where the length of the sidewalk on each side is less than 100 lineal
feet, the cores may be waived, provided that an affidavit of a Professional
Engineer or Registered Architect who supervised the construction certifies that
the work conforms to the Standard Specifications, and material delivery slips
are submitted. (Delivery slips are to be signed by an authorized representative
of the contractor.)
            (C)   If the results of the cores meet the Department's
requirements, the applicant shall file an affidavit from a Licensed Surveyor,
Registered Architect or Professional Engineer certifying that the sidewalk,
curb and roadway have been installed in conformance with the submitted SCARA
plan. A final survey showing the actual grades as built shall be filed with the
Department and the topographical Bureau of the office of the applicable Borough
President.
         (v)   Expansion joints are typically placed at 20' intervals and at
the property or lot line. Expansion joints shall be placed between curb and
sidewalk. Expansion joints shall be placed between concrete of different
thicknesses or to match existing expansion joints. Every effort shall be made
to isolate sidewalk hardware or other fixed objects in the sidewalk such as
fire hydrants and electrical boxes with expansion material. Expansion joint
filler material shall be placed to full depth of sidewalk.
         All expansion joints shall be recessed 1/2" below finished sidewalk
surface and sealed with Department specified sealer as soon as practical. The
sealer should be applied carefully to avoid over-spilling onto sidewalk surface
area. The joints are to be flush with the finished surface. Joints shall not be
sealed during freezing temperatures.
         (vi)   The concrete shall be poured and finished in accordance with
the Standard Specifications and Standard Detail Drawings.
         (vii)   Flags shall be 5'x 5' where feasible. The following methods of
scoring shall be employed unless otherwise approved by the Commissioner. The
frontage of each building shall be divided by five. If it is exactly divisible,
all flags shall be 5' wide; if not, the flags shall be plus or minus in an
amount which will make them as near to 5' as possible. Cross flag scoring shall
be at 90 degrees to the building line and curb. The flag markings along the
sidewalk between the curb and property line shall be parallel with the property
line and curb and be uniformly 5' apart commencing at the curb, with the odd
flag width, if any, nearest the property line.
         (viii)   All flags containing substantial defects shall be fully
replaced. Patching of individual flags is not permitted.
         (ix)   When an existing concrete sidewalk is to be replaced and the
foundation material meets specifications, the foundation material can be
retained and graded to the required subgrade. Any foundation material not
meeting the Standard Specifications and Standard Detail Drawings shall be
removed.
         (x)   Sidewalk grades: Unless the Department grants a waiver of grade,
permanent sidewalks shall be laid to the legal curb grades.
         (xi)   Transverse slope: Sidewalks shall be laid to pitch from the
building line toward the curb except in special cases as noted. The minimum
slope, calculated on a line perpendicular to the curb, shall be 1" in 5', and
the maximum shall be 3" in 5'. Minimum slopes shall be used wherever possible.
            Note: The maximum transverse slope permitted for vault lights,
covers, gratings and other sidewalk structures is 1¾" in 5'.
         (xii)   Longitudinal slope: The longitudinal slope of the sidewalk
shall be uniform and parallel to the curb at the curb's proper grade.
         (xiii)   Corner treatment: The two slope lines meeting at the
intersection of the two building lines shall drop from a common point at the
building corner toward their respective curbs at a rate within the limits
prescribed by these regulations. If this is not possible, the applicant shall
submit sketches or drawings, in duplicate, showing the method of treatment
proposed, to the Commissioner for approval.
         (xiv)   Pedestrian ramps: Any person constructing, reconstructing or
repairing a corner shall install pedestrian ramps in accordance with the the
Standard Specifications and in accordance with the latest revision of Standard
Detail Drawing #H-1011.
         (xv)   Adjoining existing and new sidewalks: Junctions and transitions
between new sidewalk and existing sidewalk shall conform to the Standard
Specifications and Standard Detail Drawings.
         (xvi)   Distinctive sidewalk:
            (A)   A sidewalk of a distinctive design or material may be
permitted and shall harmonize with the architecture of the abutting building
and/or area. The property owner or designated representative shall contact the
Department and submit to the Department for approval: detailed design plans,
applicable fee, a duly executed Distinctive Sidewalk Improvement Maintenance
Agreement (DSIMA) and material samples of the proposed sidewalk.
            (B)   The distinctive sidewalk shall be approved by the Public
Design Commission of the City of New York prior to installation.
            (C)   The distinctive sidewalk shall be repaired in kind or
replaced in its entirety with concrete. If a distinctive sidewalk is replaced
in its entirety with concrete, the Public Design Commission of the City of New
York shall approve of such replacement prior to its replacement. Changes to
existing materials shall require a new DSIMA.
         (xvii)   Sidewalk hardware and structures:
            (A)   Cellar doors, gratings, underground street access covers or
other similar items shall not be placed in the sidewalk unless they are of a
type approved by the Department of Buildings.
            (B)   Any abandoned structures shall be removed and replaced with
concrete side- walk.
            (C)   Where the existing sidewalk is the structural roof of a vault
or other opening, a plan approved by the Department of Buildings, along with
vault plans as required by 34 RCNY §
2-13, shall be filed for the restoration of the sidewalk.
            (D)   If a sidewalk improvement is in the vicinity of subway
gratings or over a subway structure, the permittee shall obtain the approval of
the New York City Transit Authority prior to the commencement of any work.
         (xviii)   Historic Districts:
            (A)   In Historic Districts, property owners shall obtain written
approval from the Landmarks Preservation Commission prior to the repair or
replacement of sidewalks. All work shall be done in compliance with the rules
of the Landmarks Preservation Commission, and in accordance with the Standard
Specifications, Standard Detail Drawings, and Department requirements.
            (B)   In Historic Districts gratings, bullseyes, vault lights, iron
doors and other similar structures situated in the sidewalk shall not be
removed without the authority of the Landmarks Preservation Commission.
         (xix)   No person shall deface any sidewalk by painting, printing or
writing names or advertisements, placing other inserts, attaching, in any
manner, any advertisement or other printed matter, or by drawing, painting or
discoloring such sidewalk, except as required by State of New York Industrial
Code Rule 53 relating to Construction, Excavation and Demolition Operations at
or near Underground Facilities.
         (xx)   Tree pits and trees:
            (A)   No trees shall be planted in the sidewalk area unless a
Street Opening Permit is issued by the Department. No such permit shall be
issued by the Department unless the prior written consent of the Department of
Parks and Recreation authorizing the tree planting is furnished. Tree pits
shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications. All wood forms and/
or construction-related tree guards must be removed prior to the expiration of
the permit.
            (B)   The soil level in the completed tree pits, including any
paved surface, shall be flush with the sidewalk area and the maximum dimensions
of the tree pit shall be 5' × 5'.
            (C)   No trees within the sidewalk area shall be disturbed or
removed without the permission of the Department of Parks and Recreation.
            (D)   No trees or tree pits shall be installed in Historic
Districts without a report from the Landmarks Preservation Commission.
         (xxi)   All wood forms must be removed prior to the expiration of the
permit.
      (5)   Substantial defects. Any of the following conditions shall be
considered a substantial defect.
         (i)   One or more flags missing or sidewalk never built.
         (ii)   One or more flag(s) cracked to such an extent that one or more
pieces of the flag(s) may be loosened or readily removed.
         (iii)   An undermined flag below which there is a visible void or a
loose flag that rocks or seesaws.
         (iv)   A trip hazard where the vertical differential between adjacent
flags is greater than or equal to 1/2" or where a flag contains one or more
surface defects of one inch or greater in all horizontal directions and is 1/2"
or more in depth.
         (v)   Improper slope, which shall mean (i) a flag that does not drain
toward the curb and retains water, (ii) flag(s) that shall be replaced to
provide for adequate drainage or (iii) a cross slope exceeding established
standards.
         (vi)   Hardware defects, which shall mean (i) hardware or other
appurtenances not flush within 1/2" of the sidewalk surface or (ii) cellar
doors that deflect greater than 1" when walked on, are not skid resistant or
are otherwise in a dangerous or unsafe condition.
         (vii)   A defect involving structural integrity, which shall mean a
flag that has a common joint, which is not an expansion joint, with a defective
flag and has a crack that meets the common joint and one other joint.
         (viii)   Non-compliance with Department specifications for sidewalk
construction.
         (ix)   Patchwork, which shall mean (i) less than full-depth repairs to
all or part of the surface area of broken, cracked or chipped flag(s) or (ii)
flag(s) partially or wholly constructed with asphalt or other unapproved non-
concrete material; except that patchwork resulting from the installation of
canopy poles, meters, light poles, signs and bus stop shelters shall not be
subject to this provision unless the patchwork constitutes a substantial defect
as set forth in subparagraphs (i) through (viii) of this paragraph.
   (g)   Curb (concrete, steel faced, stone).
      (1)   General permit conditions.
         (i)   The permittee shall complete all curb construction or
installation before commencing any roadway paving operation or sidewalk
construction, unless otherwise permitted by the Department.
         (ii)   All curbs more than 20 feet in length shall be built according
to the Standard Specifications and Standard Detail Drawings. A Street Opening
Permit is required.
         (iii)   Curbs less than 20 feet in length shall be built in accordance
with the Standard Specifications and Standard Detail Drawings. No Street
Opening Permit is required if done in conjunction with a sidewalk repair
permit.
         (iv)   Permits for the construction or installation of drop curbs and
concrete driveways shall not be issued unless authorized by a permit from the
Department of Buildings.
         (v)   All curbs shall be built according to specifications.
      (2)   Recess in vault for curbs. Where a vault extends to the curb line,
the permittee shall provide a recess for its entire length in which the curb
may be set or reset in accordance with the Standard Specifications and Standard
Detail Drawings.
      (3)   Permit requirements. All permits are subject to applicable
provisions contained in 34 RCNY §
2-02.
      (4)   No person shall deface any curb by painting, printing or writing
names or advertisements, placing other inserts, attaching, in any manner, any
advertisement or other printed matter, or by drawing, painting or discoloring
such curb.
      (5)   General provisions for construction. Concrete curbs shall be 6
inches wide at the top, 8 inches wide at the bottom and 18 inches deep,
measured on the back. All construction is to be at legal line and grade, or at
any other line and grade approved by a Department engineer, and according to
the Standard Specifications and Standard Detail Drawings. Penetration of broken
stone base will not be allowed unless the outside temperature is 50 degrees
Fahrenheit or above.
   (h)   Roadway.
      (1)   Roadway pavement shall be 2 inches of asphaltic concrete wearing
surface on a 4-inch penetrated broken stone base or a 4-inch compacted plant
mixed binder base. Where the existing roadway is asphaltic concrete wearing
course on a concrete base, restoration shall consist of matching the existing
thickness but in no case shall there be less than 3 inches of asphaltic
concrete wearing course on a 6-inch concrete base on compacted earth. Where
soil conditions require, the base shall be constructed of such materials and
depth as is acceptable to the Department.
      (2)   The roadway shall be paved at a minimum from the curb line to 5
feet beyond the center of the legal roadway width in front and on the sides of
the property of the applicant. In no case shall the width of required roadway
paving be less than 20 feet. Beyond the front of the property, there shall be
access over a hard surface road to the nearest completed paved street system.
If this does not exist, the applicant shall provide a pavement of at least 2
inches of asphaltic concrete graded to meet the existing paved street system.
The width of such paving shall be at least 20 feet.
      (3)   Roadway cores.
         (i)   Cores shall be required for all roadway pavement in excess of
100 lineal feet. A core shall be taken by the applicant for every 700 square
yards of paved roadway or fraction thereof, in such manner as directed by the
supervising engineer. A minimum of 2 cores is required. Core evaluation reports
by an approved laboratory shall be submitted to the Department or self
certified by a Professional Engineer or Registered Architect.
         (ii)   Where the length of roadway pavement is less than 100 lineal
feet, the requirement of cores may be waived provided that an affidavit of a
Professional Engineer or Registered Architect who supervised the construction
certifies that the work conforms to the Standard Specifications, and material
delivery slips are submitted. (Delivery slips are to be signed by an authorized
representative of the contractor.)
         (iii)   If the results of the cores meet the Department's
requirements, the applicant shall file an affidavit from a Licensed Surveyor,
Registered Architect or Professional Engineer certifying that the sidewalk,
curb and roadway have been installed in conformance with the legally
established grades as built under the terms of the permit. A final survey
showing the actual grades as built shall be filed with the Department's borough
office and the Topographical Bureau of the office of the applicable Borough
President.
      (4)   The Department will issue a letter of acceptance for maintenance
subject to the guarantee period of the roadway pavement, to the builder or
developer if the roadway pavement meets the requirement of the permit and the
Standard Specifications.
(Amended City Record 7/8/2016, eff. 8/7/2016; amended City Record 7/20/2022,
eff. 8/19/2022)
§ 2-10 Temporary Installations for Flood Mitigation and Security Purposes.
   (a)   Permit Required.
      (1)   The Commissioner may issue permits for the placement or
installation of flood mitigation systems as defined in this section and
temporary structures for security purposes to be placed on sidewalks or
roadways in accordance with this section.
      (2)   It shall be a violation of these rules to erect, place or install
the following on a sidewalk or roadway without a revocable consent pursuant to
34 RCNY
Chapter 7 or a permit pursuant to this section:
         (i)   a temporary structure for security purposes; or
         (ii)   any component part of a flood mitigation system unless such
component part is a permitted encroachment pursuant to Chapter 32 of the New
York City Building Code.
   (b)   Permit Requirements. All permits are subject to applicable provisions
contained in 34 RCNY §
2-02.
   (c)   Definitions.
      (1)   Flood Mitigation System. The term "flood mitigation system" means a
group of interconnected component parts, including barriers, walls, and/or any
ancillary structure such as stairs or ramps necessary for ingress or egress,
that surround a building, portion of a building, or public service corporation
facility, and are certified by a New York State Licensed Professional Engineer
as being capable of preventing water from entering the building, portion of a
building, or public service corporation facility during a trigger event. A
flood mitigation system may or may not include flood mitigation system
footings.
      (2)   Flood Mitigation System Footing. The term "flood mitigation system
footing" means an at or below ground component part of a flood mitigation
system that must remain in place at all times in order to expedite the
installation of the remaining elements of the flood mitigation system.
      (3)   Trigger Event. The term "trigger event" means a hurricane, tropical
storm, non-tropical storm, or other severe weather event forecasted to affect
the City of New York and result in moderate or major flooding, as such terms
are used by the National Weather Service and/or National Hurricane Center
through the issuance of Hazardous Weather Outlook advisories or other advisory
methods.
   (d)   Temporary Security Structures.
      (1)   Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of these or any other
rules, the Commissioner may issue a permit for a period of one year for
temporary structures to be placed on sidewalks or roadways for security
purposes. Such structures shall include, but not be limited to, concrete
barricades, large planters and fencing.
      (2)   Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of these rules, for the
purposes of this subdivision, the general conditions set forth in 34 RCNY §
7-06 shall apply. For concrete barricades, the standards for planters set forth
in 34 RCNY §
7-04(a)(19) shall apply.
      (3)   A permit issued pursuant to this subdivision may be revoked or
modified at will by the Department.
      (4)   Such permit may be renewed for a maximum of two consecutive six-
month periods. The approval of the Public Design Commission of the City of New
York shall be obtained prior to the grant of a renewal.
      (5)   At the expiration of the permit and any renewal, if applicable, the
person or entity wishing to continue to maintain such structures shall do so
only pursuant to a revocable consent obtained from the Department pursuant to
34 RCNY §
7-04(a)(33).
   (e)   Flood Mitigation Systems.
      (1)   (i)   Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of these or any
other Department rules, the Commissioner may issue a permit for a flood
mitigation system to be placed on a sidewalk or roadway, except where such
system is a permitted encroachment pursuant to Chapter 32 of the New York City
Building Code.
         (ii)   Except in the case of a public service corporation facility,
the Commissioner will only issue a permit pursuant to this section to an
applicant:
            (a)   for the protection of a building or a portion of a building
erected prior to January 8, 2015 or where a lawful building permit is issued by
the Department of Buildings for the erection of such building prior to January
8, 2016; or
            (b)   for the protection of a building or portion of a building
located within an area of special flood hazard, as such term is defined in
section G201.2 of Appendix G of the New York City Building Code.
         (iii)   Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of these or any
other rules, for the purposes of this subdivision, the general conditions in 34
RCNY §
7-06 shall apply to flood mitigation systems.
         (iv)   Prior approvals. As a condition of applying for a permit
pursuant to this paragraph, the applicant must submit to the Department
evidence of the following prior approvals:
            (a)   Applicants shall provide evidence of approvals or of no
objection obtained from the New York City Department of Buildings and the New
York City Fire Department, and shall submit such evidence to the Department.
            (b)   Applicants must submit to the Department for review and
approval a flood mitigation system plan ("Flood Mitigation Plan"). The Flood
Mitigation Plan must explain how the flood mitigation system will operate and
demonstrate compliance with the general conditions set forth in 34 RCNY §
7-06, including but not limited to the clear path requirements set forth in 34
RCNY §
7-06(c)(3), as described in clause c of this subparagraph. The Department will
notify the applicant in writing whether the Flood Mitigation Plan has been
approved or rejected and whether additional information is required for
approval. The Department will consult with the Department of Environmental
Protection and any other agency the Department deems necessary or desirable
regarding an application for a permit for a flood mitigation system prior to
its approval of such application. Approval of a Flood Mitigation Plan may be
suspended or revoked by the Department at any time. If approval is suspended or
revoked pursuant to this paragraph, the Department will notify the applicant in
writing, stating its reasons for such action.
            (c)   Clear Path Requirements.
               (1)   Permittees have a continuing obligation to comply with the
clear path requirements set forth in 34 RCNY §
7-06(c)(3). Applicants for a permit pursuant to this paragraph must demonstrate
compliance with such clear path requirements. In the event that field
conditions will not allow for a flood mitigation system, once installed, to
comply with such clear path requirements, the applicant shall cause a New York
State Licensed Professional Engineer to produce and submit to the Department
for review and approval, an authorized compliance plan for the maintenance and
protection of traffic to assist motorists, pedestrians, bicyclists, and others
to proceed around the obstructed path ("Compliance Plan"). Permittees shall
comply with the Compliance Plan at all times that a permit is in effect.
               (2)   In the event that a flood mitigation system, once
installed, will no longer comply with the clear path requirements set forth in
34 RCNY §
7-06(c)(3) due to a change in conditions since the Flood Mitigation Plan was
approved, the applicant shall notify the Department no less than ten days after
the applicant knew or should have known of such changed condition. The
Department may require the applicant to submit additional information,
including an amended Flood Mitigation Plan and Compliance Plan.
            (d)   The Department will notify the applicant in writing once the
prior approval requirements of this subparagraph (iv) have been met.
         (v)   Once a trigger event has occurred and prior to installation of
flood mitigation system components, exclusive of flood mitigation system
footings, applicants must apply to the Department for an emergency permit
number. Applicants must ensure that at the time of the application for such
number, all prior approvals required in subparagraph (iv) of this paragraph
have been obtained, and the flood mitigation system, once installed, will
comply with the clear path requirements set forth in Section 7-06(c)(3). No
installation of a flood mitigation system, exclusive of flood mitigation system
footings, may begin before the receipt of an emergency permit number, provided
that an application for a permit pursuant to this subparagraph shall be deemed
approved unless the Department notifies the applicant that such applicant's
Flood Mitigation Plan needs to be revised within forty-eight (48) hours of
submitting such application.
         (vi)   Installation and Removal of Flood Mitigation Systems.
            (a)   Permittee may install flood mitigation system components,
exclusive of flood mitigation system footings, a maximum of seventy-two (72)
hours prior to the occurrence of a trigger event.
            (b)   Permittee shall remove flood mitigation system components,
exclusive of flood mitigation system footings, that it installed prior to the
occurrence of a trigger event, within forty-eight (48) hours of water receding
from the street, or if the weather system that is the subject of the trigger
event is no longer forecasted to affect the City of New York, or such weather
system is no longer predicted to result in moderate or major flooding, within
forty-eight (48) hours of the change in forecast or prediction.
      (2)   Additional Authorizations Required for Flood Mitigation System
Footings. In addition to receiving a permit in accordance with paragraph (1)
above, no person shall install flood mitigation system footings upon a sidewalk
or roadway, unless such flood mitigation system footing is a permitted
encroachment pursuant to Chapter 32 of the New York City Building Code, without
first obtaining from the Department either:
         (i)   A revocable consent for the flood mitigation system footings
pursuant to 34 RCNY §
7-04; or
         (ii)   A permit issued for a period of not more than one year for the
flood mitigation system footings, at the expiration of which the flood
mitigation system footings shall be removed if a revocable consent pursuant to
34 RCNY §
7-04 is not obtained.
§ 2-11 Street Openings and Excavations.
   (a)   Permit Required.
      (1)   No excavations shall be made in any street unless a Street Opening
Permit is obtained.
         (i)   For plumbing work requiring a street opening or excavation, a
Street Opening Permit will only be issued to a business or businesses set forth
on the plate issued to licensed master plumbers pursuant to § 28-401.3 of the
Administrative Code.
            (A)   The licensed master plumber shall be required to provide a
valid New York City plate issued by the New York City Department of Buildings
indicating the master plumber business or businesses under which the licensed
master plumber practices his or her trade, or a valid copy of the same. The
licensed master plumber shall also present a copy of any documentation issued
by the New York City Department of Environmental Protection regarding the
plumbing work that is to be conducted. These items must be submitted to the
Department before the Department approves the Street Opening Permit.
            (B)   The Commissioner may suspend review of applications for
permits under this subparagraph, revoke or refuse to renew a permit, or refuse
to issue a permit to any applicant, pursuant to the provisions of 34 RCNY §
2-02(j), (k), or (l).
         (ii)   Notwithstanding the provisions of subparagraph (i) of this
paragraph, for any work performed pursuant to a valid contract with a local or
state governmental entity requiring a street opening or excavation, a Street
Opening Permit will only be issued to the contractor retained by the local or
state governmental entity to perform the work requiring the street opening or
excavation.
      (2)   Prior to any excavation or street opening pursuant to a franchise
or revocable consent, all permits required by these rules shall be obtained.
      (3)   Street Construction in Historic Districts. No planned street
construction, reconstruction or maintenance operation shall be undertaken in a
designated historic district unless preapproved in writing by the Landmarks
Preservation Commission. The provisions of subdivision (g) of this section also
apply.
   (b)   Permit requirements.
      (1)   All permits are subject to applicable provisions contained in 34
RCNY §
2-02.
      (2)   A Permittee shall obtain a separate permit for each 300 linear feet
of a block segment and for each intersection where work is to be performed.
   (c)   Conditions.
      (1)   Proper notification. 
         (i)   Permittees and owners of underground facilities must comply with
State of New York Industrial Code Rule 753 relating to construction, excavation
and demolition operations at or near underground facilities.
         (ii)   Permittees must take the precautions necessary to protect and
prevent damage to pipes, mains, conduits, and other underground facilities at
their own expense.
         (iii)   Mark out requirements. Permittees must delineate the proposed
area of excavation but must take measures to limit the geographical area to be
marked out and must avoid excessive or oversized markings. Permittees must
ascertain, to the extent possible, the precise area of excavation and mark the
corresponding area fifteen feet to the right and fifteen feet to the left in
accordance with this subparagraph. The proposed area of excavation must be
marked with temporary white paint by using a continuous line, dots marking a
radius or arc, or dashes outlining the excavation project. Dashes must be 6" to
12" in length and 1" in width. Dots must be 1" in diameter.
            The illustration below includes suggested examples of how the
proposed area of excavation should be marked by using a continuous line, dots
marking a radius or arc, or dashes.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4a77823de8d2ee472adfbde019448cdce82c4f8a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-296.png]
 
      (2)   All work shall be done in accordance with the Standard
Specifications, Standard Detail Drawings, and the provisions of this 34 RCNY §
2-11.
      (3)   All debris on the street shall be removed at the expiration of the
permit, unless otherwise stipulated.
   (d)   Application.
      (1)   Applications shall include:
         (i)   a description of the work to be performed;
         (ii)   the reason for the work;
         (iii)   the street address including the nearest cross streets where
the excavation or street opening is to be made;
         (iv)   a sketch indicating the size and location of the proposed
opening(s) which shall include:
            (A)   the distance in feet from the nearest intersection and from
the nearest curbline;
            (B)   the dimensions of the opening including length and width; and
            (C)   the existing parking restrictions.
         (v)   the start and estimated completion dates;
         (vi)   the type of pavement or surface to be opened;
         (vii)   whether the proposed work will be on a protected street (if
so, the provisions of the subdivision (f) of this section apply);
         (viii)   the name and address of the compaction testing company or
laboratory, as required;
         (ix)   the name of the contracting City agency, contract number, and
OCMC reference number, if applicable; and
         (x)   whether the proposed work will be within 100 feet on, above or
below or in either direction of any portion of a bridge, tunnel, underpass or
overpass (if so, approval from the Division of Bridges shall be obtained). For
purposes of this section "portion" shall include, but not be limited to,
approach slabs, retaining walls, and column supports. The method of excavation
and final restoration shall be determined by the Division of Bridges.
      (2)   No trees within the sidewalk area shall be disturbed or removed
without the permission of the Department of Parks and Recreation.
      (3)   A permittee performing curb to curb restoration on more than fifty
(50) percent of a block segment on a non-protected street shall submit a
protected street determination form to the Department for approval prior to
obtaining any necessary permits. Such form shall be attached to the permit
application. This requirement shall not apply to permittees performing work for
the Department or for the Department of Design and Construction.
   (e)   Excavation and Restoration Requirements.
      (1)   Proper Notice.
         (i)   Permittees shall notify the Police Department and the
Communications Centers of the Fire Department and the Department of
Transportation of construction and street operations which require street
closing permits at least twenty-four hours in advance of the commencement of
non-emergency work.
         (ii)   All permittees shall comply with the provisions of subdivision
(g) of 34 RCNY §
2-02, if applicable.
      (2)   Breaking Existing Pavement. 
         (i)   Precutting of pavement wearing course and base shall be required
for pavement removal.
         (ii)   Only hand held tools, rockwheels, or other tools approved by
the Department may be used for this purpose. This applies to all streets at all
times.
         (iii)   The permittee shall be responsible for keeping the
construction area as clean and neat as possible during the life of the permit.
         (iv)   No material shall restrict water flow in gutters.
         (v)   All possible arrangements for the safety of the general public
shall be maintained.
         (vi)   The wearing course on non-protected streets must be cut and
restored in accordance with Standard Detail Drawing #H-1042.
      (3)   Excavation.
         (i)   Sheeting and Bracing. The sides of every open excavation five
feet or more in depth shall be securely held by adequate timber, sheeting and
bracing where the earth is not sloped to the angle of repose of the material,
and where unsafe conditions are created due to composition of the soil,
climatic conditions, depth of excavation or construction operations.
         (ii)   Tunneling or Jacking. No person shall make any installation or
repair between two or more street openings by means of tunneling or jacking,
without a permit. Tunneling or jacking may be permitted for the installation or
replacement of a lateral connection provided the opening does not exceed eight
inches in diameter. Full trenching shall be required for all waste line repair/
connections.
      (4)   Traffic Maintenance.
         (i)   No more than one lane of traffic may be obstructed, except as
provided by OCMC stipulations, or as otherwise authorized by the Commissioner.
         (ii)   All unattended street openings or excavations in a driving
lane, including intersections, shall be plated, except as otherwise directed by
the Commissioner. The Commissioner may require all street openings and
excavations at any location to be plated when no work is in progress. In the
case of gas or steam leaks, barricades pursuant to 34 RCNY §
2-02(h) shall be used until the leak is corrected.
         (iii)   Barricades, signs, lights and other approved safety devices
shall be displayed pursuant to 34 RCNY §
2-02(h).
         (iv)   The permit may restrict street operations and construction
within critical areas to nights, weekends, or off-traffic hours. (Hours other
than weekdays 7 a.m. - 6 p.m. will require a noise variance granted by OCMC.)
         (v)   Flagpeople. Unless otherwise directed by the Commissioner,
permittees whose work results in the closing of a moving traffic lane and
requires traffic to be temporarily diverted to a travel lane in the opposite
direction, shall, at all times while actively working at the site, post a
flagperson or flagpersons or utilize an authorized plan for the maintenance and
protection of traffic at the point where traffic is diverted to assist
motorists, bicyclists, and pedestrians to proceed around the obstructed lane.
      (5)   Temporary Closing of Sidewalks. A minimum of five feet sidewalk
width of unobstructed pedestrian passageway shall be maintained at all times.
Where openings and excavations do not allow for five feet of unobstructed
pedestrian passageway, a temporary sidewalk closing permit is required.
      (6)   Work Site Maintenance.
         (i)   All excavated material shall be either removed from the site or
stockpiled at a designated curb, properly barricaded pursuant to 34 RCNY §
2-02(h) and stored to keep gutters clear and unobstructed in accordance with 34
RCNY §
2-05.
         (ii)   All obstructions on the street shall be protected by
barricades, fencing, or railing, with flags, lights, or signs placed pursuant
to 34 RCNY §
2-02(h) at proper intervals and during the hours prescribed. During twilight
hours the flags shall be replaced with amber lights.
      (7)   Storage of Materials.
         (i)   A street opening permit includes permission to store
construction materials in a designated area adjacent to the permitted worksite
only during permitted hours. Storing materials after permitted hours shall
require a separate permit.
         (ii)   No separate permit shall be required for the storage of
equipment, excluding cranes, in a designated area in compliance with any
applicable stipulations on the permit.
         (iii)   The designated storage area(s) are subject to review and
approval by OCMC.
      (8)   Backfill and Compaction.
         (i)   Upon completion of repairs in a street, permittees shall
backfill street openings and excavations in a manner in accordance with the
Standard Specifications and Standard Detail Drawings. All materials used for
backfill shall be free from bricks, blocks, excavated pavement materials and/or
organic material or other debris. Notwithstanding the above, asphalt millings
may be used as a backfill material.
         (ii)   Backfill material shall be deposited in horizontal layers not
exceeding twelve inches in thickness prior to compaction. A minimum of ninety-
five percent of Standard Proctor Maximum Density will be required after
compaction.
         (iii)   When placing fill or backfill around pipes, layers shall be
deposited to progressively bury the pipe to equal depths on both sides.
Backfill immediately adjacent to pipes and conduits shall not contain particles
larger than three inches in diameter.
         (iv)   Compaction shall be attained by the use of impact rammers,
plate or small drum vibrators, or pneumatic button head compaction equipment.
Hand tamping shall not be permitted except in the immediate area of the
underground facility, where it shall be lightly hand tamped with as many
strokes as required to achieve maximum density. The definition of the
"immediate area" shall be a maximum of eighteen inches from the facility.
         (v)   Where sheeting has been used for the excavation it shall be
pulled when the excavation has been filled or backfilled to the maximum
unsupported depth allowed by the New York State Department of Labor, Industrial
Code Rule 23 and Title 29, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 1926, Safety and
Health Regulations for Construction. Where a difference exists between
regulations, the more stringent requirements shall apply.
         (vi)   As a measure of maximum density achieved for restoration, the
pavement surface shall not sink more than two inches from the surrounding
existing surface during the life of the restoration. More than two inches of
settlement shall be deemed a failure of the compaction of the backfill and
cause the removal of said backfill to the subsurface facility and new fill
installed and properly compacted.
         (vii)   The permittee shall be required to supply a tester certified
by a professional engineer, or certified by other methods as authorized by the
Commissioner, on all street openings to perform compaction tests. The permittee
shall also be required to maintain copies of all in-process compaction reports
certified by a Professional Engineer as to the compliance with the
aforementioned backfill requirements set forth within this section. The
certified compaction report shall be maintained for every street opening and
shall be available upon request by the Commissioner for the duration of the
guarantee period.
      (9)   Temporary Asphaltic Pavement.
         (i)   Immediately upon completion of the compaction of the backfill of
any street opening, the permittee shall install a temporary pavement of an
acceptable asphalt paving mixture not less than four inches in thickness after
compaction, flush with the adjacent surfaces.
         (ii)   The permittee has the option of installing full depth pavement
using an acceptable asphalt paving mixture immediately upon completion of the
compaction of the backfill, excluding reconstructed protected streets and full-
depth concrete roadways.
         (iii)   Upon the expiration of the permit, all equipment, construction
materials and debris shall be removed from the site, unless otherwise
stipulated.
         (iv)   When final restoration is to be done, the materials are to be
removed with hand tools to a depth necessary to accomplish the final
restoration.
      (10)   Plating and Decking.
         (i)   All plating and decking installed by the permittee shall be made
safe for vehicles and/or pedestrians and shall be adequate to carry the load.
Composite plates may be used provided that they comply with the AASHTO H25 or
HS25 specifications.
         (ii)   The size of the plate or decking must extend a minimum of 12
inches beyond the edge of the trench, be firmly placed to prevent rocking, and
be sufficiently ramped, covering all edges of the steel plates to provide
smooth riding and safe condition.
         (iii)   All plating and decking shall be fastened by splicing,
spiking, pinning, countersinking or otherwise protected to prevent movement.
When the plates are removed all pins and spikes must be removed and the holes
must be filled with a fine asphalt concrete mix.
         (iv)   Where deflection is more than 3/4", heavier sections of plates
or decking or intermediate supports shall be installed.
         (v)   All permittees who install plating and decking during the winter
moratorium, as determined by the Department, shall post signs at the site
indicating "Steel Plates Ahead" or "Raise Plow" and countersink said plates
flush to the level of the roadway. All signs shall comply with all applicable
requirements pursuant to 34 RCNY §
2-02(h). These signs shall be placed on the sidewalk, adjacent to the curb,
facing vehicle traffic five feet prior to the plates. On two-way streets, signs
shall be placed on both sides of the street five feet prior to the plates.
         (vi)   All plating and decking shall have a skid-resistant surface
equal to or greater than the adjacent existing street or roadway surface. The
whole surface area of all plating and decking must be skid-resistant.
         (vii)   All plating and decking, including the ramping material, and
all construction signs and supports must be removed from the roadway and/or
sidewalk after completion of the final restoration and prior to the expiration
of the permit.
         (viii)   All plating and decking must identify the name of the owner
of such plating or decking. Identification must be made by welding or stamping
the name of the owner onto the plating or decking. In addition to the name of
the owner, the name of the permittee must be welded, stamped or painted onto
plating or decking not owned by the permittee.
      (11)   Base.
         (i)   Concrete and asphalt base material and base restorations shall
conform to the Standard Specifications and Standard Detail Drawings.
         (ii)   Concrete base shall be properly plated except where other
stipulations have been granted in writing by OCMC.
         (iii)   Concrete for base shall be plated in a driving lane and
intersections or barricaded pursuant to 34 RCNY §
2-02(h) in a parking lane for a minimum of three days to permit proper cure of
concrete, unless otherwise specified by the Department.
         (iv)   Hot asphalt binder materials may not be used in place of
concrete. All concrete-base roadways must be restored with concrete of the same
depth and at least the same strength as the original base concrete.
         (v)   The concrete base shall be restored at the same grade as the
existing base; at no time may it be brought up to the asphalt course unless
authorization has been granted by the Commissioner.
         (vi)   At no time will asphalt other than binder be permitted as a
base course, unless otherwise authorized by the Commissioner. Binder shall be
installed and compacted in a maximum of four (4") inch lifts.
         (vii)   Conduit or pipes shall be installed at a minimum depth of 18
inches from the surface of the roadway, or below the base, whichever is
greater. Where conduits and pipes cannot be installed at the required minimum
depth, protective plating shall be installed over the facilities.
         (viii)   All hot asphalt binder based restorations or any form of
temporary restoration must be flush with the surrounding pavement until the
wearing course is installed. Binder based restorations must be removed to a
depth of two (2") inches prior to installing the wearing course.
      (12)   Wearing Course.
         (i)   Wearing course material shall conform to the Standard
Specifications and Standard Detail Drawings.
         (ii)   The finished grade of the wearing course shall be flush with
surrounding pavement on all sides of the cut. The final wearing course shall
conform to the Standard Specifications and Standard Detail Drawings. In the
event a permanent restoration pavement installed settles more than two inches
(2 in) below the surrounding existing surface during the life of the guarantee
period, this shall be deemed a failure of the backfill compaction, in which
case the permittee shall remove all of the failed backfill, down to the
subsurface facility, and install new, properly compacted backfill.
         (iii)   The minimum thickness of the wearing course on full depth
asphalt restoration shall be two inches (2").
         (iv)   When more than one roadway opening is made against a single
permit and the openings are less than ten feet apart before the required
cutbacks, the existing wearing course between such openings shall be restored
integrally with the opening wearing course restoration, in accordance with the
applicable Standard Detail Drawing # H-1042.
         (v)   When a street opening is twelve inches or less from the curb,
the entire pavement between the opening and the curb shall be excavated and
replaced in kind, in accordance with the applicable Standard Detail Drawing #
H-1042. The pavement base shall be inspected and repaired where necessary and a
new wearing course shall be installed from the curb to the street opening. The
areas described above shall be included in the permittee's guarantee.
         (vi)   Whenever any street is excavated, the permittee shall restore
such street in kind as to material type, color, finish or distinctive design.
         (vii)   Pavements shall be restored in kind in designated historic
districts and on streets constructed with cobblestones or other distinctive
pavements, or as directed by the Commissioner.
         (viii)   The wearing course shall be properly sealed completely at the
edges of the cut with liquid asphaltic cement ironed in with a heated smoothing
iron or by means of infrared treatment to prevent water seepage into the
pavement. The sealant applied to the wearing course must be properly maintained
throughout the life of the guarantee period.
         (ix)   Permittees shall be required to obtain a permit for any changes
to, or installation of temporary roadway pavement markings and temporary
construction, parking or regulatory signs and supports, including, but not
limited to, crosswalks and lane lines. Unless otherwise directed by the
Commissioner, all roadway pavement markings, including but not limited to,
crosswalks and lane lines, and any parking or regulatory signs or supports
shall be replaced in kind in accordance with the Standard Specifications. All
construction signs and supports and pavement markings shall be removed prior to
the expiration of the permit.
         (x)   Final (permanent) restorations shall be completed prior to the
expiration of the permit. During winter months, temporary asphalt and pavement
markings shall be placed at the expiration of the permit and maintained until
such time as the final restoration may be completed.
         (xi)   All trenches must have a minimum opening width of eighteen
inches (18"). The trench must be restored in accordance with Standard Detail
Drawing # H-1042.
         (xii)   Any permittee performing work on a street pursuant to
paragraph (3) of subdivision (d) of this section shall notify the Department
within twenty-four (24) hours of the completion of the work on the same
protected street determination form as submitted with the permit application
pursuant to such paragraph (3) of subdivision (d) of this section.
         (xiii)   The final completed wearing course surface must be smooth and
without any defects including, but not limited to, pitting, cracking, rutting
and raveling throughout its guarantee period.
      (13)   Concrete Pavements.
         (i)   When street openings are made in concrete pavements, the
pavements shall be saw cut full depth for the entire perimeter of the street
opening.
         (ii)   The concrete restoration shall have the same depth, strength
and finish as the original pavement.
         (iii)   The restoration area shall be plated and maintained until
enough strength has developed to sustain traffic without deleterious effect to
the roadway.
         (iv)   Reinforcing shall be replaced in kind and spliced in compliance
with the Standard Specifications and Standard Detail Drawing #H-1042.
         (v)   Asphalt restorations will not be permitted in concrete streets
or concrete bus stop areas.
         (vi)   All restorations shall conform to the applicable Standard
Detail Drawing #H-1042 or to a standard as determined by the Department.
      (14)   Color Coding.
         (i)   At each excavation, the permittee shall either paint temporary
circles or install permanent colored markers as required in this paragraph, for
the purpose of easily identifying the permittee's openings and restorations.
         (ii)   If the work is not complete, upon leaving the site the
permittee shall paint three inch (3") circles adjacent to the cut, in the area
closest to the curb line, in accordance with the placement and color
requirements as specified below.
         (iii)   Upon completion of the restoration, the permittee shall
install colored markers as specified below, unless another method is approved
by the Department. Permittees shall be required to maintain these markers
throughout the guarantee period.
         (iv)   Placement of Coding and Markers.
            (A)   Permanent markers shall be imbedded at zero grade tolerance,
or slightly below, in the new asphalt or concrete without the use of nails and
shall be of one piece construction.
            (B)   For cuts or trenches ten feet (10') or less, one temporary
painted circle or permanent colored marker shall be placed in the linear center
of the cut.
            (C)   For cuts or trenches up to fifty feet (50'), one temporary
painted circle or permanent colored marker shall be placed at each end of the
excavation.
            (D)   For cuts or trenches over fifty feet (50'), temporary painted
circles or permanent colored markers shall be placed every twenty-five (25)
linear feet maximum and one shall be placed at each end of the excavation.
         (v)   Such markers shall be in the shape of a circle measuring between
one and one-half inches (1 1/2") and three-inches (3") in diameter, color-coded
as specified below, and shall include only the permittee's five-digit
identification number and the two-digit year, unless other information is
approved by the Department. The two-digit year shall be placed in the center of
the marker, and the five-digit identification number shall be placed above the
two-digit year.
         (vi)   Such markers shall also be UV-stable and designed not to fade
significantly.
         (vii)   Color codes shall be assigned through Quality Control
Procedure Q.P. 3 for permittees other than those listed below. Final pavement
markers may be used as an alternative to color codes provided such use is
approved by the Department.
            (A)   Verizon - Cherry red marker
            (B)   Empire City Subway - Chrome yellow marker
            (C)   Consolidated Edison Co. - Light blue marker
            (D)   Keyspan - White marker
            (E)   Plumbers (water or sewer) - Green marker
            (F)   Signals and Street Lights - Orange marker
            (G)   Long Island Power Authority - Yellow marker
            (H)   Metropolitan Transit Authority - Purple marker
            (I)   Buckeye Pipe Line - Chrome yellow marker
            (J)   Fire Department - Purple marker
            (K)   Cable T.V. - Regal blue marker
      (15)   Quality Control Program Requirement for Roadways.
         (i)   All permittees engaged in street openings, shall complete the
work so as to provide smooth riding surfaces throughout the guarantee period on
their respective restorations.
         (ii)   A documented quality history of restoration shall be maintained
by the responsible permittee. This information should show that inspections are
made at some optimum intervals to assure conformance to the guarantee.
         (iii)   Quality Control Program information shall be made available to
the Bureau upon request.
         (iv)   The use of experimental methods or materials may be authorized
under selective conditions, upon application to the Bureau for approval prior
to use on the City streets.
         (v)   Any permittee may file a proposed Quality Control Program with
the Commissioner for approval. The Commissioner may waive any of the foregoing
requirements as part of an approved program of Quality Control. Any waiver so
granted shall remain in effect as long as the approved program is implemented
in a manner satisfactory to the Commissioner or until the Commissioner's
approval is rescinded.
      (16)   Other Requirements.
         (i)   Street Opening Location Form ("Cutforms")
            (A)   Permittees shall maintain a street opening location form
("cutform") at their office and shall provide this form to the department upon
request. Such cutform shall include the following information:
               1.   a sketch showing the exact dimensions and location of the
restored area, and a description of the opening or trench defined by distance
in feet from the nearest intersection and from the nearest curbline;
               2.   the street opening permit number;
               3.   the date of completion of the final restoration;
               4.   the name of the final pavement restoration contractor; and
               5.   a compaction report certified by a New York State licensed
professional engineer.
            (B)   Failure to submit a cutform upon request may jeopardize
future permit requests and may subject permittees to summonses.
         (ii)   Guarantee period. Permittees shall be responsible for permanent
restoration and maintenance of street openings and excavations for a period of
three years on unprotected streets, and up to five years on protected streets
commencing on the restoration completion date. This period shall be the
guarantee period.
         (iii)   Permittees shall comply with all applicable sections of these
rules, the Standard Specifications, the Standard Detail Drawings, and all other
applicable laws or rules.
   (f)   Excavations and Street Openings in Protected Streets. No street
opening activity shall be allowed, except for emergency work or as authorized
by the Commissioner, in a protected street for a period of five years from the
completion of the street improvement. In addition to this subdivision (f), all
provisions of 34 RCNY §
2-11 shall apply to protected streets.
      (1)   Permit Issuance. No permit to use or open any street, except for
emergency work, shall be issued to any person within a five year period after
the completion of the construction of a capital project relating to such street
requiring resurfacing or reconstruction unless such person demonstrates that
the need for the work could not have reasonably been anticipated prior to or
during such construction. Notwithstanding the foregoing provision, the
Commissioner may issue a permit to open a street within such five year period
upon a finding of necessity therefor.
      (2)   Conditions.
         (i)   Permittees shall be responsible for contacting the Department of
Design and Construction to determine whether a street is scheduled to be
rebuilt under a street reconstruction project. Notwithstanding the foregoing
provision, a permittee performing emergency work need not contact such
Department.
         (ii)   A permittee who has obtained a street opening permit on a
protected street must also obtain a confirmation number for each such permit,
prior to the expiration of the permit. The permittee must request and obtain
such confirmation number through the Department's website (www.nyc.gov/dot) or
other Department-approved method. A permittee commencing restoration work on a
protected street must also request and obtain such confirmation number subject
to the additional requirements contained in 34 RCNY §
2-11(f)(4)(i).
      (3)   Application.
         (i)   Permittees shall include on the application the justification
for any street opening activities on protected streets.
         (ii)   The permittee shall attach the "Protected Street Opening Permit
Application Attachment" to the Street Opening permit application prior to
obtaining the permit.
      (4)   Restorations.
         (i)   No backfill of any opening or excavation on a protected street
shall be performed unless the permittee who has obtained a street opening
permit also obtains a confirmation number notifying the Department of such
restoration work. The permittee must obtain such confirmation number at least
two hours prior to the scheduled start time for the backfill except as
otherwise authorized by the Commissioner. The permittee must request and obtain
such confirmation number pursuant to § 34 RCNY §
2-11(f)(2)(ii). In no case shall the permittee commence the backfill prior to
the scheduled start time. In addition, during the backfill and compaction phase
of the work, the permittee must provide, on site, a certified compaction
technician from an approved laboratory to test that the compaction of the
backfill is in accordance with the Department's rules and Standard
Specifications. No base or wearing course of any opening or excavation on a
protected street shall be performed unless the permittee obtains a separate and
additional confirmation number pursuant to 34 RCNY §
2-11(f)(2)(ii) or submits its daily paving schedule to the Department via e-
mail or other Department-approved method prior to commencing work. The daily
paving schedule must conform to the Department's requirements and must include
but not be limited to the permittee name, location of the work (on, to and from
street), permit number(s), and proposed start time.
         (ii)   The Department may inspect any phase of the work, including but
not limited to, initial excavation, backfill and compaction, base installation,
performance of required cut backs, and final restoration.
         (iii)   A certification issued by a New York State licensed
professional engineer shall be provided to the Department within thirty days of
completion of work on protected streets. The certification shall state that the
type of work performed was as described in the permit application, and that all
phases of the restoration were performed in accordance with Department rules,
Standard Specifications and Standard Detail Drawings. Upon demand by the
Department or as directed by the Commissioner, the permittee shall furnish
copies of in-process compaction reports certified by a Professional Engineer as
to the compliance with the backfill requirements set forth within this section.
All records must be kept by the permittee and made available to the Department
for the duration of the guarantee period.
         (iv)   Permittees shall be responsible for the proper repair of the
street opening or excavation for a period of three years from the date of
completion or for the duration of the protected street guarantee period,
whichever is longer.
         (v)   All restorations shall conform to applicable Standard Detail
Drawing #H-1042 or to a standard as determined by the Department.
         (vi)   Where street openings cannot be confined to within 8 feet of
the curb line, including the required cut back, and/or within the sidewalk
area, and where protected street status has been in effect for 18 months or
less, the permittee shall restore the street opening or excavation pursuant to
the Department's protected street restoration requirements, unless otherwise
directed by the Commissioner.
         (vii)   The permanent restoration shall be flushed with the
surrounding pavement on all sides of the restoration. In the event a permanent
restoration pavement installed in violation of the provisions of subparagraph
(i) of this paragraph (4) settles more than two inches (2") below the
surrounding existing surface during the life of the guarantee period, this
shall be deemed a failure of the backfill compaction, in which case, the
permittee shall remove all of the failed backfill, down to the subsurface
facility, and install new, properly compacted backfill.
   (g)   Emergency Street Openings and Excavations.
      (1)   Permit Requirements.
         (i)   No person shall perform emergency work without obtaining an
emergency number from the Department. Permittees shall fax the Emergency Street
Opening Permit request form to the Department's Emergency Authorization Unit to
obtain an emergency permit number, unless otherwise directed by the
Commissioner.
         (ii)   An emergency permit number may be requested only for emergency
work performed on existing services. An emergency permit number shall not be
obtained for work to be performed pursuant to a CAR.
      (2)   Conditions.
         (i)   A permittee shall begin emergency work within two hours after
obtaining an emergency permit number.
         (ii)   A permittee shall perform emergency work on an around-the-clock
basis until the emergency is eliminated, unless otherwise directed by the
Commissioner. Once the emergency is eliminated on a critical roadway listed in
subdivision (c) of 34 RCNY §
2-07, the permittee shall suspend work, restore the full width of the roadway
and resume work, if necessary, during the nonrestricted hours indicated in that
subdivision. Such resumption of work shall only be undertaken within the 48-
hour duration of the emergency permit number. A permittee working with an
emergency number on a roadway other than a critical roadway may suspend or
resume work at any time within the 48-hour period covered by the emergency
number.
         (iii)   No more than one lane of traffic may be obstructed, however,
if an emergency street opening is larger than 8 feet by 10 feet, permittee may
occupy up to a maximum of 12 feet on one side of the opening and a maximum of 6
feet on the other side.
         (iv)   All unattended street openings or excavations in a driving
lane, including intersections, shall be plated, except as otherwise directed by
the Commissioner. The Commissioner may require all street openings and
excavations at any location to be plated when no work is in progress. In the
case of gas or steam leaks, barricades shall be used pursuant to 34 RCNY §
2-02(h) until the leak is corrected.
         (v)   Barricades, signs, lights and other approved safety devices
shall be displayed pursuant to 34 RCNY §
2-02(h).
         (vi)   A minimum of five feet sidewalk width of unobstructed
pedestrian passageway shall be maintained at all times. Where openings and
excavations do not allow for five feet of unobstructed pedestrian passageway,
pedestrians shall be directed by signs to the opposite sidewalk.
         (vii)   No private vehicles shall be kept within the work area.
         (viii)   A permittee shall submit an application for a regular permit,
and for Landmarks Preservation Commission permits if applicable, within two
business days of receiving an emergency permit number.
         (ix)   Restorations shall be made with in-kind materials.
         (x)   Emergency work in the African Burial Ground and Commons Historic
District areas, requires the permittee excavate with utmost caution and the
permittee shall not remove any excavation or debris from the site prior to
Landmarks Preservation Commission's review of the excavation.
         (xi)   If any emergency street opening results in a width of less than
11 feet in each direction for vehicular traffic, this shall be deemed a full
roadway closure. In such case, the Police Department, the Communication Centers
of the Fire Department and the Department of Transportation shall be notified
simultaneously with the closing.
         (xii)   Emergency permit numbers shall be kept on site and shall be
presented upon the request of any police officer or other City employee
authorized by the Commissioner to enforce these rules. Any additional
information regarding the emergency work that is requested at the site by a
Department inspector shall be provided by the permittee and/or the persons
performing such work.
         (xiii)   Flagpeople. Unless otherwise directed by the Commissioner,
permittees whose work results in the closing of a moving traffic lane and
requires traffic to be temporarily diverted to a travel lane in the opposite
direction, shall, at all times while actively working at the site, post a
flagperson or flagpersons or utilize an authorized plan for the maintenance and
protection of traffic at the point where traffic is diverted to assist
motorists, bicyclists, and pedestrians to proceed around the obstructed lane.
         (xiv)   All permittees shall comply with the provisions of subdivision
(g) of 34 RCNY §
2-02, if applicable.
      (3)   Application. When applying for an emergency permit number by fax, a
permittee shall submit all information required by the Department. This
information includes, but is not limited to, the following:
         (i)   Name of permittee
         (ii)   Permittee ID #
         (iii)   Location of emergency (including borough)
         (iv)   Type of emergency (including interruption of service)
(Amended City Record 11/20/2015, eff. 12/20/2015; amended City Record 7/8/2016,
eff. 8/7/2016; amended City Record 3/6/2019, eff. 4/5/2019; amended City Record
7/20/2022, eff. 8/19/2022)
§ 2-12 Vacant Lots.
   (a)   Property owners' responsibility. Whenever the Commissioner shall so
order or direct, property owners shall, at their own expense:
      (1)   fence any vacant lot(s);
      (2)   fill any sunken lot(s) in compliance with 34 RCNY §
2-06 or other requirements of these rules;
      (3)   cut down any raised lot(s) in accordance with the Standard
Specifications and 34 RCNY §
2-02.
   (b)   Failure to comply. Upon the property owner's failure to comply with
the requirements of paragraph (a), above, the Department may perform the work
or cause it to be performed, the cost of which, together with the
administrative expenses, shall constitute a debt recoverable from the owner by
lien on the property affected, pursuant to § 19-152 of the Administrative Code.
   (c)   Reinspection. Upon request of the property owner to the appropriate
borough office, the Department shall provide a reinspection by a different
departmental inspector than the one who conducted the first inspection.
   (d)   Permit requirements. The property owner shall obtain a permit from the
Department before performing any work pursuant to this section. All permits are
subject to applicable provisions contained in 34 RCNY §
2-02.
(Amended City Record 7/8/2016, eff. 8/7/2016)
§ 2-13 Vaults.
   (a)   Vault defined. A vault is any opening below the surface of the street
and outside the property line that is covered over.
   (b)   Exceptions. This 34 RCNY §
2-13 shall not apply to:
      (1)   Openings that are used exclusively as places for egress or ingress
by means of steps to the cellar or basement of any building.
      (2)   Openings that are used primarily for light and ventilation.
      (3)   Openings constructed or maintained by utility companies, which are
regulated under a separate agreement with the City.
      (4)   Subways, railroads and related structures that are controlled by a
public authority.
   (c)   License required. A license shall be obtained prior to construction of
a new vault or enlargement of an existing vault. A revocable consent shall be
required for any vault that extends further than the line of the sidewalk or
curbstone of any street.
   (d)   Permit required. No vault shall be constructed, altered or repaired
unless a street opening permit is obtained from the Department upon payment of
the established fee.
   (e)   Applications.
      (1)   All applicants for a license and/or permit to construct, maintain,
alter or repair a vault shall file a written application signed by the
applicant, stating the dimensions of the vault, the number of square feet
required and four 8½" × 14" cloth copies of a plan. For existing vault repairs,
blueprints may be submitted in lieu of cloth copies of the plan at the
discretion of the Commissioner. Plans shall include:
         (i)   The address and the tax lot and block number of the vault
property location.
         (ii)   The distance from the lot property line to the nearest corner
property line.
         (iii)   All frontages, lot lines, and line of building abutting the
street.
         (iv)   All distances from the lot line to the existing curb line
(existing width of sidewalk).
         (v)   The dimensions of the vault at the outer perimeter of the walls,
the depth of the vault, and the composition and thickness of the vault walls
(top and cross sections).
         (vi)   Location of all existing or proposed steps, gratings, open
areas, coal holes/chutes/slides, entrances, cellar doors, building
encroachments, and all other installations in the sidewalk area.
         (vii)   Details and location of all manhole access covers to a boiler
or underground tank, to be installed in accordance with the specifications.
         (viii)   Approved Department of Buildings plan.
         (ix)   For existing vaults, verification of annual vault charge
return.
         (x)   For a new vault or an enlargement of an existing vault, a copy
of the license agreement filed with the Division of Franchises, Concessions and
Consents of the Department.
      (2)   All applicants shall comply with the requirements of 34 RCNY §
2-02.
   (f)   Adjustments to license fee. When subsequent measurements indicate that
more or less space has been taken for the construction of a vault than that
originally paid for, an adjustment of fees shall be made pursuant to § 19-117
(e) and (f) of the Administrative Code.
   (g)   Limitations. No vault shall extend closer than seven feet to the
established curb line unless otherwise authorized by the Commissioner. Such
authorization may be granted based upon:
      (1)   Special conditions cited by the applicant and,
      (2)   Additional construction requirements, including, but not limited
to:
         (i)   A waterproofed recess in the vault roof adequate to receive a
standard curb for the entire length at which the curb may be set or reset in
accordance with the Standard Specifications and Standard Detail Drawings
relating to sidewalk width even in cases where the existing or proposed
sidewalk width does not conform to that standard width.
         (ii)   A strengthening of the vault roof to sustain live loads of six
hundred pounds or more per square foot.
         (iii)   Adequate waterproofed recesses to accommodate existing or
proposed street lights, hydrants, traffic signals and other street
appurtenances to the Department's standard sidewalk width even in cases where
the existing or proposed curb line does not conform to that standard width.
   (h)   Curb. No vault shall extend beyond the established line of the curb.
   (i)   Arched or covered vault. No new vault is to be arched or covered
unless the owner or applicant shall have had the vault first measured by a duly
licensed surveyor who shall deliver to the Department a certificate signed by
him or her specifying the area of the vault, together with a diagram showing
the dimensions thereof, including its sustaining walls, the location of the
vault in relation to the building, curb line, and the nearest street corner
intersection, the house number, the tax lot and the block numbers of the plot
and all details as to sidewalk covering; in the case of an existing vault, the
person claiming the right to the use thereof shall furnish a similar
certificate and diagram, except that in such case the measurement shall exclude
the sustaining walls if it is impracticable for the surveyor to measure the
thickness. See § 19-117(d) of the Administrative Code.
   (j)   Hoistway openings. No opening in the sidewalk area shall be
constructed for the accommodation of any elevator or lift, whether manually or
power operated. Existing hoistway openings in the sidewalk may be continued but
shall not be enlarged in buildings erected before July first nineteen hundred
fifty-seven, provided such openings are equipped with approved type doors
located flush with the sidewalk and equipped with elevators. These hoistway
openings with elevators may be relocated provided the total number of sidewalk
elevators serving the building is not increased. Relocated elevators may not
project more than five feet from the building line into the sidewalk area.
   (k)   Boiler room exit. An exit in the sidewalk area may be constructed and
maintained above a steam boiler room. The door over such exit shall be three
feet parallel to the building line and two feet at right angles thereto. The
cover shall be adjacent to the building line and shall be hinged on the side
nearest the curb allowing for it to be open slightly less than ninety degrees
with the horizontal. An iron ladder permanently fixed in position shall be
installed.
   (l)   Sidewalks over vaults.
      (1)   A concrete sidewalk of four inch minimum thickness shall be
installed over the structural roof slab of the vault and in conjunction with
the structural roof slab shall be able to sustain a minimum live load of six
hundred pounds per square foot, in accordance with the Standard Specifications
and Standard Detail Drawings. In no case shall the new sidewalk serve as the
structural roof of the vault.
      (2)   The licensee shall be responsible for repairing and maintaining the
sidewalk covering the roof of a vault in a safe condition. The Commissioner may
order a licensee to repair defects in vault coverings, including defective
sidewalk flags, in accordance with subdivision (b) of § 19-151 of the
Administrative Code.
   (m)   Doors and gratings.
      (1)   All gratings or doors covering openings or roofs of vaults on the
sidewalk shall be so constructed as to sustain a minimum live load of six
hundred pounds per square foot.
      (2)   Doors and gratings in sidewalk are not permitted in front of any
entrances, including building, store and delivery.
      (3)   All doors and grating and related hardware shall be flush with the
sidewalk.
      (4)   Door and grating material and design shall be approved by the
Department of Buildings.
   (n)   Defective covers. The Commissioner may order defective vault covers,
doors, gratings and adjacent areas which are broken or present a slippery
surface to be made safe immediately by the owner and replaced in accordance
with the Standard Specifications, Standard Detail Drawings and subdivision (b)
of § 19-151 of the New York City Administrative Code.
   (o)   Abandoned vaults. The Commissioner may order the vault licensee and/or
the owner of the premises to fill in an abandoned vault in accordance with
subdivision (b) of § 19-151 of the New York City Administrative Code as
hereinafter provided. The vault shall be filled in with clean, incombustible
material, attaining proper compaction pursuant to the Standard Specifications
and Standard Detail Drawings. Where such structures adjoin the curb, the
enclosing walls shall be cut down to a depth of two feet below the curb and the
roof shall be removed. Proper steps shall be taken to allow for the drainage of
water through the vault floor.
   (p)   Historic districts. All work on vaults in historic districts shall be
approved by the Landmarks Preservation Commission prior to the commencement of
the work.
(Amended City Record 7/8/2016, eff. 8/7/2016)
§ 2-14 Miscellaneous.
   (a)   Public pay telephones.
      (1)   An application for a permit for public pay telephones and related
equipment shall be made to the Department of Information Technology and
Telecommunications (DOITT) pursuant to Chapter 4 of Title 23 of the
Administrative Code and pursuant to 67 RCNY
Chapter 6.
      (2)   A street opening permit for installation of a public pay telephone
line or stanchion shall be obtained from the Department, pursuant to 34 RCNY §
2-02, after obtaining a permit from DOITT. Fees shall be paid pursuant to 34
RCNY §
2-03.
      (3)   A street opening permit shall be obtained for the removal of a
public pay telephone stanchion and the restoration of the sidewalk. Such
sidewalk restoration shall be performed in accordance with the Standard
Specifications and Standard Detail Drawings.
   (b)   Banners.
      (1)   Permit required.
         (i)   The Commissioner may issue permits for the display of banners
promoting cultural exhibits and events or public or historical events which
foster tourism and/or enhance the image of the City. The Commissioner may issue
permits to business improvement districts (BIDs), local development
corporations (LDCs) or other organizations that have received Commercial
Revitalization Program funds (CRP fund recipients) from the Department of
Business Services within the past year for the display of banners within the
BID, LDC or CRP fund recipient's area that are designed to provide information
about such BID, LDC or CRP fund recipient's area to the general public.
         (ii)   No person shall install, place, affix or attach a banner on any
property within the jurisdiction of the Department without first obtaining a
permit from the Commissioner.
         (iii)   No person shall install, place, affix or attach a banner on
any property within the jurisdiction of the Department which contains a sponsor
trade name or logo without the specific prior authorization of the
Commissioner.
      (2)   General conditions.
         (i)   The number of banners to be installed and the location of each
banner shall be approved by the Commissioner prior to installation. All
requested locations may not be approved.
         (ii)   Banners shall be placed within a one block radius of the event
unless otherwise authorized by the Commissioner.
         (iii)   Horizontal banners, including banners hung across a street,
are not permitted.
         (iv)   Vertical banners shall be not more than 3 feet wide and not
more than 8 feet in height. All such banners shall have 6 slits to allow air
passage. Two banners per pole are allowed only if they collectively do not
exceed 24 square feet. For existing banners only, two banners per pole not
exceeding 30 square feet collectively may be allowed by the Commissioner in
his/her discretion. Each such banner shall have 3 slits to allow air passage.
The bottom portion of a banner shall be not less than 18 feet above the
roadway.
         (v)   Banners shall contain no advertisements. The trade name(s) or
logo(s) of the sponsor(s) of the event may be placed on the banner but shall
occupy no more than 10% of the banner in total. Corporate sponsor's trade name
(s) or logo(s) shall be located on the lower portion of the banner.
         (vi)   All applicants shall submit a final graphic of the banner prior
to the issuance of a permit. It shall be a condition of each permit that the
banner is in compliance with the final graphic.
         (vii)   Applications for banner permits shall be submitted no fewer
than 45 days prior to the planned installation date.
         (viii)   Applicants shall be responsible for inspecting banners and
poles and replacing and/or removing banners that are torn, defaced or in
general disrepair, including rigging.
      (3)   Installation, maintenance and removal.
         (i)   Drilling of lamppost or welding of bracket supports is not
permitted. All mounting hardware must be of a corrosion resistant material.
         (ii)   Banners shall not be attached to any traffic signal posts
containing an electrical traffic control device. Banners shall not be installed
so as to obstruct the visibility of signs or signals which may be attached to
other lampposts.
         (iii)   Banners shall not be placed on lampposts designated as
landmarks by the Landmarks Preservation Commission. Banners shall not be placed
on ornamental signposts without meeting specific permit stipulations.
         (iv)   Banners and any installation apparatus shall be removed
immediately upon the expiration of the term of the permit, except where a
permit extension has been granted by the Commissioner.
      (4)   Duration and renewal of permits. Banner permits shall remain in
effect for a period of 30 days including installation and removal, and may be
renewed up to two times at the discretion of the Commissioner.
      (5)   Duration and renewal of permits granted to BIDs, LDCs or CRP fund
recipients. Permits granted to BIDs, LDCs or CRP fund recipients may remain
effective for up to 90 days and may be renewed at the discretion of the
Commissioner.
      (6)   Revocation. Banner permits are revocable at will by the
Commissioner.
   (c)   Bandstands and temporary platforms.
      (1)   No person shall erect or maintain a temporary platform or bandstand
on the street unless the structure has been approved by the Department of
Buildings and a permit has been issued by the Commissioner.
      (2)   Applicants for a permit to erect or maintain a temporary platform
or bandstand shall file a commercial general liability insurance policy, as
provided in 34 RCNY §
2-02, with the Commissioner.
   (d)   Helicopter lifts. A street closing permit for the closing of streets
along the route of a helicopter lift shall be required for contractors with
licensed operators performing helicopter rigging operations on construction
sites. The permit is subject to the following requirements:
      (1)   a permit for Aviation Operation, External Lift Operation, from the
Public Transportation Safety Unit of the Fire Department and
      (2)   a signed and notarized Indemnification and Hold Harmless Agreement.
   (e)   Temporary Festoon/Holiday Lighting and/or other Temporary Lighting.
      (1)   No individuals shall be permitted to hang temporary festoon/holiday
lighting and/or other temporary lighting from lampposts or poles containing
electrical traffic control devices.
      (2)   Groups, including but not limited to, Business Improvement
Districts, Block Associations and Chambers of Commerce shall be permitted to
hang temporary festoon/holiday lighting and/or other temporary lighting from
lampposts, provided the following conditions are met:
         (i)   All temporary festoon/holiday lighting and/or other temporary
lighting, their attachments, accessories, installations, and methods of
attachment shall be in compliance with the applicable requirements of these
rules, the New York City Electrical Code (Chapter 3 of Title 27 of the
Administrative Code) and the rules of the New York City Department of
Buildings.
         (ii)   A letter requesting permission to hang temporary festoon/
holiday lighting and/or other temporary lighting shall be sent to the
Department's Street Lighting Unit each year, 60 days before the holiday or
event by the sponsoring group. Such letter shall state the anticipated
installation and removal dates of the lighting, the proposed location(s) where
the lights shall be installed including the number of block faces of streets to
be used, and the number of lampposts to be affected, including those from which
power is to be drawn and those that are to be used only as an attachment for
the temporary lighting.
         (iii)   The Street Lighting Unit shall provide a disposition in
writing. If approved, the sponsoring group or its electrical contractor shall
submit such disposition from the Street Lighting Unit to the Department of
Buildings when applying for a Certificate of Electrical Inspection.
         (iv)   The sponsoring group shall hire an electrical contractor
licensed by the City to furnish and install a Ground Fault Circuit Interrupter
(GFCI) weatherproof receptacle and install the lighting fixtures and supporting
equipment. The GFCI shall be installed near the top of the shaft of the
lamppost from which the power is to be drawn.
         (v)   The sponsoring group or its electrical contractor shall be
responsible for the maintenance and replacement, as necessary, of the
weatherproof receptacles.
         (vi)   The sponsoring group or its electrical contractor shall obtain
a Certificate of Electrical Inspection from the Department of Buildings prior
to applying for a permit from the Department.
         (vii)   The sponsoring group shall make arrangements with the
appropriate electric utility company to pay for the electricity that will be
used to illuminate the temporary festoon/holiday lighting and/or other
temporary lighting.
         (viii)   The sponsoring group shall obtain and maintain in force an
insurance policy as provided in 34 RCNY §
2-02 and shall indemnify and hold the City harmless from any and all claims for
personal injury or property damage arising from the installation, maintenance,
operation and eventual removal of the temporary festoon/holiday lighting and/or
other temporary lighting.
         (ix)   A permit to hang temporary festoon/holiday lighting and/or
other temporary lighting shall be obtained from the Department of
Transportation, prior to commencing work, upon the showing of the letter of
consent from the Street Lighting Unit and the Certificate of Electrical
Inspection from the Department of Buildings pursuant to subparagraphs (iii) and
(vi) of this paragraph.
         (x)   Temporary festoon/holiday lighting and/or other temporary
lighting with necessary feed wires and supports may be permitted over sidewalks
for a period not to exceed 90 days, provided they do not interfere with the
free use of fire escapes and drop ladders. All such electrical construction
shall be removed within the time stated on the permit, excluding the authorized
GFCI weatherproof receptacle. The receptacle shall be permitted to remain
provided that it is properly maintained. Any receptacle(s) not properly
maintained shall be removed, within one (1) to ten (10) days of notice from the
Department, as directed by the Department, by the sponsoring group at its sole
cost and expense. In the event that the sponsoring group fails to remove the
receptacle(s) or in the case of an emergency, the Department may remove such
receptacle(s) and charge the cost of removal to the sponsoring group.
         (xi)   Prior to commencing any work, the electrical contractor shall
test each pole for stray voltage. if a pole tests positive, the electrical
contractor shall contact the Department and Con Edison immediately and shall
report such test result and the location of the pole. The electrical contractor
shall wait for clearance from the Department and Con Edison prior to the
commencement of work.
         (xii)   After completing the installation of the temporary festoon/
holiday lighting and/or other temporary lighting, the electrical contractor
shall retest each pole for stray voltage. If a pole tests positive, the
electrical contractor shall contact the Department and Con Edison immediately
and shall report such test result and the location of the pole.
         (xiii)   The electrical service shall not exceed 120 volts and shall
not be fused larger than fifteen (15) amperes.
         (xiv)   The installation of temporary festoon/holiday lighting and/or
other temporary lighting shall comply with the minimum height clearances below:
 
 
Nature of        Conductors Guys, Spans, Messengers
Crossing         Under 300 Volts 300 Volts to 750 750 Volts to 15,000 Volts to
                                 Volts            15,000 Volts 33,000 Volts
Above track
rails of freight 27 feet         27 feet          28 feet      30 feet
railroads.
Above track
rails of         25 feet         25 feet          25 feet      25 feet
elevated
railways.
Above track
rails of surface 22 feet         22 feet          25 feet      25 feet
railways.
Above roadways   18 feet         18 feet          20 feet      22 feet
of streets, etc.
Above spaces or  14 feet*
ways accessible  *For guys, 8
to pedestrians   feet shall be
only, i.e.,      sufficient for  18 feet          20 feet      22 feet
sidewalks and    anchor guys not
alleyways.       crossing
                 pathways.
 
         (xv)   Temporary festoon/holiday lighting and/or other temporary
lighting, strings or messengers shall not be supported by or secured to any
fire escape or drainpipe. They shall be insulated from their supports by strain
insulators.
         (xvi)   Streamers, messengers or supports shall not be attached to or
supported from electric, light, telephone, communications or trolley poles or
lines without permission from the owners.
         (xvii)   Any sponsoring group and/or electrical contractor who fails
to comply with the requirements of this subdivision shall be excluded from the
permit process for temporary festoon/holiday lighting and/or other temporary
lighting for the following year or seasonal cycle, or other period of time as
determined by the Department.
         (xviii)   Requests to make adjustments to the work performed shall be
approved by the Department.
         (xix)   The Department may mandate that changes be made to the work
performed.
         (xx)   The electrical contractor shall test each pole for stray
voltage after removing the temporary festoon/holiday lighting and/or other
temporary lighting equipment in compliance with the permit limits. If a pole
tests positive, the electrical contractor shall contact the Department and Con
Edison immediately and shall report such test result and the location of the
pole.
         (xxi)   At the completion of the work, a letter shall be sent to the
Department certifying that the work was conducted in accordance with all rules
and regulations.
   (f)   Commercial refuse containers. Commercial refuse containers are
containers placed on the public roadways temporarily, the use of which is not
related or connected to any use or activity for which a Department of Buildings
permit and/or a construction activity permit from the Department, pursuant to
34 RCNY §
2-05, is required to be obtained. Commercial refuse containers shall not be
used for the storage of putrescible waste.
      (1)   No commercial refuse container shall be placed on the street unless
the owner of the container has obtained a permit from the Department pursuant
to 34 RCNY §
2-02. Notwithstanding such requirements, the owner of the container shall not
be required to post such permit at the work site.
      (2)   Commercial refuse containers shall not be stored or placed within:
         (i)   any "No Stopping," "No Standing", "No Parking Anytime", or
"Authorized Parking" areas;
         (ii)   fifteen feet of hydrants;
         (iii)   the area created by extending the building line to the curb
(the "corner") or the area from ten feet from either side of the corner (the
"corner quadrant");
         (iv)   a crosswalk or pedestrian ramp, nor shall it be stored or
placed in any manner so as to obstruct any crosswalk or pedestrian ramp;
         (v)   five feet of railroad tracks. The prohibitions set forth in
subparagraphs (i) through (v) shall not apply to areas where posted signs
prohibit standing except for trucks loading and unloading. In exceptional
circumstances, the Commissioner may grant permission to store or place
containers in the areas specified in subparagraphs (i) through (v) above. An
application for such permission shall be made to OCMC indicating the need for
such placement.
      (3)   Storage of commercial refuse containers shall not in any way
interfere with or obstruct access to subway facilities, utility access points,
hydrants, fire alarms, traffic signals, street signs, bus stops or bus
shelters, water main valves or gas shut-off valves, unless permission is
obtained from the appropriate City Department or utility.
      (4)   The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the
container shall be permanently affixed in characters at least three inches high
both on the side of the container that faces the sidewalk area and also on the
opposite side that faces the street, with such display being in a color
contrasting with that of the container and placed approximately midway
vertically.
      (5)   Each container shall be stored parallel to the curb and extend no
more than nine feet from the curb into the roadway.
      (6)   The street shall be protected with proper covering (e.g., planking,
skids, plating, or pneumatic tires) to prevent damage before containers are
placed on the street. Protection shall be placed directly under each steel
wheel or roller of the container to adequately distribute the weight.
Protection must remain in place for the entire time the container remains on
the roadway. Placement of all protection shall be done upon delivery by the
owner of the container. All planking and skids for containers shall be a
minimum of 1 1/2" to a maximum of 3" thick. Overall size of the protective
covering shall be a minimum of 12" x 12" and the placement of the protective
covering shall not exceed the outer dimensions of the container.
      (7)   All containers shall be clearly marked on all four sides with high
intensity reflective paint, reflectors, or other markings capable of producing
a warning glow when struck by the head lamps of a vehicle or other source of
illumination at a distance of three hundred feet.
      (8)   Sidewalks, gutters, crosswalks, bike lanes and driveways shall at
all times be kept clear and unobstructed and all dirt, debris and rubbish shall
be promptly removed therefrom.
      (9)   The owner of any container shall comply with all applicable
provisions of Titles 16 and 16-A of the New York City Administrative Code and
Title 17 of the Rules of the City of New York.
   (g)   Storage boxes. No person shall place on any street a box for the
purpose of storing written matter or any other type of material or attach such
box to any item of street furniture or to the pavement in any way.
   (h)   No smoking in pedestrian plazas. Smoking is prohibited in all
pedestrian plazas under the jurisdiction of the Department. Such pedestrian
plazas will be designated by the Department on its website.
   (i)   Flagpole sockets. It shall be permissible, by and with a permit of the
Commissioner and with permission of the owners of abutting property, for any
organization of military, naval and marine war veterans to place in sidewalks
flagpole sockets to be used only for the placing therein of stanchions or poles
on which to display American flags to be used on patriotic occasions, public
celebrations, or in connection with public parades. Such organizations shall
place flagpole sockets at least five feet apart and at least eighteen inches,
but no more than twenty-four inches, from the face of the curb. The general
conditions set forth in 34 RCNY §
7-06 applicable to revocable consents shall apply to such permits, except as
provided in this subdivision. When the sidewalk socket does not have a flagpole
in it, the socket shall be capped or covered and shall be flush with the
sidewalk.
   (j)   Temporary Outdoor Dining Setups. 
      (1)   Definition. For the purposes of this subdivision, the term
“temporary outdoor dining setup” means outdoor dining facilities authorized to
continue operating on the sidewalk and in the roadway pursuant to section 10 of
L.L. 2023/121.
      (2)   Maintenance. Temporary outdoor dining setups shall be kept clean,
well-maintained, and clear of trash, debris, vermin, food scraps, and
unsanitary conditions.
      (3)   Placement. 
         (i)   Temporary outdoor dining setups shall not block or obstruct any
of the following sidewalk and roadway features:
            (A)   a bus lane or bus stop;
            (B)   a bicycle lane;
            (C)   a carshare or bikeshare station;
            (D)   a taxi stand;
            (E)   a catch basin, utility cover, sewer, rainwater drainage or
flow.
         (ii)   Temporary outdoor dining setups shall not be located in any of
the following designated zones on a roadway:
            (A)   No Stopping Anytime;
            (B)   No Standing Anytime;
            (C)   No Stopping during specific hours;
            (D)   No Standing during specific hours.
         (iii)   Temporary outdoor dining setups shall be located at least
fifteen (15) feet from a fire hydrant and at least eight (8) feet from a
crosswalk.
      (4)   Temporary outdoor dining setups shall be directly accessible to
persons with physical disabilities, including the provision of an accessible
ramp, if applicable.
      (5)   Temporary outdoor dining setups shall provide a clear path for
pedestrians on the sidewalk that is no less than eight (8) feet wide.
      (6)   Roadway Barriers. 
         (i)   Barriers shall be maintained on all sides of a temporary outdoor
dining setup located on the roadway, except the side abutting the sidewalk.
         (ii)   All barriers must be completely filled with material (e.g.,
water, sand, etc.). Water-filled barriers are strongly recommended.
         (iii)   Barriers shall be between thirty (30) inches and thirty-six
(36) inches in height, not including the height of any plantings above such
barrier. Barriers shall be at least eighteen (18) inches in width.
         (iv)   A reflective strip shall be located on each barrier, along the
entire length of the outward-facing side of such barrier.
      (7)   Outdoor dining setups must be used and occupied by the restaurant
that erected them for outdoor dining. If not used and occupied for outdoor
dining for thirty (30) consecutive days or more, they must be removed from the
sidewalk and roadway by the restaurant. The department may send a written
notice to the owner to remove an unused setup from the street or sidewalk. If
the owner does not remove the setup or utilize the setup for outdoor dining
purposes within fourteen (14) days after such notice the department may remove
the setup to a place of safety and send notice of such removal to the owner of
such restaurant if an address for such person is available. If the property is
unclaimed it may be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of the
personal property law relating to lost property. If the property has slight or
no value the department may provide for its immediate disposal after removal.
      (8)   The department may order the removal of or remove any outdoor
dining setup or other obstruction that the Commissioner determines is a danger
to public welfare, safety, or energy system reliability, including for planned
or emergency work.
(Amended City Record 7/8/2016, eff. 8/7/2016; amended City Record 7/20/2022,
eff. 8/19/2022; amended City Record 9/12/2023, eff. 9/12/2023)
§ 2-15 Removal of Unauthorized Encroachments.
   (a)   The Commissioner may serve an order upon a property owner to remove or
alter any unauthorized projection, encroachment or encumbrance on or in front
of his premises within a period to be specified in such order; such order shall
be served personally, or by leaving it at the house or place of business of the
owner, occupant or person having charge of the house or lot in front of which
the projection, encroachment or encumbrance may be, or by posting such order
thereon.
   (b)   Where a property owner fails to alter or remove the encroachment,
encumbrance or projection within the time specified in the order, the
Commissioner may remove or alter or cause such encroachment, encumbrance or
projection to be removed or altered at the expense of the owner or constructor
thereof, who shall be liable to the City for all expenses that it may incur by
such removal or alteration, together with the penalties prescribed by § 19-150
of the Administrative Code, to be recovered with costs of suit.
      (1)   In addition to any other remedies or penalties, whenever such
removal, alteration, repair and restoration is undertaken by the Commissioner
he or she may certify separately the cost and expense of such removal,
alteration, repair and restoration to the Commissioner of Finance, who shall
charge the amount of such costs and expenses against the property upon and with
respect to which the work was performed. Each such charge shall be a lien upon
the property or premises in respect to which the same shall have been made,
which lien shall have priority over all other liens and encumbrances except
taxes and assessments for other public or local improvements, sewer rents,
water rents and interest or penalty thereon levied or charged pursuant to law.
      (2)   As an alternative to the remedies prescribed above, the
Commissioner may in his or her discretion institute through the Corporation
Counsel any appropriate action or proceeding at law against such owner for the
recovery of the costs and expenses of such removal, alteration, repair and
restoration undertaken by the Commissioner, as provided in § 19-133 of the
Administrative Code.
   (c)   In addition, failure to comply with an order issued by the
Commissioner may result in criminal or civil penalties in accordance with § 19-
149 or 19-150 of the Administrative Code.
§ 2-16 Street Closings Lasting More Than 180 Days.
   (a)   Prior to the issuance of a permit that will result in a publicly
mapped street being fully closed for more than 180 consecutive calendar days an
applicant shall submit a Community Reassessment, Impact and Amelioration (CRIA)
statement to the Department for its approval. Without such approval by the
Department, the Department may refuse to issue a permit. This provision shall
apply to single permits or to a combination of permits that would result in
such full street closure for a total of more than 180 consecutive calendar
days.
   (b)   Any individual or entity that effectuates the closure of a street for
more than 180 consecutive calendar days for which a permit from the Department
is not required, with the exception of such street closures initiated by a
local law enforcement agency, shall comply with all provisions of this section.
   (c)   The CRIA statement shall contain the following:
      (1)   the objectives of the closure and the reasons why the continued
street closure is necessary to attain those objectives;
      (2)   identification of the least expensive alternative means of
attaining those objectives and the costs of such alternatives, or a statement
and explanation as to the unavailability of such alternatives;
      (3)   how the continued street closure will impact access and traffic
flow to and within the surrounding community, including but not limited to,
access to emergency vehicles, residences, businesses, facilities, paratransit
transportation and school bus services; and
      (4)   any recommendations to mitigate adverse impact and increase access
to and within the area.
   (d)   The requirement for the issuance of a CRIA statement as described in
this subdivision may be satisfied by delivery of an environmental assessment
statement or environmental impact statement conducted pursuant to CEQR rules,
that has been approved by the Department.
   (e)   The individual or entity requesting a street closure as provided for
in this section shall attend and assist the Department at the public forum held
pursuant to the requirements of § 19-107(b) of the Administrative Code of the
City of New York and any other public forum resulting from the street closure
upon request from the Department, and shall assist the Department in producing
responses to any and all issues raised pursuant to such public forum(s).
   (f)   The Department may require the individual or entity requesting such
street closure to issue the Department approved CRIA, environmental assessment
statement or environmental impact statement to the community board and the
council member in whose district the street is located.
§ 2-16 Builders' Pavements. [Repealed]
§ 2-17 Adjudications.
New York City Department of Transportation adjudications regarding the fitness
and discipline of agency employees will be conducted by the Office of
Administration Trials and Hearings. After conducting an adjudication and
analyzing all testimony and other evidence, the hearing officer shall make
written proposed findings of fact and recommend decisions, which shall be
reviewed and finally determined by the Commissioner.
§ 2-18 Newsstands.
Incorporation by Reference of Rules Promulgated by the New York City Department
of Consumer Affairs. The rules related to newsstands promulgated by the
Department of Consumer Affairs in Subchapter G of 6 RCNY
Chapter 2 of the Rules of the City of New York are hereby incorporated by
reference into this Chapter as rules of the Department of Transportation.
§ 2-19 Bicycle Access in Office Buildings.
   (a)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall
have the following meanings:
      Available. "Available" means accessible for use by bicyclists on whose
behalf the tenant or subtenant has requested bicycle access.
      Covered. "Covered" means enveloped by a roof or functional equivalent.
For purposes of this definition, "roof" means the outer cover and its
supporting structures on the top of a building.
      Foldable bicycle. "Foldable bicycle" means a bicycle designed to fold
into a compact assembly not exceeding 20 inches (508 mm) by 36 inches (914 mm)
by 32 inches (813 mm).
      Indoor. "Indoor" means situated in the interior of or within a building
that is within four blocks or one thousand feet (304.8 m), whichever is less,
of the building for which a bicycle access plan is requested.
      Off-street. "Off-street" means located in an area other than the roadway
or the public sidewalk within four blocks or one thousand (304.8 m) feet,
whichever is less, of the building for which a bicycle access plan is
requested.
      Owner. "Owner" means the owner of the office building or such other
person who controls such building and their agents.
      Secure. "Secure" means that (i) the entry to or exit from the alternate
bicycle parking is locked or supervised by building personnel and permitted
only to (A) the owner and (B) bicycle owners on whose behalf the tenant or
subtenant has requested bicycle access, and (ii) a bicycle owner can lock a
bicycle to a fixed object (including, but not limited to, a bicycle rack) such
that the bicycle is protected from damage or theft.
   (b)   Bicycle Access Plan.
      (1)   Request for Bicycle Access. 
         (i)   The tenant or subtenant of an office building, as defined in
Administrative Code § 28-504.1, may submit a request for bicycle access, in
writing on a form provided by the Department, to the owner of such office
building. Such request must include a certification by such tenant or subtenant
that there is sufficient space within such tenant's or subtenant's premises to
store the requested number of bicycles in a manner that does not violate the
New York City Building or Fire Code or any other applicable law, rule or code,
or which would impede ingress or egress to such premises or building. Such
request must be submitted by certified mail, return receipt requested.
         (ii)   The tenant or subtenant must file a copy of any request for
bicycle access with the Department. Such request may be filed electronically by
submitting it through the Department's website (www.nyc.govbikesinbuildings) or
by submitting such request by regular mail to the Department of Transportation,
55 Water Street, 9th Floor, New York, NY 10041, Attention: Bikes in Buildings
Program.
         (iii)   The owner of such office building must complete and implement
a bicycle access plan for such building within thirty (30) days after receipt
of a written request from such tenant or subtenant of such building.
         (iv)   The owner of the building may request an exception to the
requirements of Administrative Code § 28-504.1.2 in accordance with subdivision
(d) of this section.
      (2)   Contents of Bicycle Access Plan.
         (i)   Requirements. The bicycle access plan prepared by the owner of a
building must, for bicyclists on whose behalf the tenant or subtenant has
requested bicycle access, include but not be limited to:
            A.   provisions for at least one freight elevator that meets each
of the following conditions:
               1.   such elevator will be made available for bicycle access for
each building tenant or subtenant and employees thereof, who requests such
access, during the regular operating hours of such elevator;
               2.   bicycles will be allowed to be transported to and from such
elevator along each route that is used to transport freight to and from such
elevator, to the extent practicable, and where such routes do not present
substantial safety risks;
               3.   no escort by building personnel will be required for a
person transporting a bicycle to or from such elevator if no such escort is
required when a person is transporting freight to or from such elevator; and
               4.   a person transporting a bicycle to or from such elevator,
and any package or other material in such person's possession, will be subject
to the same or substantially similar security measures applicable to other
persons entering such building or such elevator.
            B.   provisions allowing bicycles to be brought in or out of such
building using one or more designated passenger elevators when the freight
elevator described in Subparagraph (A) is not operational and at any time
outside the regular operating hours of the freight elevator described in
Subparagraph (A).
            C.   information about the location of building entrances;
            D.   information about the route to freight elevators that
accommodate bicycle access;
            E.   the route to a designated area for bicycle parking on an
accessible level if such bicycle parking is made available; and
            F.   a notice to tenants and subtenants informing them of their
responsibilities with respect to bicycle storage.
         (ii)   For purposes of these rules it shall be presumed that if a
freight elevator in the building is available for carrying freight, it is
available for carrying a bicycle for purposes of providing bicycle access.
         (iii)   Bicycle access shall be available, at minimum, during the
regular operating hours of the freight elevator in the event that such elevator
is used for bicycle access.
         (iv)   Upon receiving and reviewing its copy of a request for a
bicycle access plan that has been filed in accordance with subparagraph (ii) of
paragraph one of subdivision (b) of this section, the Department may require
that additional information be included in the plan because it has determined
that such information is appropriate for the particular building in question.
   (c)   Amendments to plan. The owner of a building must either create a new
plan or amend a plan as needed (1) to address changed circumstances which
warrant a revision in a particular tenant's or subtenant's plan, or in a plan
that is applicable to all tenants; or (2) to accommodate new requests from
other tenants or subtenants requesting bicycle access. Should such owner of a
building elect to amend a bicycle access plan pursuant to this section, such
plan must be amended within thirty (30) days of receiving a request for bicycle
access. Any such amendments that may materially affect the bicycle access plan
shall be completed and implemented within thirty (30) days of the changed
circumstances or to accommodate new requests from other tenants or subtenants
requesting bicycle access, and do not preclude the requirement to comply with
the provisions of this section. All amendments must be filed with the
Department pursuant to the provisions of Subdivision (g) of this section.
   (d)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Bicycle access need not be provided if an owner of a building
applies to the Commissioner for, and is granted, a letter of exception as set
forth below. Such request must be sent by certified mail, return receipt
requested within fifteen (15) days after such owner has received a request for
a bicycle access plan to the Department of Transportation, 55 Water Street, 9th
Floor, New York, NY 10041, Attention: Bikes in Buildings Program, and certifies
the following:
         (i)   no freight elevator in such building is available because unique
circumstances exist involving substantial safety risks directly related to the
use of each such elevator pursuant to Administrative Code § 28-504.1.3(1)
("Exception 1"); or
         (ii)   there is sufficient secure alternate covered off-street no-cost
bicycle parking within four blocks or 1,000 feet (304.8m), whichever is less;
or there is sufficient secure alternate indoor no-cost bicycle parking
available on the premises or within four blocks or 1,000 feet (304.8m),
whichever is less, of such building to accommodate all tenants or subtenants of
such building requesting bicycle access and that such off-street parking is
accessible on a 24-hour basis pursuant to Administrative Code § 28-504.1.3(2)
("Exception 2"). The number of bicycle parking spaces available must be at
least equal to the number of bicycles contained in the bicycle access tenant
requests.
      (2)   A request for Exception 1 shall include the basis for requesting
such an exception and shall also include but not be limited to the following
supporting documentation:
         (i)   A certification from a professional engineer who is licensed and
registered in New York State. Such certification shall include but not be
limited to the following facts:
            (A)   The date the building was constructed;
            (B)   The date the elevator was installed;
            (C)   The method of elevator door closing;
            (D)   Whether the elevator is self-service or there is an operator;
            (E)   Whether there is a car top;
            (F)   Whether there is a car gate or door; and
            (G)   The professional engineer's license number.
         (ii)   Upon receiving and reviewing a request based on Exception 1,
the Department may require that additional information be submitted in support
of the request because it has determined that such information is appropriate
for the particular building in question.
      (3)   A request for Exception 2 must include the basis for requesting
such an exception and must also include but not be limited to the following
supporting documentation:
         (i)   Proof that secure alternate covered off-street no-cost bicycle
parking or secure alternate indoor no-cost bicycle parking is available to or
under the control of the owner of the building. Such proof may include but not
be limited to a copy of a deed, lease, title, permit or contract evidencing
such control.
         (ii)   The route to the secure alternate covered off-street no-cost
bicycle parking that is within four blocks or 1,000 feet (304.8m), whichever is
less; or the route to the secure alternate indoor no-cost bicycle parking
available on the premises or is within four blocks or 1,000 feet (304.8m),
whichever is less, of such building.
         (iii)   Upon receiving and reviewing a request based on Exception 2,
the Department may require that additional information be submitted in support
of the request because it has determined that such information is appropriate
for the particular building in question.
      (4)   Pending the Department's inspection, review and determination of a
request for a letter of exception, an owner of a building will be exempt from
complying with the requirements of this section.
   (e)   Inspection and determination.
      (1)   If Exception 1 is sought: After conducting an inspection of the
building and freight elevator, the Commissioner of the Department of Buildings
will thereafter issue a final determination to the Department as to whether to
grant Exception 1. Such final determination will be included in the
Department's letter of exception or denial sent to the owner.
      (2)   If Exception 2 is sought: After conducting an inspection in
consultation with the Department of Buildings of the secure alternate covered
off-street no-cost bicycle parking or the secure alternate indoor no-cost
bicycle parking, the Commissioner shall thereafter issue a final determination
as to whether to grant Exception 2.
      (3)   A letter of exception or denial must be sent by the Department by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner.
      (4)   If a letter of denial is sent, a bicycle access plan must be posted
within twenty (20) days after receipt of such letter.
   (f)   Posting.
      (1)   The owner of a building for which a bicycle access plan has been
adopted must post in such building either a current bicycle access plan or a
notice in the building lobby indicating that the plan is available in the
building manager's office upon request. The posting of such plan or notice must
be made within five (5) days after completion of such plan. Such posting or
notice must indicate that other tenants or subtenants are entitled to access
according to the plan upon request, provided such tenants and subtenants, upon
making such request, certify that there is sufficient space within such
tenant's or subtenant's premises to store the requested number of bicycles in a
manner that does not violate the New York City Building or Fire Codes or any
other applicable law, rule or code, or which would impede ingress or egress to
such building.
      (2)   The owner of a building for which an exception to the bicycle
access plan requirement has been granted must post in such building the letter
of exception provided by the Commissioner pursuant to subdivision (d) of this
section, or a notice in the building lobby indicating that such letter of
exception is available in the building manager's office upon request. The
posting of such letter or notice must be made within five (5) days after
receipt of such letter of exception.
      (3)   Bicycle access plans, letters of exception and notices of
availability of either such documents shall be made available to the
Department, the Department of Buildings or authorized representatives of any
other City agency upon request.
   (g)   Filing of bicycle access plan and subsequent amendments with the
Department. A bicycle access plan must be filed with the Department by
electronic submission through the Department's website (www.nyc.gov/
bikesinbuildings) or by regular mail to the Department of Transportation, 55
Water Street, 9th Floor, New York, NY 10041, Attention: Bikes in Buildings
Program, within ten (10) days of completion of such plan. Should the owner of a
building amend their bicycle access plan pursuant to Subdivision (c) of this
section, such amendment must be filed with the Department as outlined above
within ten (10) business days of completion of such amendment.
   (h)   Foldable bicycle access. It is unlawful for an owner of a building the
main occupancy of which is offices that are classified in occupancy group B to
prohibit a tenant or subtenant from transporting a foldable bicycle to or from
such tenant or subtenants space on a passenger elevator, provided that such
bicycle is fully folded.
   (i)   Emergencies. In an emergency that requires the evacuation of all or
part of a building, the owner may limit or restrict bicycles and foldable
bicycles from being transported through any means of egress.
   (j)   Restriction or limitation on bicycle access. If the owner of a
building is issued a violation of the New York City Administrative Code or the
New York City Fire Code, or a rule promulgated thereunder, arising from the
storage of a bicycle, and such owner shows that such violation occurred in an
area of such building that is under the control of a tenant or subtenant, such
owner may restrict or limit bicycle access under the bicycle access plan for
such tenant or subtenant.
(Amended City Record 10/5/2017, eff. 11/4/2017)
§ 2-20 Street Light and Power.
   (a)   General requirements. Any person installing, repairing, removing,
using or working within three (3) feet of any type of City electrical equipment
or non-City electrical equipment attached to City Property, including
communication circuits, shall comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided by law or rule, no person shall attach
any item to any City electrical equipment, including but not limited to, street
light poles and poles containing electrical traffic control devices, such as
traffic signal poles, and pedestrian and bicycle signal poles, without
permission from the Department.
      (2)   Only public utilities, public benefit corporations, City agencies
or licensed and insured contractors shall be permitted to install, repair, use
or work within three (3) feet of any type of City electrical equipment or non-
City electrical equipment attached to City Property, including communication
circuits.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided by law or rule, all electrical
installations, connections, supports, devices, and equipment, including but not
limited to, communication circuits, shall be designed and installed in
compliance with the general requirements of the National Electrical Code (NEC)
or, in the case of Public Utilities, the National Electrical Safety Code
(NESC).
      (4)   All public infrastructure work, including work in streets, bridges,
parks and public places, shall be designed and installed in compliance with
these rules; standard electrical engineering practice; the National Electric
Code (NEC) or, in the case of Public Utilities, the National Electrical Safety
Code (NESC); the Standard Detail Drawings; the Standard Specifications; the
Department's Instructions for Filing Plans & Guidelines for the Design of
Sidewalks, Curbs, Roadways and other Infrastructure Components; the
Department's Bureau of Traffic, Division of Street Lighting Standard Drawings;
and all other applicable laws and rules.
      (5)   All required applications and/or forms, plans and certifications,
relating to work that is subject to these rules shall be submitted to the
Department's Street Lighting and/or Traffic Signals Units for approval prior to
the issuance by the Department of a permit. No work shall commence prior to the
issuance of such permit. Approval of adjustments to the work performed shall be
obtained from the Department prior to commencing any such adjustments. Changes
in the work may be mandated by the Department for the purpose of conforming the
work to the requirements of these rules.
      (6)   The Department's Electrical Inspections Unit shall be notified by
persons performing all proposed non-emergency work at least seventy-two (72)
hours prior to commencement. Application to the Department for a permit or
other authorization at least seventy-two (72) hours prior to commencement of
non-emergency work shall be deemed notice.
      (7)   No person shall break, deface, remove, or interfere with any lamp,
gas, communication or electrical apparatus, or any part thereof, which shall be
hung or fixed in any street or public place, or extinguish the light therein
except as authorized by the Department. All instances of damaged gas,
communication or electrical equipment shall be reported to the 311 Government
Services & Information for New York City telephone number and/or the contact
telephone number on any applicable permits. The New York City Police Department
shall also be notified, as appropriate.
      (8)   Any person installing a connection to any type of City electrical
equipment or non-city electrical equipment attached to City property shall make
arrangements with the appropriate electric utility company to pay for the
electricity that will be used to operate said equipment.
      (9)   An inspector from the Department may visit a work site upon
receiving a complaint, or as a matter of routine inspection, to monitor
compliance with these rules. In the event that the inspector deems a condition
at the work site to be imminently dangerous, the party determined to be
responsible for creating such condition shall immediately remove or correct the
condition upon notification by the Department. For conditions not deemed
imminently dangerous, the party determined to be responsible for creating such
condition shall be provided with an Electrical Remove or Repair (EROR) report
identifying the condition needing correction. The EROR report would require a
cure period of forty-eight (48) hours to correct the condition. If the
condition is not corrected within forty-eight (48) hours, then a Notice of
Violation shall be issued against the party determined to be responsible for
creating such condition. Said violations may be issued on-site or by mail.
Notwithstanding the preceding sentences in this paragraph there shall be no
cure period afforded with respect to compliance with emergency conditions, such
as, but not necessarily limited to, those listed in 34 RCNY §
2-20(a)(4), (a)(7), (b)(5), (b)(9), (e)(11), (m)(1), (n)(5), and (t)(5), where
an imminent dangerous condition results due to improper installation,
maintenance and/or removal.
   (b)   Shunts: Overhead, Street and Wrap-around Shunts.
      (1)   This subdivision shall apply to overhead, street and wrap-around
shunts attached to City electrical equipment or running over/along a roadway or
sidewalk.
      (2)   In order for the Department to maintain accurate identification and
location records for overhead, street and wrap-around shunts, no person shall
install any shunt without first obtaining a permit from the Department unless
otherwise provided herein.
      (3)   No person shall install an overhead shunt without first obtaining a
regular permit unless an emergency condition exists and an emergency permit has
been obtained. In the event that the emergency condition is not repaired by the
conclusion of the forty-eight (48) hour emergency permit period, a regular
permit shall be obtained.
      (4)   Shunts shall not be permanent installations. A permanent repair
shall be made by the conclusion of the ninety (90) day regular permit period.
      (5)   No shunt shall bypass any electrical safety device.
      (6)   In the event that a shunt must be used and an overhead or street
shunt cannot be installed, a wrap-around shunt may be used only if approval is
obtained from the Department's Streetlight Unit prior to obtaining a permit.
Any request for such approval must include, at a minimum, the location of the
shunt and the reason(s) why only a wrap-around shunt can be used.
      (7)   The roadway surrounding a street shunt shall be properly barricaded
as a warning to vehicular traffic in the event that it is not feasible to
install shunt boards (ramps) capable of withstanding constant, heavy vehicular
traffic. All barricades must bear a sign pursuant to 34 RCNY §
2-02(c)(2) displaying the contractor's name and telephone number and the start
and end dates of all work. The sidewalk areas over which the shunt runs and all
wires shall be protected and ramped with a reflective covering.
      (8)   Overhead shunts shall be installed into the top of a street light/
lamppost or traffic signal pole by removing the pole cap, installing an
approved mounting bracket, running the electric cord or cable into and through
the interior of the pole and making the electrical connection, which shall be
independently fused for the intended use of the shunt, in the base of the pole
from the inside. The pole cap shall then be placed in the base of the pole for
reinstallation when the shunt is removed.
      (9)   Overhead shunts and their supports shall be maintained at the
following minimum clearances. (For additional minimum clearances, see Table B
of this section.)
         (i)   27 feet above railroad tracks
         (ii)   25 feet above elevated railroads
         (iii)   18 feet above roadways
         (iv)   14 feet above sidewalks and alleyways
      (10)   All shunt apparatus shall be removed when the shunt is no longer
in use.
      (11)   All existing overhead and street shunts shall be removed within
ninety (90) days of the effective date of this section. If not so removed,
permits shall be obtained for each shunt within that ninety (90) day time
period and the shunts shall be replaced with permanent connections as provided
in paragraph 4 above, unless waived by the Department in writing.
   (c)   Electrical Traffic Control Devices.
      (1)   City electrical equipment containing electrical traffic control
devices shall not be used as a source of power for anything other than the
electrical traffic control devices, unless explicitly approved by the
Department.
      (2)   Attachments to City electrical equipment containing electrical
traffic control devices shall be approved by the Department prior to such
attachment.
      (3)   In the event that the Department installs an overhead shunt to
restore power to City electrical equipment containing an electrical traffic
control device, an electrical utility shall, upon notice from the Department,
which may include, but not be limited to, a tracking number from the Electrical
Inspections Unit, obtain an overhead shunt permit and maintain such shunt
pursuant to such permit until the utility replaces the shunt with a permanent
electrical connection pursuant to these rules.
   (d)   Cable Guards and Standpipes/Overhead Wiring.
      (1)   This subdivision shall apply to cable guards and standpipes
installed or intended to be installed on City electrical equipment, such as
poles.
      (2)   No person shall install a cable guard or standpipe on any City
electrical equipment that already has a cable guard or standpipe without first
obtaining approval from the Department's Streetlight Unit.
      (3)   Metal cable guards and standpipes shall be galvanized and in good
condition.
      (4)   Cable guards and standpipes shall be installed parallel to the curb
unless otherwise directed by the Department.
   (e)   Conductors – Aerial/Overhead.
      (1)   This subdivision shall apply to conductors installed or intended to
be installed on City property.
      (2)   No person shall install any aerial/overhead conductor without first
obtaining a permit from the Department's Streetlight Unit, unless an emergency
condition exists and Department authorization to install the aerial/overhead
conductor has been obtained. In the event that the emergency condition is not
repaired within forty-eight (48) hours of receiving Department authorization, a
permit shall be obtained.
      (3)   On City electrical equipment, electric light and power wires shall
not be placed on the same cross arm with communication or similar wires without
prior authorization from the Department. Where electric light and power wires
are placed on the same City-owned pole with communication or similar wires, the
horizontal distance between the two inside pins of each cross arm shall not be
less than thirty (30) inches, if access to points above such cross arms may be
necessary, and the former shall be placed above the latter and separated
therefrom by a vertical distance as provided in Table C of this section.
      (4)   Conductors shall be securely attached to suitable insulators on
pins on cross arms, or on NEC or NESC approved brackets, with NEC or NESC
approved clamps or wire of the same size and type as conductors. Other methods
of attachment shall not be used unless prior approval is given by the
Department for such use.
      (5)   For temporary work, including but not limited to building
construction, conductors may be suspended from suitable insulators or other
attachments, provided such attachments are approved by the Department prior to
installation and the conductors are securely attached to substantial supports.
      (6)   Conductors operating at potentials in excess of 300 volts to ground
shall be capable of being disconnected so that, in case of a fire or other
emergency condition, current may be cut off from the particular circuits or
section so as not to interfere with the work of fire fighters or other
emergency responders. Such disconnections shall be made only by authorized
employees of the company operating the conductors.
      (7)   Conductors shall be adequately protected against accidental contact
with other conductors, trees, buildings, poles, or other possible interference.
      (8)   The following minimum clearances are required between wires or
cables and buildings:
Table A
 
Voltage Classification Up to 8,700V 8,700V to 15,000A 15,000V to 33,000V
Horizontal Clearance   3 feet       8 feet            10 feet
Vertical Clearance     8 feet       8 feet            10 feet
 
      (9)   Conductors for light or power shall not be connected together
without the approval of the Department. This provision shall not apply to
transformer leads or to networked supply systems such as trolley conductors and
low tension feeders or mains to which services are connected.
      (10)   Conductors shall be spliced or joined so as to be both
mechanically and electrically secure. The splices shall be covered with
insulation equal to that on the conductors.
      (11)   Conductors used as supply lines carrying 2,300 volts or less shall
be approved for outdoor open wiring by the Department prior to installation.
      (12)   Conductors shall, where exposed to weather, be supported on
insulators approved in advance by the Department.
      (13)   Conductors shall enter a switch or cutout box or cabinet through
approved bushings at the bottom of such box or cabinet wherever practical.
Where conductors enter boxes or cabinets at the side, they shall be provided
with drip-loops in addition to the approved bushings.
      (14)   The following minimum clearances are required, except where
otherwise specifically permitted by the Department:
Table B
 
Nature of        Conductors Guys, Spans, Messengers
Crossing         Under 300 Volts 300 Volts to 750 750 Volts to 15,000 Volts to
                                 Volts            15,000 Volts 33,000 Volts
Above track
rails of freight 27 feet         27 feet          28 feet      30 feet
railroads.
Above track
rails of         25 feet         25 feet          25 feet      25 feet
elevated
railways.
Above track
rails of surface 22 feet         22 feet          25 feet      25 feet
railways.
Above streets    18 feet         18 feet          20 feet      22 feet
                 14 feet*
                 *For guys, 8
Above sidewalks  feet shall be
and alleyways.   sufficient for  18 feet          20 feet      22 feet
                 anchor guys not
                 crossing
                 pathways.
 
      (15)   Minimum Wire Crossing Clearances:
         The following minimum clearances or separations between conductors
crossing each other and on different supporting structures are required except
where otherwise specifically permitted by the Department.
Table C
Conductors of lines operating at the voltages indicated at the heads of columns
shall, unless otherwise permitted by the Department, be installed above those
in the left hand column of the table.
 
Voltage Classification Communication 0 to    300V to 750V to 8,700V to Guys**
                                     300V    750V    8,700V  33,000V
Communication          2 feet        4 feet* 4 feet  4 feet  6 feet    2 feet
0 to 300 V                           2 feet  2 feet  2 feet  4 feet    2 feet
300 to 750 V                                 2 feet  2 feet  4 feet    2 feet
750 to 7,500 V                                       2 feet  4 feet    4 feet
Guys**                 2 feet        2 feet  2 feet  4 feet  4 feet    2 feet
Buildings or other     8 feet        8 feet  8 feet  10 feet 10 feet
structures
 
* This may be reduced to 2 feet providing the crossing is not within 6 feet of
any pole concerned in the crossing.
** Also span wires, messengers, lightning protection wires and service loops.
   (f)   Cross Arms. Cross arms on City electrical equipment shall not be
longer than necessary for the number of conductors that may reasonably be
anticipated to support utility cables.
   (g)   Electrical Construction.
      (1)   No person shall begin construction of lines to furnish
communications or electric service in the City of New York unless the
Department issues a permit for such construction in accordance with this
subdivision.
      (2)   As a part of the application by persons other than Public Utilities
for permits pursuant to this subdivision, such persons shall file their
construction specifications, i.e. strength, foundations, settings and
electrical connections, for communications or electric service installations
with the Department. No permit shall be issued to such persons by the
Department until such specifications are approved by the Department. All work
shall be performed in accordance with the specifications approved by the
Department.
      (3)   As a part of the application by Public Utilities for an annual
permit to maintain their systems, Public Utilities shall file their
construction specifications, i.e. strength, foundations, settings and
electrical connections, for communications or electric service installations
demonstrating full compliance with the NESC with the Department. No annual
permit shall be issued to a Public Utility by the Department until such
specifications are filed with the Department. All work shall be performed in
accordance with the specifications filed with the Department. Notwithstanding
the receipt of an annual permit to maintain their systems, Public Utilities are
required to obtain all necessary permits to perform their work, including
street opening, construction activity and sidewalk construction permits.
   (h)   [Intentionally left blank]
   (i)   Overhead Distribution Structures.
      (1)   No person shall begin construction of new overhead electrical
distribution structures in or on any public street unless the Department issues
a permit for such construction in accordance with this subdivision.
      (2)   As a part of the application by persons other than Public Utilities
for permits pursuant to this subdivision, such persons shall file their plans
for new overhead electrical distribution structures with the Department. No
permit shall be issued to such persons by the Department until such plans are
approved by the Department. All work shall be constructed in accordance with
plans approved by the Department.
      (3)   As a part of the application by Public Utilities for an annual
permit to maintain their systems, Public Utilities shall file their plans for
new overhead electrical distribution structures demonstrating full compliance
with the NESC with the Department. No annual permit shall be issued to a Public
Utility by the Department until such plans are filed with the Department. All
work shall be constructed in accordance with the plans filed with the
Department. Notwithstanding the receipt of an annual permit to maintain their
systems, Public Utilities are required to obtain all necessary permits to
perform their work, including street opening, construction activity and
sidewalk construction permits.
   (j)   Equipment and Equipment Repairs.
      (1)   All costs for the repair or replacement of damaged or missing City
electrical equipment, including street light/lamppost wiring and foundation,
shall be at the expense of the person whose work and/or equipment caused the
condition.
      (2)   Any equipment and/or device installed, relocated, removed from or
attached to any type of City property or City electrical equipment, including
communication circuits, street light/lamppost wiring and foundation, that
creates an unsafe condition may be removed, replaced or repaired by the
Department and such removal, replacement or repair shall be at the expense of
such person whose work and/or equipment created the unsafe condition.
      (3)   In the event of damage to City electrical equipment, including but
not limited to electrical conduit, street lights, ITS and traffic signal poles,
pull boxes, panel boxes, junction boxes, cameras, or any other City-owned
electrical systems equipment on or adjacent to all roadway and/or highway
surfaces, including grade level and elevated roadways, ramps, overpasses, and
paved and non-paved shoulder areas, notice shall be made to the Electrical
Inspections Unit by the person that discovered such damage, at the time of
discovery, and regardless of fault. An inspector shall be dispatched to
evaluate and document the condition and coordinate the necessary repairs by the
party determined to be responsible for creating such condition. The person who
caused the damage shall conduct the necessary repairs without delay following
notification to the Department of said repair and the obtaining of any
necessary permits. Unless Electrical Inspections Unit inspector is present at
the jobsite when the repairs are being performed, such person shall provide
pictures and/or other documentation to confirm that the appropriate repair work
has been completed.
      (4)   When the owner of any non-city electrical and/or non-electrical
equipment located on or extending over a City street, or attached to City
property is notified by the Department that a repair or alteration of said
equipment is needed for public safety purposes, the equipment shall be made
safe within the time frame prescribed by the Department. However, in cases of
emergency the equipment must be made safe within twenty-four (24) hours of
notification. Complete repair or alteration shall be made within seven (7) days
following notification as directed by the Department.
      (5)   If the repairs of non-city electrical equipment located on a City
street or attached to City property are not satisfactorily made in the time
allotted and the Department considers the equipment to be a danger to public
safety, the Department may in the interest of public safety remove the
equipment, except where prohibited by law, and charge the cost of removal to
the owner of the equipment.
   (k)   Conduits.
      (1)   Where conduits are attached to City electrical equipment, they
shall be securely fastened in place and grounded in an approved manner. If
straps are used, each strap shall be secured with two (2) lag screws or other
method approved by the Department.
      (2)   Flexible conduit, where permitted to be attached to City electrical
equipment, shall enter the switch or cutout box or cabinet at the bottom
wherever practical, using an NEC and/or NESC approved fitting. Where such
conduit enters the box or cabinet at the side, it shall be provided with a
drip-loop.
   (l)   Grounding.
      (1)   All exposed non-current carrying metal parts of electrical
equipment for light, communications or power located on or attached to City
property, including but not limited to, transformer cases, switch or fuse
cabinets, metallic conduit, raceways and cable armor, shall be permanently and
effectively grounded.
      (2)   Transformers with ungrounded secondaries and metal shields for
conductors running down City electrical equipment, such as a City-owned pole,
must be properly protected.
      (3)   The grounding resistance should not exceed 25 ohms.
      (4)   City electrical equipment shall not be used as a ground.
   (m)   Work site safety.
      (1)   The work site safety rules in subdivision (h) of 34 RCNY §
2-02 and any other safety measures directed by the Department shall apply to
work performed pursuant to this section.
      (2)   No movable equipment shall be left unattended at the work site
unless properly secured.
   (n)   Guys and Anchors.
      (1)   Where the mechanical loads to be imposed on City electrical
equipment, such as City-owned poles or other City-owned supporting structures,
are greater than can be safely supported by the pole or structure itself,
additional strength shall be provided by the use of guys, braces or other
approved construction. Guys shall be of stranded cable or other approved
mechanical construction; suitable shims and thimbles shall be used where
required. Guy wires shall be adequately protected by strain insulators, and
shall keep a minimum wire crossing clearance as indicated in Table C of this
section.
      (2)   Anchor guys may be attached to City property only with the approval
of the Department.
      (3)   Anchor guys attached to City property will not be permitted:
         (i)   Within twenty-five (25) feet of any intersecting street;
         (ii)   Where sufficient strength will be afforded by head guys or pole
guys and cribbed poles;
         (iii)   Where the anchor guys would interfere with the entrance to a
building or garage.
      (4)   Anchor guys attached to City property shall be protected by an
approved shield, extending at least eight feet (8) out of the ground, and not
less than six feet (6) above the sidewalk.
      (5)   Where guy wires are liable to come into contact with electrical
conductors, approved insulators shall be installed.
   (o)   [Intentionally left blank];
   (p)   Insulators. On communication lines attached to City property, other
methods of attachment approved by the Department may be used in lieu of
insulators.
   (q)   Pole Installations.
      (1)   This subdivision shall apply to all street light, traffic control
device or wood poles installed or intended to be installed on City property.
      (2)   Poles shall not be installed or replaced without obtaining a permit
from the Department.
      (3)   All plans, designs and/or drawings for pole installations including
the specifications for height, setting, foundation and depth in ground shall be
provided to the Department for approval prior to obtaining a permit.
      (4)   Poles installed and/or relocated after the effective date of this
section shall be set at the proper grade and at the approved distance from the
curb. The following approved distances from the curb are required, unless
otherwise approved by the Department.
 
Pole Type      Distance from Curb Edge to the Center of the pole
Traffic Signal 32 inches
Street Light   36 inches
Wood Pole      36 inches
 
      (5)   All poles now standing or hereafter erected shall be branded,
stamped or marked in a manner approved by the Department with the initials of
the company owning them or with some other distinguishing mark of ownership,
and a clearly legible serial number at a point not less than five (5) feet nor
more than seven (7) feet above the street surface. Where a pole is occupied by
wires of more than one company, each group of conductors and/or cross arms
shall, where necessary, be distinguished by a characteristic mark, paint or
fastening approved by the Department. All poles now standing shall be branded,
stamped or marked in the manner as described herein within twelve (12) months
of the effective date of this section. In lieu of an ownership mark on a pole,
Public Utilities shall, upon completion of a web-based pole ownership database
readily identifying pole ownership via the pole serial number, provided the
Department with access to such database.
      (6)   Unless authorized by the Department, poles shall not be erected on
both sides of any street requiring new installations.
      (7)   Poles installed and/or relocated after the effective date of this
section shall be spaced not less than eighty (80) feet or more than one hundred
thirty (130) feet apart, unless authorized by the Department.
      (8)   Poles installed and/or relocated after the effective date of this
section shall be set at least fifteen (15) feet from hydrants, unless otherwise
authorized by the Department.
      (9)   Poles installed and/or relocated after the effective date of this
section shall be set at least seven (7) feet from driveways, unless otherwise
authorized by the Department.
      (10)   Metal poles shall be painted as directed by the Department.
      (11)   Steps, where provided on poles carrying supply wires, shall be
substantially parallel with the roadway. The lowest metal step shall be not
less than six and one-half (6 1/2) feet from the ground.
      (12)   Where poles are treated with creosote over one (1) foot above the
ground line, they shall be guarded, if necessary, in a manner approved by the
Department, to avoid exposure to the public.
   (r)   Persons Installing, Relocating, Removing/Replacing Street Light Poles
and/or Installing/Removing Temporary Pole Taps.
      (1)   A person requesting to install, relocate, and/or remove/replace
street light poles on City property shall provide the Department with the
appropriate application, all plans, drawings, and/or designs for said work,
including all contractor information, at least sixty (60) days in advance of
the expected work. No permit shall be issued to such persons by the Department
until all plans are approved by the Department. No work shall be performed
without the obtaining of all necessary permits.
      (2)   A person requesting to install a temporary pole tap on City
electrical equipment shall provide the Department with the appropriate
application, all plans, drawings, and/or designs for said work, including all
contractor information, at least thirty (30) days in advance of the expected
work. No permit shall be issued to such persons by the Department until all
plans are approved by the Department unless otherwise provided herein. No work
shall be performed without the obtaining of all necessary permits.
      (3)   Notwithstanding paragraph 2 above, Department approval prior to
obtaining a permit is not required for temporary pole taps used to facilitate
work by Public Utilities in the immediate vicinity of the work site provided
that the pole tap is removed whenever Public Utility personnel are not
physically present at the site.
      (4)   All costs for the installation of temporary pole taps and/or the
installation, relocation, removal and/or replacement of a streetlight pole
shall be borne by the person requesting the work.
      (5)   A person requesting to erect a street lighting pole on City
property in front of his or her property shall comply with the Revocable
Consents Rules, 34 RCNY
Chapter 7.
      (6)   Unless otherwise authorized by the Department, temporary lighting
shall be provided at or near the street light pole location when a pole is
being relocated or is temporarily removed until the new or relocated street
light is energized. A minimum 150 Watt HPS luminaire shall be mounted at least
eighteen (18) feet above the street. (Please refer to Table B of this section.)
      (7)   A relocated or removed street light pole shall be appropriately
replaced by the end of the permit period.
      (8)   If a relocated or removed street light pole is not satisfactorily
replaced by the end of the permit period, the Department may replace said pole
and charge the cost of replacement to the person that requested its relocation
or removal.
      (9)   The wiring to the street light luminaire shall not be disconnected
at any time when a temporary pole tap is installed.
      (10)   A temporary pole tap on City electrical equipment shall be removed
by the end of the approved time frame.
   (s)   Service Conductors, Supply or Communication.
      (1)   Service conductors shall not be installed on City property unless
the installation has received all necessary permits required by the Department
and other applicable City agencies.
      (2)   Except where advance written permission is obtained from the
Department, unsupported loops on service conductors installed on City Property
shall not exceed one hundred and fifty (150) feet.
      (3)   Where service for light, communications, or power is to be provided
from any metal column or structure located on City property, the conductors
shall be protected by metal conduit to a point at least eight (8) feet above
the sidewalk and terminate in an approved box or fitting on such column or
structure.
   (t)   Service Connections for Exterior Electrical Installation.
      (1)   This subdivision shall apply to service connections installed or
intended to be installed on City property.
      (2)   Service shall not be furnished to any exterior electrical
installation unless said installation has received all necessary permits from
the Department.
      (3)   A connection shall only be made at the point designated in the
permit.
      (4)   A connection shall not be made to light or power service or wiring
in any building without a permit.
      (5)   Where service for light or power is to be provided from a building
or from the secondary side of transformer housed on street:
         (i)   Service equipment is required. Service equipment shall be not
less than 125% of the computed load and in no case less than one hundred (100)
amperes, except by special permission of the Department.
         (ii)   Feeders shall be in good condition, properly insulated,
continuous without splices and shall be enclosed in metal conduit from the
service connection to an approved service head which shall maintain a minimum
clearance as listed in Table B of this section. Conductors for light or power
shall not be so interconnected as to form a shunt around any service switch or
fuse controlling the supply of current to any electrical installation.
   (u)   [Intentionally left blank]
   (v)   Supports.
      (1)   This subdivision shall apply to supports installed or intended to
be installed on City property.
      (2)   Wood supports shall not be less than four inches by four inches
(4"X4"), and shall be securely fastened in place.
      (3)   Pipe used for vertical supports shall be not less than one and one-
half (1 1/2) inches in diameter and shall be maintained in good condition.
      (4)   Vertical supports shall be securely erected, and where rigid
attachment is not available, shall be well ballasted and securely guyed in at
least three (3) directions.
      (5)   City electrical equipment, such as City-owned poles and supports,
shall be securely guyed with head guys not less than #6 AWG and side guys not
less than #12 AWG galvanized stranded wires.
      (6)   Conductors attached to City property shall be supported at least
every fifteen (15) feet. Spans in excess of fifteen (15) feet shall be
supported on suitable messenger wires every five (5) feet.
      (7)   Conductors attached to City property shall be supported on approved
insulators and secured thereto by insulated wire of same size as conductors.
      (8)   Messenger wires and conductors attached to City property shall be
dead-ended on strain insulators.
      (9)   Conductors attached to City property shall have approved rubber,
weatherproof or slow-burning weatherproof insulating covering, shall not be
smaller than #14 AWG, and shall be suspended not less than fourteen (14) feet
above the sidewalk, and not less than three (3) feet from any building, when
parallel thereto.
      (10)   Conductors and sockets shall be weatherproof and in good
condition.
      (11)   The ends of conductors shall be securely taped.
   (w)   Tests, including stray voltage tests.
      (1)   Owners or operators of lines, equipment and appliances shall make
such inspections, tests and determinations as required by law and as directed
by the Department.
         (i)   Prior to performing any installation, removal, repair, and/or
work within three (3) feet of any type of City electrical equipment or non-city
electrical equipment in the public right-of-way or attached to City Property,
including communication circuits, a contractor shall test the equipment for
stray voltage. If the equipment tests positive (i.e. has a voltage reading
greater than or equal to one (1) volt measured using a voltmeter and a 500 ohm
shunt resistor), the electrical contractor shall contact the Department and the
appropriate utility company immediately and shall report such test result and
the location of the equipment. The contractor shall safeguard the location
until the Department and/or the appropriate utility company responds to the
location. The electrical contractor shall wait for clearance from the
Department and the appropriate utility company prior to the commencement of
work.
         (ii)   After completing any installation, removal, repair, and/or work
within three (3) feet of any type of City electrical equipment or non-city
electrical equipment in the public right-of-way or attached to City Property,
including communication circuits, a contractor shall retest the equipment for
stray voltage. If the equipment tests positive, the electrical contractor shall
contact the Department and the appropriate utility company immediately and
shall report such test result and the location of the equipment. The contractor
shall safeguard the location until the Department and/or the appropriate
utility company responds to the location.
      (2)   The results of such tests and determinations shall be provided to
the Department as requested.
   (x)   Transformers and cable boxes.
      (1)   This subdivision shall apply to transformers and cable boxes
installed or intended to be installed on City property.
      (2)   Transformers and cable boxes shall not be installed on City
electrical equipment, in manholes or vaults, or elsewhere in the street without
first obtaining a permit.
      (3)   Transformers and cable boxes shall be so installed as to maintain
the clearance between supply lines and communication lines, as specified in
Table C of this section unless otherwise provided herein.
      (4)   Transformers shall be grounded pursuant to all applicable
regulations.
      (5)   Transformers shall not be installed on the sidewalk or roadways
without the approval of the Department
   (y)   Vertical Supply Conductors.
      (1)   Vertical supply conductors on City electrical equipment carrying
communications wires shall have suitable insulating covering and be encased in
a suitable, NEC or NESC approved, insulating conduit or casing extending from a
point eight (8) feet above the ground up to the bottom of the appropriate cross
arm, bracket or transformer; within eight (8) feet of the ground a suitable
mechanical protection shall be provided.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the above, in connection with the use of metal
sheathed supply cable, continuous iron pipe may be used throughout, without
insulating covering, if the metal sheathed cable is an extension from an
underground system, or if the iron pipe is permanently and effectively
grounded. Iron pipe extending continuously down the pole and into a building
and there grounded to the street side of the water shut-off, shall be
considered as permanently and effectively grounded.
(Amended City Record 7/8/2016, eff. 8/7/2016; amended City Record 7/20/2022,
eff. 8/19/2022)
§ 2-21 Adopt-a-Highway Program.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of the Adopt-a-Highway Program is to enlist the
help of maintenance providers, sponsors, and/or volunteers to assist in
cleaning and beautifying the City's highways through litter and graffiti
removal, tree trimming, sweeping, mowing, planting flowers or trees, and other
landscape maintenance along designated highway routes.
   (b)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have
the following meanings:
      (1)   Adopted segment means a particular section of the highway
designated by the Commissioner to be adopted by a sponsor or volunteer
participating in the Adopt-a-Highway Program. In addition to the section of the
highway, adopted segments may include highway exits, entrances, or service
roads.
      (2)   Adopter means a sponsor or a volunteer approved by the Department
to be a participant in the Adopt-a-Highway Program.
      (3)   Maintenance provider means a business entity approved by the
Department to provide professional maintenance services on an adopted segment
according to a permit issued by the Department.
      (4)   Maintenance provider agreement means a written agreement between a
maintenance provider and the Department.
      (5)   Maintenance services means work performed at the adopted segments
that may include, but is not necessarily limited to, litter removal, tree
trimming, graffiti removal, sweeping, mowing, planting flowers or trees, and
other landscape maintenance.
      (6)   Sponsor means any individual, business, corporation, or
organization that enters into an agreement with a maintenance provider to
perform maintenance services in a designated adopted segment.
      (7)   Sponsor agreement means a written agreement between a sponsor and a
maintenance provider.
      (8)   Volunteer means any individual or group, other than those employed
by a maintenance provider, who enters into a volunteer agreement with the
Department to perform maintenance services on an adopted segment without
compensation and in accordance with a permit issued by the Department.
      (9)   Volunteer agreement means a written agreement between the volunteer
adopting an adopted segment and the Department.
   (c)   General requirements.
      (1)   Applications for Participation.
         (i)   Sponsors. Any individual, business, corporation or organization
who desires to participate in the Adopt-a-Highway Program as a sponsor must
obtain from the Department a list of maintenance providers with whom the
sponsor may enter into a maintenance provider agreement.
         (ii)   Maintenance providers. Any business entity who desires to
participate in the Adopt-a-Highway Program as a maintenance provider must
submit an application by mail or electronically to the Department using the
Department's Maintenance Provider and Related Services Application.
         (iii)   Volunteers. Any individual or group who desires to participate
in the Adopt-a-Highway Program as a volunteer must submit an application by
mail or electronically to the Department using the Department's Adopt-a-Highway
Volunteer Application.
      (2)   Rights to segments.
         (i)   Segments are available for adoption on a first-come first-served
basis. Prospective adopters may choose from the Department's list of available
segments or may, upon request, be placed on a waiting list for an already
adopted segment.
         (ii)   The Department will maintain waiting lists for adopted segments
in order of the date the request for an adopted segment is received by the
Department. Upon termination or relinquishment of the adoption of a particular
segment, if there is a waiting list for such segment, the Department will give
the prospective adopter at the top of the applicable waiting list the
opportunity to adopt such segment.
      (3)   Compliance. Adopters and maintenance providers must comply with any
agreement the adopter or maintenance provider enters into with the Department
related to the Adopt-a-Highway Program, the terms of the permit issued by the
Department, the Adopt-a-Highway technical guidelines published by the
Department, any other terms and conditions as required by the Department, and
all applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
   (d)   Permits. A volunteer or maintenance provider whose application to
participate in the Adopt-a-Highway Program has been approved must obtain a
permit in order to perform work on the adopted segment.
      (1)   Maintenance provider permit. For each segment adopted by a sponsor,
prior to performing any maintenance services, the maintenance provider must
obtain a maintenance provider permit from the Department. The maintenance
provider must perform the maintenance services required under its sponsor
agreement in accordance with the terms and conditions of its maintenance
provider agreement with the Department and the applicable maintenance provider
permit.
      (2)   Volunteer permit. For each segment adopted by a volunteer, prior to
performing any maintenance services, the volunteer must obtain a volunteer
permit from the Department. The volunteer must perform the maintenance services
required under its volunteer agreement in accordance with the terms and
conditions of the volunteer permit.
   (e)   Levels of service.
      (1)   The Department will establish minimum levels of service for each
adopted segment that will be delineated in the applicable maintenance provider
permit or volunteer permit issued by the Department. Minimum levels of service
may include litter pickup, trimming, sweeping, graffiti removal, landscape
maintenance, or installation of new plantings. The Department will review with
the adopter the level of service required for each adopted segment.
      (2)   Adopters may choose enhanced levels of service on an adopted
segment. The enhanced levels of service must be approved by the Department and
will be delineated in a permit issued by the Department. Enhanced levels of
service may include any maintenance services not included in the adopter's
minimum levels of service for the particular segment, such as planting.
   (f)   Work areas. Adopters must perform maintenance services in the areas
detailed in the maintenance provider segment. Work areas may include areas on
the curbside of highway segments between the travel way and the service or
collector road, on and off ramps, and center areas of split roadways.
   (g)   Sponsors and maintenance providers.
      (1)   Sponsor-maintenance provider relationship.
         (i)   The sponsor agreement is exclusively between the maintenance
provider and the sponsor. The Department is not a party to any agreement
between the maintenance provider and the sponsor. Neither the maintenance
provider nor the sponsor will be considered an agent of the Department. The
cost of services for sponsors participating in the program is to be negotiated
solely between the sponsor and the maintenance provider. All billing and
collection occurs between those two parties. The Department has the right to
review the sponsor agreement.
         (ii)   A sponsor enters into a contract with a maintenance provider
for a particular segment with agreed upon levels of service. Both the sponsor
and maintenance provider then sign and submit a maintenance provider work
permit application. Once the work permit application is approved by the
Department, the sponsor has the right to that adopted segment for the duration
of the work permit's terms and conditions.
         (iii)   Sponsors may change maintenance providers and still retain
rights to the adopted segment as long as the new maintenance provider has been
approved by the Department.
      (2)   Sponsor obligations. It is the sponsor's obligation to ensure that
the maintenance provider's services are rendered as agreed upon in the sponsor
agreement and in accordance with the maintenance provider agreement and
maintenance provider permit.
      (3)   Term of adoption.
         (i)   Sponsors wishing to adopt a segment must commit to a minimum of
a one-year agreement with a Department-approved maintenance provider.
         (ii)   Adopted segments that need landscaping require sponsor
commitment for a minimum of two years.
      (4)   Maintenance provider qualifications. Maintenance providers must be
approved by the Department to participate in the Adopt-a-Highway Program.
Maintenance providers must have a minimum of five years of maintenance
experience similar to that as defined as maintenance services in these rules,
administrative experience, and experience with roadway closures. Maintenance
Providers must conform with the requirements of VENDEX, New York City's
automated system check on background, performance, tax, and contact information
for businesses that contract with the City.
      (5)   Maintenance provider obligations. Maintenance providers act as
independent contractors for sponsors. Maintenance providers are responsible
for:
         (i)   Entering into and maintaining a maintenance provider agreement
with the Department.
         (ii)   Reaching a sponsor agreement with a sponsor and informing
sponsors of maintenance services completed.
         (iii)   Coordinating all maintenance services and requirements with
the Department.
         (iv)   Submitting a maintenance provider work permit application and
performing all administrative work associated with the program including
billing and related services with the sponsor.
         (v)   Performing all maintenance services in accordance with the
maintenance provider agreement and maintenance provider permit.
         (vi)   Maintaining records for each adopted segment including:
            – Name of sponsor
            – Description and length of each adopted segment
            – Gross value (including in-kind goods and services) of sponsor
contribution
            – Levels of maintenance services provided
            – Time period covered by the maintenance provider's agreement with
the sponsor
         (vii)   Supplying all labor, equipment and capital resources necessary
to perform the maintenance services in accordance with the maintenance provider
agreement and maintenance provider permit.
         (viii)   Always using a backup truck with arrow board and impact
attenuator when performing mechanical sweeping.
         (ix)   Picking-up and bagging litter and clippings; placing bags and
bulk debris on the shoulder of each adopted segment.
         (x)   Transporting field personnel in commercial vehicles.
         (xi)   Performing maintenance services only during hours specified in
the maintenance provider permit.
         (xii)   Ordering a sign as soon as the maintenance provider work
permit application is approved by the Department.
         (xiii)   Providing a sign to the Department for installation at the
adopted segment.
         (xiv)   Maintaining the sign so that it is dirt and graffiti free and
unobstructed.
         (xv)   Recycling whenever possible when performing maintenance
services.
         (xvi)   Scheduling maintenance services at the adopted segment from
Monday through Thursday, except where Friday is needed to make-up for
cancellations due to weather, or unless authorized by the Department.
      (6)   Field Personnel. Maintenance provider field personnel performing
maintenance services must be 18 years of age or older. Every adopted segment
must have a supervisor who can speak and understand English. All drivers must
possess a valid commercial driver's license.
      (7)   Safety.
         (i)   Maintenance providers must be familiar with and comply with Part
6 of the most recent version of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
for Streets and Highways (MUTCD), published by the Federal Highway
Administration (FHWA), and the New York State Supplement "Highway Work Zone
Traffic Controls" and "Vegetation Control for Safety, A Guide for Street and
Highway Maintenance Personnel," by the FHWA, Office of Highway Safety. Any lane
closing schemes must be presented for approval to the Department's Office of
Construction Mitigation and Coordination, and a maintenance provider permit
must be issued before commencing maintenance services.
         (ii)   Maintenance providers are required to have every field employee
complete a Department-approved safety training program each year.
      (8)   Insurance.
         (i)   From the date any maintenance provider agreement is executed
through the date of its expiration or termination, the maintenance provider
must ensure that the types of insurance indicated in this section are obtained
and remain in force, and that such insurance adheres to all requirements
herein. The maintenance provider is authorized to undertake or maintain
operations under its maintenance provider agreement only during the effective
period of all required coverage.
         (ii)   Types of required insurance.
            (A)   Commercial General Liability insurance. The maintenance
provider shall maintain Commercial General Liability insurance in the amount of
at least One Million Dollars ($1,000,000) per occurrence and at least Two
Million Dollars ($2,000,000) aggregate. This insurance shall protect the
insureds from claims for property damage and/or bodily injury, including death,
that may arise from any of the operations under the maintenance provider
agreement. Coverage shall be at least as broad as that provided by the most
recently issued Insurance Services Office ("ISO") Form CG 0001, and shall be
"occurrence"-based rather than "claims-made." The City, together with its
officials and employees, shall be an Additional Insured with coverage at least
as broad as the most recent edition of ISO Form CG 2026.
            (B)   Workers' Compensation, Employers Liability, and Disability
Benefits insurance. The maintenance provider shall maintain such insurance on
behalf of, or with regard to, all employees involved in the maintenance
provider's operations under its maintenance provider agreement to the full
extent required by the laws of the State of New York.
            (C)   Business Automobile Liability insurance. With regard to all
operations under its maintenance provider agreement, the maintenance provider
shall maintain or cause to be maintained Business Automobile Liability
insurance in the amount of at least One Million Dollars ($1,000,000) each
accident (combined single limit) for liability arising out of the ownership,
maintenance or use of any owned, non-owned or hired vehicles. Coverage shall be
at least as broad as the latest edition of ISO Form CA0001.
         (iii)   General requirements for insurance coverage and policies.
            (A)   Policies of insurance required under this section shall be
provided by companies that may lawfully issue such policy and have an A.M. Best
rating of at least A- / "VII" or a Standard and Poor's rating of at least A,
unless prior written approval is obtained from the Department.
            (B)   Policies of insurance required under this section shall be
primary and non-contributing to any insurance or self-insurance maintained by
the City.
            (C)   There shall be no self-insurance program with regard to any
insurance required under this section unless approved in writing by the
Department. The maintenance provider shall ensure that any such self-insurance
program provides the City with all rights that would be provided by traditional
insurance under this section, including but not limited to the defense and
indemnification obligations that insurers are required to undertake in
liability policies.
            (D)   The City's limits of coverage for all types of insurance
required under this section for which it is an Additional Insured shall be the
greater of (1) the minimum limits set forth in this section or (2) the limits
provided to the maintenance provider under all primary, excess and umbrella
policies covering operations under its maintenance provider agreement.
         (iv)   Proof of Insurance.
            (A)   Certificates of Insurance for all insurance required in this
section must be submitted to and accepted by the Department prior to or upon
execution of any maintenance provider agreement.
            (B)   For Commercial General Liability insurance and Business
Automobile Liability insurance, the maintenance provider shall submit one or
more Certificates of Insurance in a form acceptable to the Department. All such
Certificates of Insurance shall certify (1) the issuance and effectiveness of
such policies of insurance, each with the specified minimum limits, and (2) the
status of the City as Additional Insured under the Commercial General Liability
policy, as required herein. All such Certificates of Insurance shall be
accompanied by either a duly executed "Certification by Broker" in the form
required by the Department or certified copies of all policies referenced in
such Certificate of Insurance.
            (C)   Certificates of Insurance confirming renewals of insurance
shall be submitted to the Department prior to the expiration date of coverage
of all policies required under any maintenance provider agreement. Such
Certificates of Insurance shall comply with clause (B) of this subparagraph.
            (D)   Acceptance or approval by the Department of a Certificate of
Insurance or any other matter does not waive the maintenance provider's
obligation to ensure that insurance fully consistent with the requirements of
this section is secured and maintained, nor does it waive the maintenance
provider's liability for its failure to do so.
            (E)   The maintenance provider shall be obligated to provide the
City with a copy of any policy of insurance required under this section upon
request by the Department or the New York City Law Department.
         (v)   Other insurance requirements.
            (A)   The maintenance provider may satisfy its insurance
obligations under this section through primary policies or a combination of
primary and excess/umbrella policies, so long as all policies provide the scope
of coverage required herein.
            (B)   The maintenance provider shall be solely responsible for the
payment of all premiums for all policies and all deductibles or self-insured
retentions to which they are subject, whether or not the City is an insured
under the policy.
            (C)   Where notice of loss, damage, occurrence, accident, claim, or
suit is required under a policy maintained in accordance with this section, the
maintenance provider shall notify in writing all insurance carriers that issued
potentially responsive policies of any such event relating to any operations
under its maintenance provider agreement (including notice to Commercial
General Liability insurance carriers for events relating to the maintenance
provider's own employees) no later than 20 days after such event. For any
policy where the City is an Additional Insured, such notice shall expressly
specify that "this notice is being given on behalf of the City of New York as
Insured as well as the Named Insured." Such notice shall also contain the
following information: the number of the insurance policy, the name of the
named insured, the date and location of the damage, occurrence, or accident,
and the identity of the persons or things injured, damaged, or lost. The
maintenance provider shall simultaneously send a copy of such notice to the
City of New York c/o Insurance Claims Specialist, Affirmative Litigation
Division, New York City Law Department, 100 Church Street, New York, New York
10007.
            (D)   The maintenance provider's failure to secure and maintain
insurance in complete conformity with this section or to do anything else
required by this section shall constitute a material breach of the maintenance
provider agreement. Such breach shall not be waived or otherwise excused by any
action or inaction by the City at any time.
            (E)   Insurance coverage in the minimum amounts provided for in
this section shall not relieve the maintenance provider of any liability under
its maintenance provider agreement, nor shall it preclude the City from
exercising any rights or taking such other actions as are available to it under
any other provisions of its maintenance provider agreement or the law.
            (F)   The maintenance provider waives all rights against the City,
including its officials and employees, for any damages or losses that are
covered under any insurance required under this section (whether or not such
insurance is actually procured or claims are paid thereunder) or any other
insurance applicable to the operations of the maintenance provider and/or its
employees, agents, or servants of its contractors or subcontractors.
            (G)   In the event the maintenance provider requires any entity, by
contract or otherwise, to procure insurance with regard to any operations under
its maintenance provider agreement and requires such entity to name the
maintenance provider as an additional insured under such insurance, the
maintenance provider shall ensure that such entity also names the City,
including its officials and employees, as an additional insured with coverage
at least as broad as specified in ISO form CG 20 26.
            (H)   In the event the maintenance provider receives notice, from
an insurance company or other person, that any insurance policy required under
this section shall expire or be cancelled or terminated (or has expired or been
cancelled or terminated) for any reason, the maintenance provider shall
immediately forward a copy of such notice to the Department. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, the maintenance provider shall ensure that there is no
interruption in any of the insurance coverage required under this section.
      (9)   Maintenance provider's responsibility for safety, injuries or
damage; indemnification.
         (i)   In all its activities under a maintenance provider agreement,
the maintenance provider shall be solely responsible for the safety and
protection of its employees, agents, servants, contractors, and subcontractors,
and for the safety and protection of the employees, agents, or servants of its
contractors or subcontractors.
         (ii)   The maintenance provider shall be solely responsible for taking
all reasonable precautions to protect the persons and property of the City or
others from damage, loss, or injury resulting from any and all operations under
its maintenance provider agreement.
         (iii)   The maintenance provider shall be solely responsible for
injuries to any and all persons, including death, and damage to any and all
property arising out of or related to the operations under its maintenance
provider agreement, whether or not due to the negligence of the maintenance
provider, including but not limited to injuries or damages resulting from the
acts or omissions of any of its employees, agents, servants, contractors,
subcontractors, or any other person.
         (iv)   To the fullest extent permitted by law, the maintenance
provider shall indemnify, defend, and hold the City and its officials and
employees harmless against any and all claims, liens, demands, judgments,
penalties, fines, liabilities, settlements, damages, costs, and expenses of
whatever kind or nature (including, without limitation, attorneys' fees and
disbursements) arising out of or related to any of the operations under its
maintenance provider agreement (regardless of whether or not the maintenance
provider itself had been negligent) and/or the maintenance provider's failure
to comply with the law or any of the requirements of its maintenance provider
agreement. Insofar as the facts or law relating to any of the foregoing would
preclude the City or its officials and employees from being completely
indemnified by the maintenance provider, the City and its officials and
employees shall be partially indemnified by the maintenance provider to the
fullest extent permitted by law.
         (v)   The maintenance provider's obligation to defend, indemnify, and
hold the City and its officers and employees harmless shall not be (1) limited
in any way by the maintenance provider's obligations to obtain and maintain
insurance under its maintenance provider agreement, nor (2) adversely affected
by any failure on the part of the City or its officers and employees to avail
themselves of the benefits of such insurance.
      (10)   Equipment.
         (i)   All field personnel must be equipped with proper safety
equipment and attire to perform work in the adopted segment, including but not
limited to: orange safety vests, safety helmets, durable work gloves, long
pants, and substantial leather footwear with ankle support.
         (ii)   Maintenance providers must have at least one heavy duty truck
compliant with all federal, State, and City requirements.
         (iii)   All trucks used for the Adopt-a-Highway program must be
equipped with:
            (A)   A truck mounted safety attenuator system designed and
certified for use on vehicles to provide a safety crash cushion between
approaching traffic and roadway workers. Truck mounted safety attenuators must
be in good working order to meet or exceed the National Cooperative Highway
Research Program Report #230 testing criteria for vehicles weighing from 1,800
- 45,000 pounds, including any updates of that report.
            (B)   A flashing arrow board, appropriately mounted, facing
oncoming traffic. The board must be a minimum of 3' x 5' and must comply with
all federal and State standards for traffic directional arrow boards used on
highways. In operating mode, it must provide:
               1.   FLASHING ARROW (5 lamp overhead, 3 lamp stem, both flashing
simultaneously, 50% on and 50% off, right or left.)
               2.   DOUBLE FLASHING ARROW (5 lamp arrowheads at both ends,
joined by and flashing simultaneously with 1 lamp center bar, 50% on and 50%
off.)
               3.   TRAVEL MODE (lamps positioned in center bar, 50% on and 50%
off.)
            (C)   Vehicle markings that include stripes on the back and sides
of the vehicle and signage that indicates "SLOW MOVING" or "CAUTION" to
oncoming traffic.
         (iv)   At least one vehicle per adopted segment must have a two-way
radio communication device.
         (v)   Maintenance providers must provide field personnel with green,
black, or white plastic garbage bags, at least .003 mm thick and no larger than
33" x 45" for litter and debris pickup.
      (11)   Subcontracting. Subcontracting of litter pickup at the adopted
segment is not permitted. Maintenance providers may subcontract other
maintenance services. All subcontractors must be approved by the Department
prior to performing any work at any adopted segment, obtain all insurance as
required of maintenance providers by this section, and comply with the terms of
the maintenance provider permit, the Adopt-a-Highway Guidelines published by
the Department, any other terms and conditions as required by the Department,
and all applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
      (12)   Hazardous debris removal. Maintenance provider field personnel
must not touch or attempt to remove materials from the adopted segment which
may be toxic or otherwise hazardous. Items to avoid include powders, chemicals,
smelly substances, suspicious packages, chemical drums or containers, weapons,
medical waste, syringes or hypodermic needles, dead animals, or bulk items that
cannot be put in litter bags (such as car parts or larger items). Maintenance
provider field personnel must immediately notify the Department of the location
of these items.
      (13)   Notifications to the Department.
         (i)   Maintenance providers must provide the Department with a weekly
proposed work schedule by Wednesday (5 p.m.) of the week prior to the work
being performed.
            (A)   Work schedules must be typed and in a format approved by the
Department, and must include segment number, sponsor name, highway, direction,
mile marker to and from, and scheduled cleaning date.
         (ii)   By 9:00 a.m. of each day that maintenance providers will be
performing maintenance services, they must submit to the Department a schedule
of that day's maintenance activities including any changes not reflected on
their weekly schedule.
         (iii)   If circumstances warrant that maintenance providers must amend
their maintenance services while performing maintenance services, the
maintenance providers must notify the Department immediately of such changes.
      (14)   Failure to maintain adopted segments. Maintenance providers will
be notified as follows if the Department determines that an adopted segment was
not maintained as scheduled:
         (i)   First observation. If, upon inspection, the Department observes
that an adopted segment was not maintained as scheduled, the Department will
verbally provide the maintenance provider with 24-hour notice to perform the
required maintenance services. At the end of the 24-hour period, if the
maintenance provider has not performed required maintenance services, the
Department will provide written notification that the maintenance provider has
an additional 24-hour period to perform such required maintenance services.
         (ii)   Second observation. If, upon inspection, the Department
observes that an adopted segment was not maintained as scheduled a second time
within a six-month period, the Department will notify in writing, both the
sponsor and the maintenance provider that it must complete the required
maintenance services immediately.
         (iii)   Third observation. If, upon inspection, the Department
observes that an adopted segment was not maintained as scheduled a third time
within one year of the first observation, the Department may revoke the
existing maintenance provider permit in accordance with this section and notify
the sponsor. The sponsor may retain the adopted segment, provided that the
sponsor enters into a sponsor agreement with a different maintenance provider.
      (15)   Solicitation of sponsors by maintenance providers.
         (i)   A maintenance provider must not directly contact a sponsor who
has a sponsor agreement with a different maintenance provider by calling,
writing or any other form of solicitation, except as indicated by this section.
         (ii)   If a maintenance provider is found to be soliciting another
maintenance provider's sponsor in a manner inconsistent with this section, the
maintenance provider will be subject to discharge from the Adopt-a-Highway
program. Any such discharge shall be in accordance with subdivision (m) of this
section.
         (iii)   The Department will provide a list of all approved maintenance
providers on the Department's website and will provide any sponsor with a list
upon request.
         (iv)   Three months prior to a maintenance provider agreement renewal
date, the Department will provide sponsors with a letter reminding the sponsor
that it may switch maintenance providers, as well as a list of all current
maintenance providers with contact information.
      (16)   Changes in levels of service. The Department may change the
minimum levels of service for an adopted segment and will notify the adopter of
such changes in levels of service no fewer than 30 days prior to such change in
levels of service being in effect.
   (h)   Volunteers.
      (1)   Term of adoption. Volunteers wishing to adopt a segment must commit
to a minimum of a one-year agreement with the Department to perform maintenance
services at the adopted segment.
      (2)   Volunteer obligations. Volunteers are responsible for:
         (i)   Entering into a volunteer agreement with the Department.
         (ii)   Coordinating all maintenance services and requirements with the
Department.
         (iii)   Submitting a volunteer permit application to the Department.
         (iv)   Performing all maintenance services in accordance with the
volunteer agreement and volunteer permit.
         (v)   Supplying all labor to perform the maintenance services in
accordance with the volunteer agreement and the volunteer permit.
         (vi)   Picking up and bagging litter and clippings and leaving them
for pick-up as directed by the Department.
         (vii)   Working on adopted segments only during hours specified in the
volunteer permit.
         (viii)   Submitting a form to the Department after the first two
months of maintaining the adopted segment to request that the Department
manufacture and install a sign at the adopted segment.
         (ix)   Maintaining the sign so it is dirt free and unobstructed.
         (x)   Attending safety training sessions provided by the Department.
         (xi)   Having the volunteer permit on hand while working at the
adopted segment.
      (3)   Renewals. The Department will mail volunteers a renewal volunteer
agreement one month prior to expiration of the current volunteer agreement.
Volunteers must return the signed volunteer agreement one week prior to the
expiration of the volunteer agreement or the area will be considered abandoned,
the recognition panel will be removed, and the adopted segment will be made
available to the next adopter on the waiting list.
      (4)   Adopted segment improvements. Any improvements to the adopted
segment such as plantings or structures, including, but not limited to,
flagpoles, benches, bird feeders or baths, retaining walls, and light houses,
must be approved by the Department prior to installation.
      (5)   Use of pesticides. Volunteers may only use pesticides approved by
the Department in the adopted segment. Pesticides may only be applied by New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation Certified Pesticide
Applicators.
      (6)   Liability waiver. Volunteers must sign a liability waiver that
waives any liability to the City for any accident or injury that may occur at
the adopted segment while the volunteers are performing maintenance services at
the adopted segment.
      (7)   Frequency of maintenance services. Volunteers must perform
maintenance services at their adopted segments at least 30 times per year. This
includes a requirement to clean the adopted segment a minimum of three times
per month in May, June, July, August, September, and October and a minimum of
twice a month every other month during the year.
      (8)   Age of field personnel. Volunteer personnel working on adopted
segments must be 18 years of age or older.
      (9)   Safety.
         (i)   Prior to the commencement of work at the adopted segment, the
Department will inspect the adopted segment to assure that it is a safe place
for the volunteers to perform maintenance services without the closing of
traffic lanes.
         (ii)   Volunteers must adhere to the following safety rules when
performing work on the adopted segment:
            (A)   Only allow persons 18 or older and in good physical condition
(sight, hearing, and mental alertness) to work in the adopted segment.
            (B)   When the volunteer is a group, a volunteer group leader must
be designated by the group. The volunteer group leader is responsible for
providing information on safety to the group and must conduct a safety training
refresher session before performing any maintenance services.
            (C)   Park no closer than the nearest side street or service road
to the adopted segment and never on the highway.
            (D)   Wear appropriate attire including, but not limited to:
highway safety vests and orange or red clothing; heavy work gloves; work shoes
or boots with ankle support; hats; and long pants.
            (E)   Never drink alcoholic beverages or use illegal substances
while working at the adopted segment.
            (F)   Never perform maintenance services on the roadway.
            (G)   Stay off steep slopes when working at the adopted segment.
            (H)   Have a first aid kit on site at the adopted segment and know
the route to the closest hospital/emergency room.
            (I)   Never pick-up hazardous or medical waste found at the adopted
segment and immediately notify the Department of such waste.
            (J)   [Reserved.]
            (K)   Never use headphones while performing maintenance services on
the adopted segment.
            (L)   Avoid contact with poisonous plants and notify the Department
of any poisonous plants found at the adopted segment.
            (M)   Never cross the highway for any reason.
            (N)   Never enter the highway or its shoulder area to pick up
trash.
      (10)   Notice after performing maintenance services. Volunteers should
notify the Department after performing maintenance services at the adopted
segment so that the Department can schedule pick-up of the trash bags.
      (11)   Recycling. Volunteers should recycle whenever possible when
performing maintenance services.
         (i)   Changing adopted segments. Adopters may exchange their existing
segment for another segment in the system provided that the other segment is
available. The Adopt-A-Highway sign must stay at the original adopted segment.
The Department will remove the recognition panel portion of the sign containing
the adopter's name from the original segment and use it for the new segment.
   (j)   Reserving segments. Adopters may not reserve or hold segments. Once a
permit has been issued for a segment, the maintenance provider or volunteer
must begin performing maintenance services in accordance with the terms and
conditions of the permit within such time as is specified in the sponsor
agreement and/or volunteer agreement.
   (k)   Adopt-a-Highway Signs.
      (1)   Signs are produced and maintained by the maintenance provider or
volunteer and must be delivered to the Department for installation no later
than one month after the permit for an adopted segment is approved.
      (2)   Sign installation.
         (i)   Ground mounted signs will be installed by the Department as
close to the beginning of the adopted segment as feasible, taking into
consideration safety and other informational signage.
         (ii)   Signs requiring bridge, gantry wall, or parapet mounting will
be installed by the Department or a contractor approved by the Department, and
paid for by the maintenance provider or volunteer.
      (3)   All signs posted at the adopted segment must:
         (i)   consist of a standard base sign design with a removable
recognition panel identifying the sponsor's or volunteer's name and/or logo;
         (ii)   conform to the Department's specifications for size, shape,
materials, and placement;
         (iii)   not be used for advertising purposes; and
         (iv)   comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
      (4)   Where litter pick-up, trimming and/or mechanical sweeping are the
services provided, the sign will read "LITTER REMOVAL."
      (5)   Where other services are provided the signs will read
"BEAUTIFICATION."
      (6)   Signs on elevated highway segments must be 4' x 4.5' and hung on
lampposts.
      (7)   Signs on the Henry Hudson Parkway must be larger than 4' x 4.5' to
accommodate two recognition panels.
      (8)   Maintenance providers and volunteers must replace damaged or stolen
signs.
      (9)   When an adopter terminates its agreement with the Adopt-a-Highway
program, the adopter must not remove the sign. The Department will remove the
recognition panel portion of the sign.
   (l)   Field inspections of adopted segments. The Department will perform
inspections of the adopted segment to assure that maintenance providers and
volunteers are performing maintenance services as required under their permits
and agreements.
   (m)   Voiding and revoking permits.
      (1)   If an adopter does not perform maintenance services at an adopted
segment one month after permit issuance, the Department will notify the adopter
orally and in writing that its permit has become void.
      (2)   The Department may revoke a volunteer or maintenance provider
permit for a permittee's failure to comply with this section, the requirements
of the permit, the Adopt-a-Highway technical guidelines, and any applicable
laws, rules, and regulations.
         (i)   Prior to revoking a permit the Department will give the
permittee an opportunity to be heard with at least two days notice.
         (ii)   If the Department determines that an imminent peril to life or
property exists, the Department may revoke a permit without providing the
permittee an opportunity to be heard prior to such revocation. Upon request of
the permittee, the Department will provide the permittee an opportunity to
present its objections to such action within five days after the Department
receives the request.
      (3)   The Department will assign the segment of the voided or revoked
permit to the next sponsor or volunteer on the waiting list or place the
segment on the available segment list.
§ 2-22 Adopt-a-Greenway Program.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of the Adopt-a-Greenway Program is to enlist the
help of maintenance providers, sponsors, and/or volunteers to assist in
cleaning and beautifying the City's greenways through litter and graffiti
removal, tree trimming, sweeping, mowing, planting flowers or trees, snow
removal and other landscape maintenance along designated greenway routes.
   (b)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have
the following meanings:
      (1)   Adopted segment means a particular section of the greenway
designated by the Commissioner to be adopted by a sponsor or volunteer
participating in the Adopt-a-Greenway Program.
      (2)   Adopter means a sponsor or a volunteer approved by the Department
to be a participant in the Adopt-a-Greenway Program.
      (3)   Maintenance provider means a business entity approved by the
Department to provide professional maintenance services on an adopted segment
according to a permit issued by the Department.
      (4)   Maintenance provider agreement means a written agreement between a
maintenance provider and the Department.
      (5)   Maintenance services means work performed at the adopted segments
that may include, but is not necessarily limited to, litter removal, snow
removal, tree trimming, graffiti removal, sweeping, mowing, planting flowers or
trees, and other landscape maintenance.
      (6)   Sponsor means any individual, business, corporation, or
organization that enters into an agreement with a maintenance provider to
perform maintenance services in a designated adopted segment.
      (7)   Sponsor agreement means a written agreement between a sponsor and a
maintenance provider.
      (8)   Volunteer means any individual or group, other than those employed
by a maintenance provider, who enters into a volunteer agreement with the
Department to perform maintenance services on an adopted segment without
compensation, and in accordance with a permit issued by the Department.
      (9)   Volunteer agreement means a written agreement between the volunteer
adopting an adopted segment and the Department.
   (c)   General requirements.
      (1)   Applications for Participation.
         (i)   Sponsors. Any individual, business, corporation or organization
who desires to participate in the Adopt-a-Greenway Program as a sponsor must
obtain from the Department a list of maintenance providers with whom the
sponsor may enter into a maintenance provider agreement.
         (ii)   Maintenance providers. Any business entity who desires to
participate in the Adopt-a-Greenway Program as a maintenance provider must
submit an application by mail or electronically to the Department using the
Department's Adopt-a-Greenway Maintenance Provider and Related Services
Application.
         (iii)   Volunteers. Any individual or group who desires to participate
in the Adopt-a-Greenway Program as a volunteer must submit an application by
mail or electronically to the Department using the Department's Adopt-a-
Greenway Volunteer Application.
      (2)   Rights to segments.
         (i)   Segments are available for adoption on a first-come first-served
basis. Prospective adopters may choose from the Department's list of available
segments or may, upon request, be placed on a waiting list for an already
adopted segment.
         (ii)   The Department will maintain waiting lists for adopted segments
in order of the date the request for an adopted segment is received by the
Department. Upon termination or relinquishment of the adoption of a particular
segment, if there is a waiting list for such segment, the Department will give
the prospective adopter at the top of the applicable waiting list the
opportunity to adopt such segment.
      (3)   Compliance. Adopters and maintenance providers must comply with any
agreement the adopter or maintenance provider enters into with the Department
related to the Adopt-a-Greenway Program, the terms of the permit issued by the
Department, the Adopt-a-Greenway technical guidelines published by the
Department, any other terms and conditions as required by the Department, and
all applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
   (d)   Permits. A volunteer or maintenance provider whose application to
participate in the Adopt-a-Greenway Program has been approved must obtain a
permit in order to perform work on the adopted segment.
      (1)   Maintenance provider permit. For each segment adopted by a sponsor,
prior to performing any maintenance services, the maintenance provider must
obtain a maintenance provider permit from the Department. The maintenance
provider must perform the maintenance services required under its sponsor
agreement in accordance with the terms and conditions of its maintenance
provider agreement with the Department and the applicable maintenance provider
permit.
      (2)   Volunteer permit. For each segment adopted by a volunteer, prior to
performing any maintenance services, the volunteer must obtain a volunteer
permit from the Department. The volunteer must perform the maintenance services
required under its volunteer agreement in accordance with the terms and
conditions of the volunteer permit.
   (e)   Levels of service.
      (1)   The Department will establish minimum levels of service for each
adopted segment that will be delineated in the applicable maintenance provider
permit or volunteer permit issued by the Department. Minimum levels of service
may include litter pickup, trimming, sweeping, graffiti removal, landscape
maintenance, snow removal, or installation of new plantings. The Department
will review with the adopter the level of service required for each adopted
segment.
      (2)   Adopters may choose enhanced levels of service on an adopted
segment. The enhanced levels of service must be approved by the Department and
will be delineated in a permit issued by the Department. Enhanced levels of
service may include any maintenance services not included in the adopter's
minimum levels of service for the particular segment, such as planting.
   (f)   Work areas. Adopters must perform maintenance services in the areas
detailed in the maintenance provider segment.
   (g)   Sponsors and maintenance providers.
      (1)   Sponsor-maintenance provider relationship.
         (i)   The sponsor agreement is exclusively between the maintenance
provider and the sponsor. The Department is not a party to any agreement
between the maintenance provider and the sponsor. Neither the maintenance
provider nor the sponsor will be considered an agent of the Department. The
cost of services for sponsors participating in the program is to be negotiated
solely between the sponsor and the maintenance provider. All billing and
collection occurs between those two parties. The Department has the right to
review the sponsor agreement.
         (ii)   A sponsor enters into a contract with a maintenance provider
for a particular segment with agreed upon levels of service. Both the sponsor
and maintenance provider then sign and submit a maintenance provider work
permit application. Once the work permit application is approved by the
Department, the sponsor has the right to that adopted segment for the duration
of the work permit's terms and conditions.
         (iii)   Sponsors may change maintenance providers and still retain
rights to the adopted segment as long as the new maintenance provider has been
approved by the Department.
      (2)   Sponsor obligations. It is the sponsor's obligation to ensure that
the maintenance provider's services are rendered as agreed upon in the sponsor
agreement and in accordance with the maintenance provider agreement and
maintenance provider permit.
      (3)   Term of adoption.
         (i)   Sponsors wishing to adopt a segment must commit to a minimum of
a one-year agreement with a Department-approved maintenance provider.
         (ii)   Adopted segments that need landscaping require sponsor
commitment for a minimum of two years.
      (4)   Maintenance provider qualifications. Maintenance providers must be
approved by the Department to participate in the Adopt-a-Greenway Program.
Maintenance providers must have a minimum of one year of maintenance experience
similar to that as defined as maintenance services in paragraph (5) of
subdivision (b) of this section and one year of administrative experience.
Maintenance Providers must conform with the requirements of VENDEX, New York
City's automated system check on background, performance, tax, and contact
information for businesses that contract with the City.
      (5)   Maintenance provider obligations. Maintenance providers act as
independent contractors for sponsors. Maintenance providers are responsible
for:
         (i)   Entering into and maintaining a maintenance provider agreement
with the Department.
         (ii)   Reaching a sponsor agreement with a sponsor and informing
sponsors of maintenance services completed.
         (iii)   Coordinating all maintenance services and requirements with
the Department.
         (iv)   Submitting a maintenance provider work permit application and
performing all administrative work associated with the program including
billing and related services with the sponsor.
         (v)   Performing all maintenance services in accordance with the
maintenance provider agreement and maintenance provider permit.
         (vi)   Maintaining records for each adopted segment including:
            – Name of sponsor
            – Description and length of each adopted segment
            – Gross value (including in-kind goods and services) of sponsor
contribution
            – Levels of maintenance services provided
            – Time period covered by the maintenance provider's agreement with
the sponsor
         (vii)   Supplying all labor, equipment and capital resources necessary
to perform the maintenance services in accordance with the maintenance provider
agreement and maintenance provider permit.
         (viii)   Picking-up and bagging litter and clippings; placing bags and
bulk debris on the shoulder of each adopted segment.
         (ix)   When transporting field personnel to adopted segments, such
field personnel must be transported in commercial vehicles.
         (x)   Performing maintenance services only during hours specified in
the maintenance provider permit.
         (xi)   Ordering a sign as soon as the maintenance provider work permit
application is approved by the Department.
         (xii)   Providing a sign to the Department for installation at the
adopted segment.
         (xiii)   Maintaining the sign so that it is dirt and graffiti free and
unobstructed.
         (xiv)   Recycling whenever possible when performing maintenance
services.
         (xv)   Submitting a maintenance services schedule to the Department.
      (6)   Field Personnel. Maintenance provider field personnel performing
maintenance services must be 18 years of age or older. Every adopted segment
must have a supervisor who can speak and understand English. All drivers must
possess a valid commercial driver's license.
      (7)   Safety.
         (i)   Maintenance providers must be familiar with and comply with Part
6 of the most recent version of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
for Streets and Highways (MUTCD), published by the Federal Highway
Administration (FHWA), the New York State Supplement "Work Zone Traffic
Control" and "Vegetation Control for Safety, A Guide for Street and Highway
Maintenance Personnel," by the FHWA, Office of Highway Safety. Any lane closing
schemes must be presented for approval to the Department's Office of
Construction Mitigation and Coordination, and a maintenance provider permit
must be issued before commencing maintenance services.
         (ii)   Maintenance providers are required to have every field employee
complete a Department-approved safety training program each year.
      (8)   Insurance.
         (i)   From the date any maintenance provider agreement is executed
through the date of its expiration or termination, the maintenance provider
must ensure that the types of insurance indicated in this section are obtained
and remain in force, and that such insurance adheres to all requirements
herein. The maintenance provider is authorized to undertake or maintain
operations under its maintenance provider agreement only during the effective
period of all required coverage.
         (ii)   Types of required insurance.
            (A)   Commercial General Liability insurance. The maintenance
provider shall maintain Commercial General Liability insurance in the amount of
at least One Million Dollars ($1,000,000) per occurrence and at least Two
Million Dollars ($2,000,000) aggregate. This insurance shall protect the
insureds from claims for property damage and/or bodily injury, including death,
that may arise from any of the operations under the maintenance provider
agreement. Coverage shall be at least as broad as that provided by the most
recently issued Insurance Services Office ("ISO") Form CG 0001, and shall be
"occurrence"-based rather than "claims-made." The City, together with its
officials and employees, shall be an Additional Insured with coverage at least
as broad as the most recent edition of ISO Form CG 2026.
            (B)   Workers' Compensation, Employers Liability, and Disability
Benefits insurance. The maintenance provider shall maintain such insurance on
behalf of, or with regard to, all employees involved in the maintenance
provider's operations under its maintenance provider agreement to the full
extent required by the laws of the State of New York.
            (C)   Business Automobile Liability insurance. With regard to all
operations under its maintenance provider agreement, the maintenance provider
shall maintain or cause to be maintained Business Automobile Liability
insurance in the amount of at least One Million Dollars ($1,000,000) each
accident (combined single limit) for liability arising out of the ownership,
maintenance or use of any owned, non-owned or hired vehicles. Coverage shall be
at least as broad as the latest edition of ISO Form CA0001.
         (iii)   General requirements for insurance coverage and policies.
            (A)   Policies of insurance required under this section shall be
provided by companies that may lawfully issue such policy and have an A.M. Best
rating of at least A-/"VII" or a Standard and Poor's rating of at least A,
unless prior written approval is obtained from the Department.
            (B)   Policies of insurance required under this section shall be
primary and non-contributing to any insurance or self-insurance maintained by
the City.
            (C)   There shall be no self-insurance program with regard to any
insurance required under this section unless approved in writing by the
Department. The maintenance provider shall ensure that any such self-insurance
program provides the City with all rights that would be provided by traditional
insurance under this section, including but not limited to the defense and
indemnification obligations that insurers are required to undertake in
liability policies.
            (D)   The City's limits of coverage for all types of insurance
required under this section for which it is an Additional Insured shall be the
greater of (1) the minimum limits set forth in this section or (2) the limits
provided to the maintenance provider under all primary, excess and umbrella
policies covering operations under its maintenance provider agreement.
         (iv)   Proof of Insurance.
            (A)   Certificates of Insurance for all insurance required in this
section must be submitted to and accepted by the Department prior to or upon
execution of any maintenance provider agreement.
            (B)   For Commercial General Liability insurance and Business
Automobile Liability insurance, the maintenance provider shall submit one or
more Certificates of Insurance in a form acceptable to the Department. All such
Certificates of Insurance shall certify (1) the issuance and effectiveness of
such policies of insurance, each with the specified minimum limits, and (2) the
status of the City as Additional Insured under the Commercial General Liability
policy, as required herein. All such Certificates of Insurance shall be
accompanied by either a duly executed "Certification by Broker" in the form
required by the Department or certified copies of all policies referenced in
such Certificate of Insurance.
            (C)   Certificates of Insurance confirming renewals of insurance
shall be submitted to the Department prior to the expiration date of coverage
of all policies required under any maintenance provider agreement. Such
Certificates of Insurance shall comply with clause (B) of this subparagraph.
            (D)   Acceptance or approval by the Department of a Certificate of
Insurance or any other matter does not waive the maintenance provider's
obligation to ensure that insurance fully consistent with the requirements of
this section is secured and maintained, nor does it waive the maintenance
provider's liability for its failure to do so.
            (E)   The maintenance provider shall be obligated to provide the
City with a copy of any policy of insurance required under this section upon
request by the Department or the New York City Law Department.
         (v)   Other insurance requirements.
            (A)   The maintenance provider may satisfy its insurance
obligations under this section through primary policies or a combination of
primary and excess/umbrella policies, so long as all policies provide the scope
of coverage required herein.
            (B)   The maintenance provider shall be solely responsible for the
payment of all premiums for all policies and all deductibles or self-insured
retentions to which they are subject, whether or not the City is an insured
under the policy.
            (C)   Where notice of loss, damage, occurrence, accident, claim, or
suit is required under a policy maintained in accordance with this section, the
maintenance provider shall notify in writing all insurance carriers that issued
potentially responsive policies of any such event relating to any operations
under its maintenance provider agreement (including notice to Commercial
General Liability insurance carriers for events relating to the maintenance
provider's own employees) no later than 20 days after such event. For any
policy where the City is an Additional Insured, such notice shall expressly
specify that "this notice is being given on behalf of the City of New York as
Insured as well as the Named Insured." Such notice shall also contain the
following information: the number of the insurance policy, the name of the
named insured, the date and location of the damage, occurrence, or accident,
and the identity of the persons or things injured, damaged, or lost. The
maintenance provider shall simultaneously send a copy of such notice to the
City of New York c/o Insurance Claims Specialist, Affirmative Litigation
Division, New York City Law Department, 100 Church Street, New York, New York
10007.
            (D)   The maintenance provider's failure to secure and maintain
insurance in complete conformity with this section or to do anything else
required by this section shall constitute a material breach of the maintenance
provider agreement. Such breach shall not be waived or otherwise excused by any
action or inaction by the City at any time.
            (E)   Insurance coverage in the minimum amounts provided for in
this section shall not relieve the maintenance provider of any liability under
its maintenance provider agreement, nor shall it preclude the City from
exercising any rights or taking such other actions as are available to it under
any other provisions of its maintenance provider agreement or the law.
            (F)   The maintenance provider waives all rights against the City,
including its officials and employees, for any damages or losses that are
covered under any insurance required under this section (whether or not such
insurance is actually procured or claims are paid thereunder) or any other
insurance applicable to the operations of the maintenance provider and/or its
employees, agents, or servants of its contractors or subcontractors.
            (G)   In the event the maintenance provider requires any entity, by
contract or otherwise, to procure insurance with regard to any operations under
its maintenance provider agreement and requires such entity to name the
maintenance provider as an additional insured under such insurance, the
maintenance provider shall ensure that such entity also names the City,
including its officials and employees, as an additional insured with coverage
at least as broad as specified in ISO form CG 20 26.
            (H)   In the event the maintenance provider receives notice, from
an insurance company or other person, that any insurance policy required under
this section shall expire or be cancelled or terminated (or has expired or been
cancelled or terminated) for any reason, the maintenance provider shall
immediately forward a copy of such notice to the Department. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, the maintenance provider shall ensure that there is no
interruption in any of the insurance coverage required under this section.
      (9)   Maintenance provider's responsibility for safety, injuries or
damage; indemnification.
         (i)   In all its activities under a maintenance provider agreement,
the maintenance provider shall be solely responsible for the safety and
protection of its employees, agents, servants, contractors, and subcontractors,
and for the safety and protection of the employees, agents, or servants of its
contractors or subcontractors.
         (ii)   The maintenance provider shall be solely responsible for taking
all reasonable precautions to protect the persons and property of the City or
others from damage, loss, or injury resulting from any and all operations under
its maintenance provider agreement.
         (iii)   The maintenance provider shall be solely responsible for
injuries to any and all persons, including death, and damage to any and all
property arising out of or related to the operations under its maintenance
provider agreement, whether or not due to the negligence of the maintenance
provider, including but not limited to injuries or damages resulting from the
acts or omissions of any of its employees, agents, servants, contractors,
subcontractors, or any other person.
         (iv)   To the fullest extent permitted by law, the maintenance
provider shall indemnify, defend, and hold the City and its officials and
employees harmless against any and all claims, liens, demands, judgments,
penalties, fines, liabilities, settlements, damages, costs, and expenses of
whatever kind or nature (including, without limitation, attorneys' fees and
disbursements) arising out of or related to any of the operations under its
maintenance provider agreement (regardless of whether or not the maintenance
provider itself had been negligent) and/or the maintenance provider's failure
to comply with the law or any of the requirements of its maintenance provider
agreement. Insofar as the facts or law relating to any of the foregoing would
preclude the City or its officials and employees from being completely
indemnified by the maintenance provider, the City and its officials and
employees shall be partially indemnified by the maintenance provider to the
fullest extent permitted by law.
         (v)   The maintenance provider's obligation to defend, indemnify, and
hold the City and its officers and employees harmless shall not be (1) limited
in any way by the maintenance provider's obligations to obtain and maintain
insurance under its maintenance provider agreement, nor (2) adversely affected
by any failure on the part of the City or its officers and employees to avail
themselves of the benefits of such insurance.
      (10)   Equipment.
         (i)   All field personnel must be equipped with proper safety
equipment and attire to perform work in the adopted segment, including but not
limited to: orange safety vests, safety helmets, durable work gloves, long
pants, and substantial leather footwear with ankle support.
         (ii)   Maintenance providers must provide field personnel with green,
black, or white plastic garbage bags, at least .003 mm thick and no larger than
33" x 45" for litter and debris pickup.
      (11)   Subcontracting. Subcontracting of litter pickup at the adopted
segment is not permitted. Maintenance providers may subcontract other
maintenance services. All subcontractors must be approved by the Department
prior to performing any work at any adopted segment, obtain all insurance as
required of maintenance providers by this section, and comply with the terms of
the maintenance provider permit, the Adopt-a-Greenway Guidelines published by
the Department, any other terms and conditions as required by the Department,
and all applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
      (12)   Hazardous debris removal. Maintenance provider field personnel
must not touch or attempt to remove materials from the adopted segment which
may be toxic or otherwise hazardous. Items to avoid include powders, chemicals,
smelly substances, suspicious packages, chemical drums or containers, weapons,
medical waste, syringes or hypodermic needles, dead animals, or bulk items that
cannot be put in litter bags (such as car parts or larger items). Maintenance
provider field personnel must immediately notify the Department of the location
of these items.
      (13)   Notifications to the Department.
         (i)   Maintenance providers must provide the Department with a weekly
proposed work schedule by Wednesday (5 p.m.) of the week prior to the work
being performed.
            (A)   Work schedules must be typed and in a format approved by the
Department, and must include segment number, sponsor name, adopted segment, and
scheduled cleaning date.
         (ii)   By 9:00 a.m. of each day that maintenance providers will be
performing maintenance services, they must submit to the Department a schedule
of that day's maintenance activities including any changes not reflected on
their weekly schedule.
         (iii)   If circumstances warrant that maintenance providers must amend
their maintenance services while performing maintenance services, the
maintenance providers must notify the Department immediately of such changes.
      (14)   Failure to maintain adopted segments. Maintenance providers will
be notified as follows if the Department determines that an adopted segment was
not maintained as scheduled:
         (i)   First observation. If, upon inspection, the Department observes
that an adopted segment was not maintained as scheduled, the Department will
verbally provide the maintenance provider with 24-hour notice to perform the
required maintenance services. At the end of the 24-hour period, if the
maintenance provider has not performed required maintenance services, the
Department will provide written notification that the maintenance provider has
an additional 24-hour period to perform such required maintenance services.
         (ii)   Second observation. If, upon inspection, the Department
observes that an adopted segment was not maintained as scheduled a second time
within a six-month period, the Department will notify in writing, both the
sponsor and the maintenance provider that it must complete the required
maintenance services immediately.
         (iii)   Third observation. If, upon inspection, the Department
observes that an adopted segment was not maintained as scheduled a third time
within one year of the first observation, the Department may revoke the
existing maintenance provider permit in accordance with this section and notify
the sponsor. The sponsor may retain the adopted segment, provided that the
sponsor enters into a sponsor agreement with a different maintenance provider.
      (15)   Solicitation of sponsors by maintenance providers.
         (i)   A maintenance provider must not directly contact a sponsor who
has a sponsor agreement with a different maintenance provider by calling,
writing or any other form of solicitation, except as indicated by this section.
         (ii)   If a maintenance provider is found to be soliciting another
maintenance provider's sponsor in a manner inconsistent with this section, the
maintenance provider will be subject to discharge from the Adopt-a-Greenway
program. Any such discharge shall be in accordance with subdivision (m) of this
section.
         (iii)   The Department will provide a list of all approved maintenance
providers on the Department's website and will provide any sponsor with a list
upon request.
         (iv)   Three months prior to a maintenance provider agreement renewal
date, the Department will provide sponsors with a letter reminding the sponsor
that it may switch maintenance providers, as well as a list of all current
maintenance providers with contact information.
      (16)   Changes in levels of service. The Department may change the
minimum levels of service for an adopted segment and will notify the adopter of
such changes in levels of service no fewer than 30 days prior to such change in
levels of service being in effect.
   (h)   Volunteers.
      (1)   Term of adoption. Volunteers wishing to adopt a segment must commit
to a minimum of a one-year agreement with the Department to perform maintenance
services at the adopted segment.
      (2)   Volunteer obligations. Volunteers are responsible for:
         (i)   Entering into a volunteer agreement with the Department.
         (ii)   Coordinating all maintenance services and requirements with the
Department.
         (iii)   Submitting a volunteer permit application to the Department.
         (iv)   Performing all maintenance services in accordance with the
volunteer agreement and volunteer permit.
         (v)   Supplying all labor to perform the maintenance services in
accordance with the volunteer agreement and the volunteer permit.
         (vi)   Picking up and bagging litter and clippings and leaving them
for pick-up as directed by the Department.
         (vii)   Working on adopted segments only during hours specified in the
volunteer permit.
         (viii)   Submitting a form to the Department after the first two
months of maintaining the adopted segment to request that the Department
manufacture and install a sign at the adopted segment.
         (ix)   Maintaining the sign so it is dirt free and unobstructed.
         (x)   Attending safety training sessions provided by the Department.
         (xi)   Having the volunteer permit on hand while working at the
adopted segment.
      (3)   Renewals. The Department will mail volunteers a renewal volunteer
agreement one month prior to expiration of the current volunteer agreement.
Volunteers must return the signed volunteer agreement one week prior to the
expiration of the volunteer agreement or the area will be considered abandoned,
the acknowledgement sign will be removed, and the adopted segment will be made
available to the next adopter on the waiting list.
      (4)   Adopted segment improvements. Any improvements to the adopted
segment such as plantings or structures, including, but not limited to,
flagpoles, benches, bird feeders or baths, retaining walls, and light houses,
must be approved by the Department prior to installation.
      (5)   Use of pesticides. Volunteers may only use pesticides approved by
the Department in the adopted segment. Pesticides may only be applied by New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation Certified Pesticide
Applicators.
      (6)   Liability waiver. Volunteers must sign a liability waiver that
waives any liability to the City for any accident or injury that may occur at
the adopted segment while the volunteers are performing maintenance services at
the adopted segment.
      (7)   Frequency of maintenance services. Volunteers must perform
maintenance services at their adopted segments at least 30 times per year. This
includes a requirement to clean the adopted segment a minimum of three times
per month in May, June, July, August, September, and October and a minimum of
twice a month every other month during the year.
      (8)   Age of volunteer field personnel. Except as otherwise provided in
this paragraph, volunteer field personnel working on adopted segments must be
18 years of age or older.
         (i)   If the volunteer is a group:
            (A)   Any minor 15 years of age and older within such group shall
be required to provide written consent from a parent or guardian prior to
participating in the maintenance services at the adopted segment;
            (B)   Any minor 13 or 14 years of age with such group shall be
required to provide written consent from a parent or guardian prior to
participating in the maintenance services and shall only be permitted to
perform such maintenance services in the presence of his/her parent or
guardian.
         (ii)   No person under the age of 13 shall be permitted to perform any
maintenance services at any adopted segment.
      (9)   Safety.
         (i)   Prior to the commencement of work at the adopted segment, the
Department will inspect the adopted segment to assure that it is a safe place
for the volunteers to perform maintenance services without the closing of
traffic lanes.
         (ii)   Volunteers must adhere to the following safety rules when
performing work on the adopted segment:
            (A)   Only allow persons in good physical condition (sight,
hearing, and mental alertness) to work in the adopted segment.
            (B)   When the volunteer is a group, a volunteer group leader must
be designated by the group. The volunteer group leader is responsible for
providing information on safety to the group and must conduct a safety training
refresher session before performing any maintenance services.
            (C)   Wear appropriate attire including, but not limited to:
retroreflective safety vests and orange or red clothing; heavy work gloves;
work shoes or boots with ankle support; hats; and long pants.
            (D)   Never drink alcoholic beverages or use illegal substances
while working at the adopted segment.
            (E)   Never perform maintenance services on the portion of the
roadway intended for vehicular travel.
            (F)   Stay off steep slopes when working at the adopted segment.
            (G)   Have a first aid kit on site at the adopted segment and know
the route to the closest hospital/emergency room.
            (H)   Never pick-up hazardous or medical waste found at the adopted
segment and immediately notify the Department of such waste.
            (K)   Never use headphones while performing maintenance services on
the adopted segment.
            (L)   Avoid contact with poisonous plants and notify the Department
of any poisonous plants found at the adopted segment.
      (10)   Notice after performing maintenance services. Volunteers should
notify the Department after performing maintenance services at the adopted
segment so that the Department can schedule pick-up of the trash bags.
      (11)   Recycling. Volunteers should recycle whenever possible when
performing maintenance services.
         (i)   Changing adopted segments. Adopters may exchange their existing
segment for another segment in the system provided that the other segment is
available. The Adopt-a-Greenway acknowledgment sign must stay at the original
adopted segment. The Department will remove the acknowledgement sign from the
original segment and use it for the new segment.
   (j)   Reserving segments. Adopters may not reserve or hold segments. Once a
permit has been issued for a segment, the maintenance provider or volunteer
must begin performing maintenance services in accordance with the terms and
conditions of the permit within such time as is specified in the sponsor
agreement and/or volunteer agreement.
   (k)   Sharing segments. Upon approval by the Department, adopters may share
the rights and maintenance services associated with a particular segment with
one other adopter. Each adopter must comply with all other requirements of this
section, any agreement the adopter or maintenance provider enters into with the
Department related to the Adopt-a-Greenway Program, the terms of the permit
issued by the Department, the Adopt-a-Greenway technical guidelines published
by the Department, any other terms and conditions as required by the
Department, and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
   (l)   Adopt-a-Greenway Signs.
      (1)   Signs are produced and maintained by the maintenance provider or
volunteer and must be delivered to the Department for installation no later
than one month after the permit for an adopted segment is approved.
      (2)   Sign installation.
         (i)   Ground mounted signs will be installed by the Department as
close to the beginning of the adopted segment as feasible, taking into
consideration safety and other informational signage.
         (ii)   Signs requiring bridge, gantry wall, or parapet mounting will
be installed by the Department or a contractor approved by the Department, and
paid for by the maintenance provider or volunteer.
      (3)   All signs posted at the adopted segment must:
         (i)   consist of a standard base sign design identifying the sponsor's
or volunteer's name and/or logo;
         (ii)   conform to the Department's specifications for size, shape,
materials, and placement;
         (iii)   not be used for advertising purposes; and
         (iv)   comply with applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
      (4)   Signs will read "BEAUTIFICATION."
      (5)   Maintenance providers and volunteers must replace damaged or stolen
signs.
      (6)   When an adopter terminates its agreement with the Adopt-a-Greenway
program, the adopter must not remove the sign. The Department will remove it.
   (m)   Field inspections of adopted segments. The Department will perform
inspections of the adopted segment to assure that maintenance providers and
volunteers are performing maintenance services as required under their permits
and agreements.
   (n)   Voiding and revoking permits.
      (1)   If an adopter does not perform maintenance services at an adopted
segment one month after permit issuance, the Department will notify the adopter
orally and in writing that its permit has become void.
      (2)   The Department may revoke a volunteer or maintenance provider
permit for a permittee's failure to comply with this section, the requirements
of the permit, the Adopt-a-Greenway technical guidelines, and any applicable
laws, rules, and regulations.
         (i)   Prior to revoking a permit the Department will give the
permittee an opportunity to be heard with at least two days notice.
         (ii)   If the Department determines that an imminent peril to life or
property exists, the Department may revoke a permit without providing the
permittee an opportunity to be heard prior to such revocation. Upon request of
the permittee, the Department will provide the permittee an opportunity to
present its objections to such action within five days after the Department
receives the request.
      (3)   The Department will assign the segment of the voided or revoked
permit to the next sponsor or volunteer on the waiting list or place the
segment on the available segment list.
§ 2-23 Microtrenching.
   (a)   Incorporation by Reference of the Microtrenching Rules Promulgated by
the New York City Department of Information Technology and Telecommunications
as 67 RCNY
Chapter 1. Except where inconsistent with this Title, the microtrenching rules
promulgated by the Department of Information Technology and Telecommunications
(DOITT) in 67 RCNY
Chapter 1 are hereby incorporated by reference into this Chapter as rules of
the Department of Transportation.
   (b)   Microtrenching:
      (1)   A telecommunications franchisee applicant for a microtrenching
permit from the Department must obtain a certification that no excess capacity
is available in the location covered by such permit from DOITT pursuant to 67
RCNY
Chapter 1. The applicant must submit that certification to the Department of
Transportation as part of the application for a permit.
      (2)   A street opening permit for installation of telecommunications
conduit utilizing microtrenching must be obtained from the Department, pursuant
to 34 RCNY §
2-02, after obtaining a certification from DOITT. Fees must be paid pursuant to
34 RCNY §
2-03.
      (3)   A street opening permit must be obtained for the removal of
conduits installed pursuant to this section and the restoration of the sidewalk
or roadway. Such sidewalk or roadway restoration must be performed in
accordance with the Department's specifications.
Chapter 3: Penalty Schedule
§ 3-01 Department of Transportation Penalty Schedule.
All citations are to the Administrative Code of the City of New York or to this
Title.
Except as otherwise noted or provided in the relevant rule or law, a second or
subsequent violation is a violation by the same respondent of the same
provision of law, with a date of occurrence within 6 months of the date of
occurrence of the previous violation.
When a respondent is found to be in violation of any of the following
provisions of the Administrative Code or this Title, any civil penalty
recommended by the Hearing Officer under 48 RCNY §
6-17(c)(3), any default penalty imposed pursuant to 48 RCNY §
6-20(b) and subject to Section 1049-a(d)(1)(d) of the Charter, and any civil
penalty imposed for admissions of violation(s) pursuant to 48 RCNY §
6-09(a) or late admissions pursuant to 48 RCNY §
3-17 will be imposed in accordance with the following penalty schedule:
 
Section Description Penalty ($) Default ($)
Section                         Description                                                                   Penalty Default
                                                                                                              ($)     ($)
Admin. Code § 10-157(b), (c),  Failure to provide appropriate equipment to bicycle operator delivering on    100     100
(e)                             behalf of a business using a bicycle for commercial purposes (FIRST OFFENSE)
Admin. Code § 10-157(b), (c),  Failure to provide appropriate equipment to bicycle operator delivering on
(e)                             behalf of a business using a bicycle for commercial purposes (SECOND OR       250     250
                                SUBSEQUENT OFFENSE)
Admin. Code § 10-157(d)        Failure to produce or maintain a roster by a business using a bicycle for     100     100
                                commercial purposes (FIRST OFFENSE)
Admin. Code § 10-157(d)        Failure to produce or maintain a roster by a business using a bicycle for     250     250
                                commercial purposes (SECOND OR SUBSEQUENT OFFENSE)
Admin. Code § 10-157(f)        Failure to properly equip bicycle used on behalf of a business using a        100     100
                                bicycle for commercial purposes (FIRST OFFENSE)
Admin. Code § 10-157(f)        Failure to properly equip bicycle used on behalf of a business using a        250     250
                                bicycle for commercial purposes (SECOND OR SUBSEQUENT OFFENSE)
Admin. Code § 10-157.1         Failure to post Commercial Bicyclist Safety Poster containing required        100     100
                                information (FIRST OFFENSE)
Admin. Code § 10-157.1         Failure to post Commercial Bicyclist Safety Poster containing required        250     250
                                information (SECOND OR SUBSEQUENT OFFENSE)
Admin. Code § 19-102(i)        Use/opening of street without DOT permit                                      1,500   5,000
Admin. Code § 19-102(i)        Use/opening of protected street without DOT permit                            1,800   5,000
Admin. Code § 19-102(i)        Working without DOT permit on controlled access highway                       4,000   5,000
Admin. Code § 19-102(ii)       Failure to comply with terms and conditions of DOT permit                     1,200   3,600
Admin. Code § 19-102(ii)       Failure to comply with terms and conditions of DOT permit on controlled       4,000   5,000
                                access highway
Admin. Code § 19-107           Street closing without DOT permit                                             1,800   5,000
Admin. Code § 19-108          Failure to have DOT permit on site or in field office                         50      75
Admin. Code § 19-109(a)       Failure to provide adequate protection to persons and/or property at worksite 1,200   3,600
Admin. Code § 19-109(b)        Identifying signs improperly displayed or missing                             100     300
Admin. Code § 19-117(a)        Constructing vault without license or revocable consent                       500     1,500
Admin. Code § 19-119           Vault opening without proper protection                                       250     750
Admin. Code § 19-121(a)       Obstruction of any portion of street with construction materials/equipment    750     2,250
                                without DOT permit
Admin. Code § 19-121(b)(2)    Debris/construction materials obstructing sidewalks, gutters, crosswalks, and 250     750
                                driveways without DOT permit
Admin. Code § 19-121(b)(3)    Construction material/equipment without proper markings capable of producing  250     750
                                a warning glow
Admin. Code § 19-121(b)(4)    Material/equipment without name, address, and telephone number of owner       100     300
Admin. Code § 19-121(b)(5)     Construction material/equipment within 5 feet of surface of railroad tracks   500     1,500
Admin. Code § 19-121(b)(6)     No street protection under construction material/equipment                    250     750
Admin. Code § 19-121(b)(7)    Obstruction of fire hydrant or bus stop or other area with construction       500     1,500
                                material or equipment, which would impair safety or convenience of public
Admin. Code § 19-122          Failure to remove sand, dirt, rubbish, or debris from site within 7 days      250     750
Admin. Code § 19-123          Placement of commercial refuse container on the street without DOT permit     750     2,250
Admin. Code § 19-123           No street protection under commercial refuse container                        250     750
Admin. Code § 19-124(a)       Erect or maintain canopy over the sidewalk without DOT permit                 100     300
Admin. Code § 19-124(b)       Failure to abide by permit conditions                                         50      75
Admin. Code § 19-124(e)       Unlawful advertising on canopy                                                50      75
Admin. Code § 19-124.1(a)     Displaying or installing banners without DOT permit                           150     450
Admin. Code § 19-124.1(c)     Unlawful advertising on banner                                                50      75
Admin. Code § 19-125           Post/pole/flagpole socket/lamppost without DOT permit/consent                 100     300
Admin. Code § 19-125(a)       Failure to obtain permit or revocable consent for flagpole socket / lamppost  150     300
Admin. Code § 19-125(c)       Improper placement of barber poles                                            50      150
Admin. Code § 19-126           Use/movement/removal of crane/building/structure without DOT permit           1,000   3,000
Admin. Code § 19-127          Failure to properly label hand truck                                          50      75
Admin. Code § 19-133           Unauthorized projections and encroachments on City property                   250     750
Admin. Code § 19-133.1         Maintaining an unlawful sidewalk ATM booth (Automated Teller Machine Booth)   2,500   5,000
                                (FIRST DAY OF VIOLATION)
Admin. Code § 19-133.1         Failure to remove an unlawful sidewalk ATM booth (CONTINUING VIOLATION- for   5,000   5,000
                                every 5-day period the violation remains)
Admin. Code § 19-136           Goods/wares/merchandise obstructing sidewalk                                  150     500
Admin. Code § 19-136(b)        Vehicle(s) on sidewalk                                                        50      300
Admin. Code § 19-136(j)       Improper placement or maintenance of coin-operated rides                      150     300
Admin. Code § 19-138(b)        Defacement of roadway or sidewalk                                             250     750
Admin. Code § 19-147(d)       Failure to replace loose, slippery or broken utility maintenance hole         250     750
                                (manhole) covers, castings, and other street hardware
Admin. Code § 19-151           Failure to comply with commissioner's order                                   250     400
Admin. Code § 19-159.4        Failure to equip concrete mixer truck driven in or through the city of New    1,000   3,000
                                York with chute closure device during the transport of liquid concrete
Admin. Code § 19-170(c)(3)    Parking a tractor-trailer combination, tractor, truck trailer or semi-trailer 400     400
                                on a residential street from 9 p.m. to 5 a.m. (FIRST OFFENSE)
                                Parking a tractor-trailer combination, tractor, truck trailer or semi-trailer
Admin. Code § 19-170(c)(3)    on a residential street from 9 p.m. to 5 a.m. (SECOND OR SUBSEQUENT OFFENSE   800     800
                                WITHIN SIX MONTHS)
Admin. Code § 19-176(b)        Unlawful bicycle riding                                                       50      100
Admin. Code § 19-176(c)        Riding bicycle on sidewalk in manner which endangers any person or property   100     300
                                (FIRST OFFENSE)
Admin. Code § 19-176(c)        Riding bicycle on sidewalk in manner which endangers any person or property   200     600
                                (SECOND OR SUBSEQUENT OFFENSE)
Admin. Code § 19-176(c)        Riding bicycle on sidewalk in manner which endangers any person or property   200     500
                                and causes physical contact with a person (FIRST OFFENSE)
Admin. Code § 19-176(c)        Riding bicycle on sidewalk in manner which endangers any person or property   400     1,000
                                and causes physical contact with a person (SECOND OR SUBSEQUENT OFFENSE)
Admin. Code § 19-176.2(b)      Operation of motorized scooter within the city of New York                    500     500
Admin. Code § 19-176.3        Operation of a moped share system without authorization from the department   25,000  25,000
Admin. Code § 19-176.3;        Any other violation of Administrative Code § 19-176.3 or 34 RCNY §
34 RCNY §                      4-19                                                                          500     1,000
4-19  
Admin. Code § 19-190(a)        Right-of-way - failure to yield                                               100     100
Admin. Code § 19-190(b)        Right-of-way - failure to yield, physical injury                              250     250
Admin. Code § 19-191(a)        Leaving the scene - property damage (FIRST OFFENSE)                           500     1,000
Admin. Code § 19-191(a)        Leaving the scene – property damage (SECOND OR SUBSEQUENT OFFENSE)          1,000   2,000
Admin. Code § 19-191(b)        Leaving the scene - physical injury (FIRST OFFENSE)                           2,000   2,000
Admin. Code § 19-191(b)        Leaving the scene – physical injury (SECOND OR SUBSEQUENT OFFENSE)          5,000   5,000
Admin. Code § 19-191(b)        Leaving the scene - serious physical injury (FIRST OFFENSE)                   10,000  10,000
Admin. Code § 19-191(b)        Leaving the scene – serious physical injury (SECOND OR SUBSEQUENT OFFENSE)  15,000  15,000
Admin. Code § 19-191(b)        Leaving the scene - death (FIRST OFFENSE)                                     15,000  15,000
Admin. Code § 19-191(b)        Leaving the scene – death (SECOND OR SUBSEQUENT OFFENSE)                    20,000  20,000
Admin. Code § 19-196           Operating an all-terrain vehicle in the city of New York (FIRST OFFENSE)      500     500
Admin. Code § 19-196           Operating an all-terrain vehicle in the city of New York (SECOND OR           1,000   1,000
                                SUBSEQUENT OFFENSE REGARDLESS OF INTERVAL BETWEEN OFFENSES)
34 RCNY §                      Failure to apply for a permit under a public utility's or franchisee's        1,500   4,500
2-02(a)                        corporate name
34 RCNY §                      Failure to provide name and telephone number of emergency contact             250     500
2-02(a)(1)(ii)
34 RCNY §                      Failure to display required signs at work site                                750     2,250
2-02(c)(2)  
34 RCNY §                      Failure to have the necessary ID markings on DOT required signs               750     2,250
2-02(c)(4)  
34 RCNY §                      Failure to obtain proper permits to repair the conditions reported on a CAR   500     1,500
2-02(d)(2)  
34 RCNY §                      Failure to timely protest a CAR                                               250     750
2-02(d)(3)  
34 RCNY §                      Failure to repair defects caused by respondent's underground structure        1,200   3,600
2-02(g)(4)  
34 RCNY §                      Illegally working on a street during an embargo                               1,200   3,600
2-02(m)
34 RCNY §                      Canopy erected/maintained on a restricted street                              150     450
2-04(f)(1)
34 RCNY §                      Divisible construction materials or equipment stored on the roadway at a      500     1,500
2-05(d)(8)(vi)                  height greater than 5 feet
34 RCNY §                      Divisible construction materials or equipment stored on the sidewalk at a     500     1,000
2-05(d)(8)(vi)                  height greater than 5 feet
34 RCNY §                      Failure to provide space within the storage area for loading and unloading of 250     750
2-05(d)(10)                    construction materials
34 RCNY §                      Mixing mortar on roadway without protection                                   250     750
2-05(d)(12)
34 RCNY §                      Failure to carry overhead equipment hoses, cables, or wires across the        250     500
2-05(d)(16)                    sidewalk with 14 feet minimum clearance
34 RCNY §                      Construction shanty/trailer without DOT permit                                150     450
2-05(h)(1)
34 RCNY §                      Failure to remove shanties/trailers from roadway/sidewalk                     250     750
2-05(h)(4)
34 RCNY §                      Crossing sidewalk for the delivery or removal of any construction material or
2-05(i)(1)                     equipment on the street by vehicle or motorized equipment where there is no   250     500
                                approved drop curb (driveway) without DOT permit
34 RCNY §                      Failure to obtain an emergency number if opening an underground street access 1,500   5,000
2-07(a)(2)                     cover to perform emergency work during an embargo
34 RCNY §                      Restricting more than 11 feet of roadway by opening covers/gratings           500     1,600
2-07(a)(4)
34 RCNY §                      Opening more than two consecutive covers/gratings                             500     1,600
2-07(a)(5)
34 RCNY §                      Toolcart stored on sidewalk failed to provide a 5 foot minimum walkway        250     500
2-07(a)(6)
34 RCNY §                      Toolcart stored on roadway without a DOT permit                               250     750
2-07(a)(6)
34 RCNY §                      Toolcart stored on sidewalk obstructing hydrant, bus stop, or driveway        500     500
2-07(a)(6)
34 RCNY §                      Failure to repair defective street condition found within an area extending   750     2,250
2-07(b)(2)                     12 inches outward from the perimeter of the cover/grating
34 RCNY §                      Failure to obtain DOT permit for street plate covering defective condition    1,500   5,000
2-07(b)(2)
34 RCNY §                      Utility cover/street hardware not flush with surrounding area                 1,000   3,000
2-07(b)(3)
34 RCNY §                      Doing non-emergency work on a critical roadway during restricted hours        2,000   3,000
2-07(c)(1)
34 RCNY §                      Opening a utility access cover without an authorization number                2,000   3,000
2-07(c)(4)(i)
34 RCNY §                      Failure to perform emergency work around the clock (covers / gratings)        1,000   3,000
2-07(c)(4)(iv)
34 RCNY §                      Failure to notify DOT of completion of emergency work (covers/gratings)       250     750
2-07(c)(4)(v)
34 RCNY §                      Except as in NYC Administrative Code § 19-152, failure to install or seal    250     750
2-09(f)(4)(v)                   expansion joints as per subsection
34 RCNY §                      Except as in NYC Administrative Code § 19-152, failure to fully replace      250     500
2-09(f)(4)(viii)                defective sidewalk flag
34 RCNY §                      Except as in NYC Administrative Code § 19-152, failure to install pedestrian 1,500   4,500
2-09(f)(4)(xiv)                ramp as per DOT drawings
34 RCNY §                      Except as in NYC Administrative Code § 19-152, failure to obtain DOT approval250     750
2-09(f)(4)(xvi)                 for distinctive sidewalk
34 RCNY §                      Failure to replace distinctive sidewalk in kind                               250     500
2-09(f)(4)(xvi)(C)
34 RCNY §                      Failure to remove wood forms and/or tree guards upon expiration of the permit 250     750
2-09(f)(4)(xx)  
34 RCNY §                      Failure to remove wood forms upon expiration of the permit                    250     750
2-09(f)(4)(xxi)  
34 RCNY §                      Failure to install curb before commencing any roadway paving operation or     250     500
2-09(g)(1)(i)                   sidewalk construction
34 RCNY §                      Failure to mark out proposed excavation area; failure to limit geographical   1,500   5,000
2-11(c)(1)(iii)                 area to be marked out and/or use of excessive or oversized markings.
34 RCNY §                      Failure to notify City 24 hours before street work                            250     500
2-11(e)(1)
34 RCNY §                      Failure to use only hand held tools, rockwheels or other DOT approved tools   250     400
2-11(e)(2)                      to precut pavement
34 RCNY §                      Excavation down 5 feet or greater without shoring/sheeting/bracing            1,500   4,500
2-11(e)(3)(i)
34 RCNY §                      Tunneling/jacking without a DOT permit                                        400     1,200
2-11(e)(3)(ii)
34 RCNY §                      Failure to plate excavation in driving lane or intersection                   1,200   3,600
2-11(e)(4)(ii)
34 RCNY §                      Failure to post flagperson at worksite to give directions                     800     2,400
2-11(e)(4)(v)
34 RCNY §                      Failure to maintain a 5-foot pedestrian walkway on sidewalk                   250     750
2-11(e)(5)
34 RCNY §                      Unsuitable backfill material used                                             250     750
2-11(e)(8)(i)
34 RCNY §                      Restoration sunken more than 2 inches                                         500     1,000
2-11(e)(8)(vi)
34 RCNY §                      Temporary pavement not flush with surrounding area                            500     1,000
2-11(e)(9)(i)
34 RCNY §                      Failure to use composite plates that comply with AASHTO H25 or HS25           1,200   3,600
2-11(e)(10)(i)                 specifications
34 RCNY §                      Failure to properly place and ramp plating and decking a minimum of 12 inches 1,200   3,600
2-11(e)(10)(ii)                beyond the edge of the trench
34 RCNY §                      Failure to properly fasten plating and decking                                1,200   3,600
2-11(e)(10)(iii)
34 RCNY §                      Failure to post "Steel Plates Ahead" or "Raise Plow" sign                     500     1,500
2-11(e)(10)(v)  
34 RCNY §                      Failure to countersink plates flush with roadway                              1,000   3,000
2-11(e)(10)(v)  
34 RCNY §                      Failure to use plating and/or decking that is skid-resistant in its entirety  1,000   3,000
2-11(e)(10)(vi)                on roadway
34 RCNY §                      Failure to remove plating and decking after final restoration or prior to DOT 250     500
2-11(e)(10(vii)                 permit expiration.
34 RCNY §                      Failure to add required identifying information to plating and decking        250     500
2-11(e)(10)(viii)
34 RCNY §                      Failure to restore concrete-base roadway to same depth and strength as the    400     1,000
2-11(e)(11)(iv)                 original base concrete
34 RCNY §                      Failure to restore concrete base at same grade as existing base               1,200   3,600
2-11(e)(11)(v)  
34 RCNY §                      Installing asphalt other than binder as a base course                         1,200   3,600
2-11(e)(11)(vi)  
34 RCNY §                      Failure to install and compact binder in a maximum of four inch lifts         400     1,000
2-11(e)(11)(vi)
34 RCNY §                      Failure to install protective plating over shallow conduit                    250     500
2-11(e)(11)(vii)
34 RCNY §                      Binder base or temporary restoration not flush with surrounding area          750     1,000
2-11(e)(11)(viii)
34 RCNY §                      Wearing course not flush with surrounding area                                750     2,250
2-11(e)(12)(ii)
34 RCNY §                      Failure to provide minimum thickness of wearing course on full depth asphalt  400     1,000
2-11(e)(12)(iii)                restoration
34 RCNY §                      Failure to restore entire pavement between street opening and curb            400     1,000
2-11(e)(12)(v)
34 RCNY §                      Failure to restore street in kind (non-historic district)                     750     1,000
2-11(e)(12)(vi)
34 RCNY §                      Failure to restore pavement in kind in designated historic district           250     750
2-11(e)(12)(vii)
34 RCNY §                      Failure to properly seal and maintain the wearing course                      250     750
2-11(e)(12)(viii)
34 RCNY §                      Failure to obtain DOT permit for any changes to, or installation of,          750     1,000
2-11(e)(12)(ix)                temporary roadway pavement markings
34 RCNY §                      Failure to obtain DOT permit for any changes to, or installation of,          750     2,250
2-11(e)(12)(ix)                temporary construction, parking or regulatory signs and supports
34 RCNY §                      Failure to restore in kind all roadway pavement markings                      1,500   4,500
2-11(e)(12)(ix)  
34 RCNY §                      Failure to restore in kind any parking or regulatory signs or supports        1,500   4,500
2-11(e)(12)(ix)  
34 RCNY §                      Failure to permanently restore cut within required time                       800     2,400
2-11(e)(12)(x)
34 RCNY §                      Failure to provide smooth riding surface free of defects in the final         750     2,250
2-11(e)(12)(xiii)              completed wearing course
34 RCNY §                      Failure to restore concrete pavement at the same depth, strength and finish   400     1,000
2-11(e)(13)(ii)                 as original pavement
34 RCNY §                      Installing asphalt on a concrete street or concrete bus stop area             700     1,000
2-11(e)(13)(v)
34 RCNY §                      Failure to conform to the applicable Standard Detail Drawing #H-1042 or DOT   750     1,000
2-11(e)(13)(vi)                 approved standard (concrete roadways)
34 RCNY §                      Failure to apply color code identifying DOT permittee                         50      150
2-11(e)(14)(i)
34 RCNY §                      Failure to install a color coding marker at the end of the restoration        250     750
2-11(e)(14)(iii)
34 RCNY §                      Failure to submit a street opening location form ("cutform") upon DOT's       50      150
2-11(e)(16)(i)(A)               request
34 RCNY §                      Failure to comply with all applicable sections of the Highway Rules, the
2-11(e)(16)(iii)                Standard Specifications, Standard Detail Drawings, and all other applicable   750     1,000
                                laws or rules
34 RCNY §                      Failure to obtain a confirmation number prior to expiration of DOT street     250     750
2-11(f)(2)(ii)                  opening permit (protected street)
34 RCNY §                      Failure to obtain a confirmation number two hours prior to the commencement   750     2,250
2-11(f)(4)(i)                   of a backfill on a protected street
34 RCNY §                      Failure to conform to the applicable Standard Detail Drawing #H-1042 or DOT   750     1,000
2-11(f)(4)(v)                   approved standard (protected street)
34 RCNY §                      Working without a valid emergency number                                      1,000   3,000
2-11(g)(1)(i)
34 RCNY §                      Doing non-emergency work with an emergency authorization number               2,000   6,000
2-11(g)(1)(ii)  
34 RCNY §                      Failure to begin emergency work within 2 hours after authorization            1,000   3,000
2-11(g)(2)(i)  
34 RCNY §                      Failure to perform emergency work around the clock                            1,000   3,000
2-11(g)(2)(ii)
34 RCNY §                      Failure to apply for DOT permit within two business days of receiving an      750     2,250
2-11(g)(2)(viii)               emergency permit number
34 RCNY §                      Failure to repair sidewalk covering a vault                                   250     400
2-13(l)(2)
34 RCNY §                      Displaying or installing banners without DOT permit                           150     450
2-14(b)(1)
34 RCNY §                      Failure to maintain and/or replace weatherproof receptacles as necessary for  150     300
2-14(e)(2)(v)                   holiday/temporary lighting.
34 RCNY §                      Failure to obtain and maintain the required insurance for holiday/temporary   250     500
2-14(e)(2)(viii)                lighting.
34 RCNY §                      Failure to obtain a DOT permit prior to commencing work for holiday/temporary 250     500
2-14(e)(2)(ix)                  lighting.
34 RCNY §                      Failure to remove temporary lighting and related equipment when required for  250     500
2-14(e)(2)(x)                   holiday/temporary lighting.
34 RCNY §                      Use of electrical service exceeding 120 volts and/or fused larger than 15     250     500
2-14(e)(2)(xiii)                amperes for holiday/temporary lighting.
34 RCNY §                      Failure to comply with minimum height clearances for holiday/temporary        250     500
2-14(e)(2)(xiv)                 lighting.
34 RCNY §                      Supporting or securing holiday/temporary lighting to a fire escape or         250     500
2-14(e)(2)(xv)                  drainpipe; failure to insulate temporary lighting.
34 RCNY §                      Failure to obtain DOT approval for adjustments to work on holiday/temporary   200     400
2-14(e)(2)(xviii)               lighting.
34 RCNY §                      Failure to perform changes mandated by DOT on holiday/temporary lighting.     150     300
2-14(e)(2)(xix)
34 RCNY §                      Failure to certify work for holiday/temporary lighting.                       150     300
2-14(e)(2)(xxi)
34 RCNY §                      Commercial refuse container stored or placed in an unauthorized area          250     750
2-14(f)(2)(i)
34 RCNY §                      Commercial refuse container stored or placed within 15 feet of a hydrant      250     750
2-14(f)(2)(ii)
34 RCNY §                      Commercial refuse container placed in a crosswalk or pedestrian ramp          250     750
2-14(f)(2)(iv)
34 RCNY §                      Commercial refuse container causing obstruction or interference               250     750
2-14(f)(3)
34 RCNY §                      Unlabeled or improperly labeled commercial refuse container                   250     750
2-14(f)(4)
34 RCNY §                      Commercial refuse container not parallel to the curb or extended more than 9  250     750
2-14(f)(5)                      feet into the roadway
34 RCNY §                      Failure to have the proper street protection under commercial refuse          250     750
2-14(f)(6)                     container at all times
34 RCNY §                      Commercial refuse container without proper reflective markings on all four    250     750
2-14(f)(7)                      sides
34 RCNY §                      Commercial refuse container/debris obstructing sidewalks, gutters,            250     750
2-14(f)(8)                     crosswalks, bike lanes or driveway
34 RCNY §                      Failure to adequately maintain a temporary outdoor dining setup               500     500
2-14(j)  
34 RCNY §                      Item attached to City electrical equipment without DOT permit                 250     500
2-20(a)(1)
34 RCNY §                      Unauthorized person working within 3 feet of City electrical equipment        250     500
2-20(a)(2)
34 RCNY §                      Failure to notify DOT's Electrical Inspection Unit at least 72 hours prior to 250     500
2-20(a)(6)                      the commencement of non-emergency work
34 RCNY §                      Breaking, defacing, removing, or interfering with equipment as per section    250     500
2-20(a)(7)
34 RCNY §                      Installation of an overhead shunt or wrap-around shunt without a DOT permit   500     1,500
2-20(b)(2)  
34 RCNY §                      Installation of street shunt without a DOT permit                             750     2,250
2-20(b)(2)  
34 RCNY §                      Failure to replace shunt with permanent connection within 90 days             750     2,250
2-20(b)(4)  
34 RCNY §                      Failure to bear a sign pursuant to 34 RCNY §
2-20(b)(7)                     2-02(c)(2) with contractor's name, telephone numbers, start and end dates of  750     2,250
                                all work
34 RCNY §                      Failure to maintain overhead shunt or supports at minimum clearances          250     500
2-20(b)(9)
34 RCNY §                      Failure to protect conductor against accidental contact or possible           250     500
2-20(e)(7)                      interference
34 RCNY §                      Failure to repair non-city electrical and/or non-electrical equipment within  750     2,250
2-20(j)(4)                     the required time frame
34 RCNY §                      Anchor guy attached to City property without DOT approval                     250     500
2-20(n)(2)
34 RCNY §                      Anchor guy attached to City property within 25 feet of intersecting street    250     500
2-20(n)(3)(i)
34 RCNY §                      Anchor guy attached to City property where head guys or pole guys and cribbed 250     500
2-20(n)(3)(ii)                  poles sufficient
34 RCNY §                      Anchor guy attached to City property interfering with the entrance of a       250     500
2-20(n)(3)(iii)                 building or garage
34 RCNY §                      Anchor guy attached to City property not protected by approved shield         250     500
2-20(n)(4)
34 RCNY §                      Failure to install or relocate street poles within 80 to 130 feet apart,      500     500
2-20(q)(7)                      unless authorized by DOT
34 RCNY §                      Unauthorized passenger pickup or discharge (FIRST OFFENSE)                    500     500
4-10(c)(1)
34 RCNY §                      Unauthorized passenger pickup or discharge (SECOND OR SUBSEQUENT OFFENSE)     2,500   2,500
4-10(c)(1)
34 RCNY §                      Failure of an intercity bus permit holder to prominently display a copy of an 500     500
4-10(d)(7)(ii)                  intercity bus permit (FIRST OFFENSE)
34 RCNY §                      Failure of an intercity bus permit holder to prominently display a copy of an 2,500   2,500
4-10(d)(7)(ii)                  intercity bus permit (SECOND OR SUBSEQUENT OFFENSE)
34 RCNY §                      Failure of an intercity bus permit holder to properly display the operator's  500     500
4-10(d)(7)(iii)                 name, address and telephone number (FIRST OFFENSE)
34 RCNY §                      Failure of an intercity bus permit holder to properly display the operator's  2,500   2,500
4-10(d)(7)(iii)                 name, address and telephone number (SECOND OR SUBSEQUENT OFFENSE)
34 RCNY §                      Unlawful stopping or standing in an assigned on-street bus stop location
4-10(d)(7)(v)                   except when actively engaged in the pick-up or discharge of passengers by an  500     500
                                intercity bus permit holder (FIRST OFFENSE)
34 RCNY §                      Unlawful stopping or standing in an assigned on-street bus stop location
4-10(d)(7)(v)                   except when actively engaged in the pick-up or discharge of passengers by an  2,500   2,500
                                intercity bus permit holder (SECOND OR SUBSEQUENT OFFENSE)
34 RCNY §                      Altering an intercity bus permit (FIRST OFFENSE)                              500     500
4-10(d)(7)(vi)
34 RCNY §                      Altering an intercity bus permit (SECOND OR SUBSEQUENT OFFENSE)               2,500   2,500
4-10(d)(7)(vi)
34 RCNY §                      Failure to register a business using a bicycle for commercial purposes with   100     100
4-12(p)(ii)                    the Department
34 RCNY §                      Failure to comply with DOT Pedestrian Plaza Rules                             500     500
4-16(b), (c), (d), and (e)
34 RCNY §                      Demonstrating or testing a motor vehicle with autonomous vehicle technology   5,000   5,000
4-17                           on any public highway in the city of New York without a permit from the       per day per day
                                Department
34 RCNY §                      Failure to provide or comply with a safety plan                               5,000   15,000
4-19(d)(6)  
34 RCNY §                      Failure to provide or comply with a vehicle maintenance and inspection plan   5,000   15,000
4-19(d)(7)  
34 RCNY §                      Failure to provide or comply with a rider accountability and compliance plan  5,000   15,000
4-19(d)(8)  
34 RCNY §                      Failure to provide or comply with a community outreach plan                   5,000   15,000
4-19(d)(9)  
34 RCNY §                      Failure to provide or comply with an equity plan                              5,000   15,000
4-19(d)(10)  
34 RCNY §                      Failure to comply with the terms of a moped share system permit               5,000   15,000
4-19(e)(3)  
34 RCNY §                      Use of a Pedestrian Flow Zone in the Theatre District Zone for any purpose    500     500
4-20(b)                        other than the safe and continuous movement of pedestrian traffic
34 RCNY §                      Engaging in Designated Activities within the Theatre District Zone outside of 500     500
4-20(c)                        Designated Activity Zone(s), except where otherwise authorized
34 RCNY §                      Failure to comply with open streets rules                                     500     500
4-21(d)  
34 RCNY §                      Operation of a sidewalk cafe or roadway cafe without a license and revocable  500     500
5-02(a)                        consent (FIRST OFFENSE)
34 RCNY §                      Operation of a sidewalk cafe or roadway cafe without a license and revocable  1,000   1,000
5-02(a)                        consent (SECOND AND SUBSEQUENT OFFENSE)
34 RCNY §                      Failure to comply with operation and management requirements (FIRST OFFENSE)  200     200
5-10  
34 RCNY §                      Failure to comply with operation and management requirements (SECOND AND      500     500
5-10                           SUBSEQUENT OFFENSE)
34 RCNY §                      Failure to comply with design requirements (FIRST OFFENSE)                    200     200
5-11  
34 RCNY §                      Failure to comply with design requirements (SECOND AND SUBSEQUENT OFFENSE)    500     500
5-11  
34 RCNY §                      Failure to adequately maintain a temporary outdoor dining setup               500     500
5-13*  
 
* Editor's note: Pursuant to § 5 of the adopted rule (City Record 2/2/2024,
eff. 3/3/2024), this provision expires and is deemed repealed on November 1,
2025.
 
Penalty Schedule Related to Newsracks 
Section Description Penalty ($) Default ($)
Section                         Description             Penalty ($) Default ($)
Admin. Code § 19-128.1(b)(1)   Newsrack exceeds size   100         500
                                limits
                                Newsrack used for
Admin. Code § 19-128.1(b)(2)   impermissible           100         500
                                advertising/promotional
                                purposes
                                Failure to keep coin
Admin. Code § 19-128.1(b)(3)   return mechanism in     100         500
                                good working order
                                Failed to affix correct
Admin. Code § 19-128.1(b)(4)   name/address/telephone  100         500
                                number to newsrack as
                                per subsection
Admin. Code § 19-128.1(b)(5),  Newsrack placed/
(6)                             installed/maintained in 250         500
                                improper location
                                Failure to place/
Admin. Code § 19-128.1(b)(7)   install newsrack in a   250         500
                                manner so that it
                                cannot be tipped over
                                Failure to notify DOT
Admin. Code § 19-128.1(c)(1)   of newsrack information 3,000       4,000
                                and compliance as per
                                subsection
                                Failure to notify DOT
Admin. Code § 19-128.1(c)(2)   of required newsrack
                                information for:
                               1 - 99 racks           250         250
                               100 - 249 racks         550         750
                               250 - 499 racks         1,100       1,500
                               500 - 749 racks         1,700       2,250
                               750 - 999 racks         2,300       3,000
                               1,000 + racks           3,000       4,000
                                Failure to maintain /
                                provide required
Admin. Code § 19-128.1(d)      indemnification/
                                insurance information
                                for:
                               1 - 99 racks           250         250
                               100 - 249 racks         550         750
                               250 - 499 racks         1,100       1,500
                               500 - 749 racks         1,700       2,250
                               750 - 999 racks         2,300       3,000
                               1,000+ racks            3,000       4,000
                                Failure to /
Admin. Code § 19-128.1(e)(1)   inaccurately certified
                                graffiti-removal info
                                for:
                               1 - 99 racks (OATH Code 250         250
                                AD90)  
                               100 - 249 racks         550         750
                               250 - 499 racks         1,100       1,500
                               500 - 749 racks         1,700       2,250
                               750 - 999 racks         2,300       3,000
                               1,000 + racks           3,000       4,000
                                Failure to maintain
Admin. Code § 19-128.1(e)(1)   accurate logs / records
                                as per subsection for:
                               1 - 99 racks (OATH Code 250         250
                                AD91)  
                               100 - 249 racks         550         750
                               250 - 499 racks         1,100       1,500
                               500 - 749 racks         1,700       2,250
                               750 - 999 racks         2,300       3,000
                               1,000 + racks           3,000       4,000
                                Failure to provide
Admin. Code § 19-128.1(e)(1)   maintenance logs/
                                records as per
                                subsection for:
                               1 - 99 racks (OATH Code 250         250
                                AD92)  
                               100 - 249 racks         550         750
                               250 - 499 racks         1,100       1,500
                               500 - 749 racks         1,700       2,250
                               750 - 999 racks         2,300       3,000
                               1,000 + racks           3,000       4,000
                                Failure to remove
Admin. Code § 19-128.1(e)(2)   refuse from newsrack as 100         500
                                per subsection
                                Newsrack empty/
Admin. Code § 19-128.1(e)(3)   unsecured door for      100         500
                                impermissible time
                                Failure to correct
Admin. Code § 19-128.1(e)(4)   newsrack damaged/in     100         500
                                need of repair as per
                                subsection
                                Failure to repair
Admin. Code § 19-128.1(e)(5)   damage to City          100         500
                                property/sidewalk
                                caused by newsrack
34 RCNY §                      Failure to remove
2-08(e)(3)                      refuse from newsrack as 100         500
                                per paragraph
34 RCNY §                      Newsrack empty/
2-08(e)(5)                      unsecured door for      100         500
                                impermissible time
                                Failure to correct
34 RCNY §                      newsrack damaged/in     100         500
2-08(e)(4)                      need of repair as per
                                paragraph
                                Failure to repair
34 RCNY §                      damage to City          100         500
2-08(b)(3)                      property/sidewalk
                                caused by newsrack
                                Failure to affix
34 RCNY §                      correct name/address/
2-08(d)(2)                      telephone number to     100         500
                                newsrack as per
                                paragraph
34 RCNY §                      Newsrack exceeds size   100         500
2-08(d)(1)                      limits
                                Newsrack used for
34 RCNY §                      impermissible           100         500
2-08(d)(3)                      advertising/promotional
                                purposes
34 RCNY §                      Newsrack placed/
2-08(c)                         installed/maintained in 250         500
                                improper location
                                Failure to place/
34 RCNY §                      install newsrack in a   250         500
2-08(b)(1)                      manner so that it
                                cannot be tipped over
                                Failure to notify DOT
34 RCNY §                      of newsrack information 3,000       4,000
2-08(b)(4)(i) and (ii)          and compliance as per
                                paragraph
                                Subsequent to the
34 RCNY §                      initial notification to
2-08(b)(4)(iii), (iv) and (v)   DOT, failure to notify
                                DOT in accordance with
                                rule requirements for:
                               1 - 99 racks            375         500
                               100 - 249 racks         550         750
                               250 - 499 racks         1,100       1,500
                               500 - 749 racks         1,700       2,250
                               750 - 999 racks         2,300       3,000
                               1,000 or more racks     3,000       4,000
                                Failure to maintain
34 RCNY §                      accurate logs/records
2-08(e)(2)                      per DOT requirements
                                for:
                               1 - 99 racks            375         500
                               100 - 249 racks         550         750
                               250 - 499 racks         1,100       1,500
                               500 - 749 racks         1,700       2,250
                               750 - 999 racks         2,300       3,000
                               1,000 or more racks     3,000       4,000
                                Failure to provide
34 RCNY §                      maintenance logs/
2-08(e)(2)                      records to DOT on
                                request for:
                               1 - 99 racks            375         500
                               100 - 249 racks         550         750
                               250 - 499 racks         1,100       1,500
                               500 - 749 racks         1,700       2,250
                               750 - 999 racks         2,300       3,000
                               1,000 or more racks     3,000       4,000
                                Failure to maintain/
34 RCNY §                      provide proper
2-08(f)                         indemnification/
                                insurance information
                                for:
                               1 - 99 racks            375         500
                               100 - 249 racks         550         750
                               250 - 499 racks         1,100       1,500
                               500 - 749 racks         1,700       2,250
                               750 - 999 racks         2,300       3,000
                               1,000 or more racks     3,000       4,000
 
(Added City Record 9/1/2017, eff. 10/1/2017; amended City Record 7/26/2018,
eff. 8/25/2018; amended City Record 12/3/2020, eff. 1/2/2021; amended City
Record 9/7/2021, eff. 9/7/2021; amended City Record 12/9/2021, eff. 12/9/2021;
amended City Record 12/14/2021, eff. 12/14/2021; amended City Record 7/20/2022,
eff. 8/19/2022; amended City Record 8/4/2022, eff. 9/3/2022; amended City
Record 9/12/2023, eff. 9/12/2023; amended City Record 2/2/2024, eff. 3/3/2024;
amended City Record 2/28/2024, eff. 3/29/2024)
Chapter 4: Traffic Rules and Regulations
§ 4-01 Words and Phrases Defined.
   (a)   Vehicle and Traffic Law definitions apply. Whenever any words and
phrases used in these rules are not defined herein but are defined in Article 1
of the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law, any such definition shall be
deemed to apply to such words and phrases used herein.
   (b)   Definitions. The following words and phrases, when used in these
rules, shall, for the purpose of these rules, have the following meanings:
      Access-A-Ride vehicle. An "Access-A-Ride vehicle" means a vehicle
authorized by the Metropolitan Transportation Authority New York City Transit
to provide only the Access-A-Ride service. Such vehicle must bear a license
plate with the New York Department of Motor Vehicles designation of "New York
City Transit Authority", and must also have an authorized and clearly visible
Access-A-Ride logo on its back side, not smaller than six inches by six inches
in size.
      Bicycle. "Bicycle" means every two- or three-wheeled device upon which a
person or persons may ride, propelled by human power through a belt, a chain or
gears, with such wheels in a tandem or tricycle, except that it will not
include such a device having solid tires and intended for use only on a
sidewalk by pre-teenage children. For the purposes of these rules the term
bicycle includes pedal-assist commercial bicycles as defined in this section;
and bicycles with electric assist as defined in section 102-c of the vehicle
and traffic law.
      Bicycle sharing system. The term "bicycle sharing system" means a network
of self-service and publicly available bicycles in which a bicycle trip begins
and/or ends on any public highway in the City of New York.
      Bicycle with electric assist. “Bicycle with electric assist” shall have
the same meaning as set forth in section 102-c of the vehicle and traffic law.
      Blockface. The term "blockface" means that portion of the street along
the curb on one side of a street which is between the boundaries of the corner
area at either end of the block.
      Bus. "Bus" means every motor vehicle having a seating capacity of more
than fifteen passengers, in addition to the operator, and used for the
transportation of persons, and every charter bus, school bus and sight-seeing
bus, regardless of seating capacity, as defined below.
         (i)   Charter bus. The term "charter bus" means a bus transporting
passengers for compensation in a chartered party.
         (ii)   School bus. The term "school bus" means every motor vehicle
regardless of seating capacity owned by a public or governmental agency or
private school and operated for the transportation of pupils, teachers and
other persons acting in a supervisory capacity, to or from school or school
activities, or privately owned and operated on a regular basis for compensation
for the transportation of pupils, teachers and other persons acting in a
supervisory capacity to or from school or school activities.
         (iii)   Sight-seeing bus. The term "sight-seeing bus" means a bus for
hire carrying passengers from a fixed point in the City of New York, at which
point the passengers embark and are generally discharged to a place or places
of interest, assembly, or amusement in the City of New York, and including a
charter bus, as defined in these rules, when engaged in a sight-seeing
operation.
         (iv)   Shuttle bus. The term "shuttle bus" means a bus operating
entirely within the City of New York that does not charge a fee to its
passengers.
         (v)   Intercity bus. An "intercity bus" means a bus that transports
the general public between the City of New York and any location outside the
City of New York in scheduled bus service. Such term does not include a school
bus, a bus providing public transportation, or a charter bus.
      Bus lane. The term “bus lane” means a traffic lane or lanes designated
for the exclusive use of buses with the exceptions allowed under 34 RCNY §§
4-12(m) and
4-08(a)(3).
      Busway. The term “busway” means a bus lane that consists of the entire
roadway and is designated for the exclusive use of buses, with access to such
roadway(s) restricted to other vehicles, except wheelchair accessible Access-A-
Ride vehicles having a seating capacity of four or more passengers, unless
otherwise indicated by authorized posted signs.
      Chartered party. The term "chartered party" means a group of persons who,
pursuant to a common purpose and under a single contract and at a fixed charge,
have acquired exclusive use of a bus to travel together as a group to a
specific destination or for a particular itinerary either agreed upon in
advance or modified after having left the place of origin by such group.
      Commercial bicycle. A bicycle used to transport property in commerce.
      Commercial vehicle. 
         (i)   For purposes of parking, standing and stopping rules, a vehicle
will not be deemed a commercial vehicle or a truck unless:
            (A)   it bears commercial plates; and
            (B)   it is permanently altered by having all seats and seat
fittings, except the front seats, removed to facilitate the transportation of
property, except that for vehicles designed with a passenger cab and a cargo
area separated by a partition, the seating capacity within the cab will not be
considered in determining whether the vehicle is properly altered; and
            (C)   it displays the registrant's name and address permanently
affixed in characters at least three inches high on both sides of the vehicle,
with such display being in a color contrasting with that of the vehicle and
placed approximately midway vertically on doors or side panels.
         (ii)   For the purposes of rules other than parking, stopping and
standing rules, a vehicle designed, maintained, or used primarily for the
transportation of property, or for the provision of commercial services and
bearing commercial plates will be deemed a commercial vehicle.
         (iii)   Vehicles bearing commercial or equivalent registration plates
from other states or countries will not be deemed trucks or commercial vehicles
unless they are permanently altered and marked as required in (i)(B) and (C) of
this definition, above.
      Commissioner. "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of the New York City
Department of Transportation or his/her authorized designee.
      Commuter Van. The term "commuter van" means a van which: (i) is used as
part of a commuter van service as defined in § 19-502(q) of the New York City
Administrative Code; (ii) has a seating capacity of at least nine passengers
but not more than twenty passengers or such greater capacity as the New York
City Taxi and Limousine Commission may establish by rule; (iii) carries
passengers for hire in the City; (iv) is duly licensed as a commuter van by the
New York City Taxi and Limousine Commission; and (v) is not permitted to accept
hails from prospective passengers in the street.
      Credential. The term "credential" means any explicit approval from the
Department or other authorized agency to park at a parking meter or other
location, including, but not limited to, a record of payment or valid parking
permit.
      Crosswalk. 
         (i)   Marked crosswalk. The term "marked crosswalk" means that part of
a roadway defined by two parallel lines or highlighted by a pattern of lines
(perpendicular, parallel or diagonal used either separately or in combination)
that is intended to guide pedestrians into proper crossing paths.
         (ii)   Unmarked crosswalk. The term "unmarked crosswalk" means that
part of a roadway, other than a marked crosswalk, that is included within the
extensions of the sidewalk lines between opposite sides of the roadway at an
intersection, provided that (A) the roadway crosses through the intersection
rather than ending at the intersection, and/or (B) all traffic on the opposing
roadway is controlled by a traffic control device.
      Cruising. "Cruising" means the movement of any vehicle on any street in
search of prospective passengers who may wish to hire the vehicle.
      Dedicated use sign. The term "dedicated use sign" shall mean a curb
regulation sign that allows a designated vehicle to use the regulated block
face. Other vehicles may not stand or park at these locations.
      Department. "Department" means the New York City Department of
Transportation.
      Designated Activities. The term "Designated Activities" means commercial
activities, including solicitation of any kind, distribution of anything,
entertainment or performances by individuals or groups, posing for or taking
photographs or videos, and vending expressive matter, where any form of
compensation, donation, or gratuity is requested or accepted. Persons who
engage in designated activities shall be deemed to be engaged in such
activities for the entirety of their interactions with each member of the
public for the purpose of conducting commercial activity. Designated activities
shall not include commercial activities by vendors who are licensed pursuant to
§§ 17-307 and 20-453 of the New York City Administrative Code.
      Designated Activity Zone. The term "Designated Activity Zone" means an
area designated as such by the Department by signage and/or markings in which
individuals conduct Designated Activities.
      Driveway. "Driveway" means every entrance or exit authorized, pursuant to
applicable law and used by vehicular traffic to or from lands or buildings
abutting a roadway.
      D/S Decals. "D/S Decals" means valid nontransferable service vehicle
decals or delivery vehicle decals issued by the City of New York that are
affixed to the inside of the operator's side of the windshields of vehicles
bearing "A", "C" or "D" series license plates issued by the U.S. Department of
State.
      Electric scooter. “Electric scooter” shall have the same meaning as set
forth in section 114-e of the vehicle and traffic law.
      Electric vehicle. "Electric vehicle" means a commercially available,
mass-produced vehicle originally equipped by the manufacturer with an electric
propulsion system or a vehicle retrofitted with an electric propulsion system,
provided the vehicle owner can provide supporting documentation of such
retrofit. Electric vehicles include both (1) battery electric vehicles which
have batteries that are recharged by connecting the vehicle to an external
power source; and (2) plug-in hybrid electric vehicles, which have batteries
that be can be recharged by connecting the vehicle to an external power source
or by an onboard internal-combustion engine and generator.
      Electric vehicle charging. The term "electric vehicle charging" means
when an electric vehicle's charging port is connected to the electric vehicle
charger via a cable.
      Electric vehicle charging station. The term "electric vehicle charging
station" means a location with (1) one or more electric vehicle chargers that
supply electric energy for the recharging of electric vehicles, and (2) one or
more parking spaces dedicated to each electric vehicle charger to accommodate
charging vehicles.
      Electronic communication device. The term "electronic communication
device" means any electronic equipment approved by the Department capable of
transmitting information via telephone, cable, fiber, satellite or antenna to
the Department for payment at parking spaces where payment for such space is
requested. This includes but is not limited to mobile or vehicle mounted
computers with an on-line connection, mobile or cellular phones, personal
digital assistants, or any other electronic communication device approved by
the Department.
      Emergency vehicle (authorized). The term "emergency vehicle (authorized)"
means every police vehicle, fire vehicle, emergency ambulance service vehicle,
and every other emergency vehicle as defined in § 101 of the Vehicle and
Traffic Law.
      Expressive Matter. The term "expressive matter" means materials or
objects with expressive content, such as newspapers, books, or other similar
written matter and visual art such as paintings, prints, photography, or
sculpture.
      For-hire vehicle. The term "for-hire vehicle" means a motor vehicle,
licensed by the New York City Taxi and Limousine Commission, for hire in the
City, used for the carriage of passengers by prearrangement only and designed
to carry fewer than nine passengers, including but not limited to livery
vehicles, and excepting taxis or wheelchair accessible vans.
      High Occupancy Vehicle (HOV). The term "HOV" means a vehicle, except a
truck as defined in 34 RCNY §
4-13(a)(1), with two or more occupants, the number of which is specified by
signs placed on express lanes on highways or bridges, pursuant to 34 RCNY §
4-07(k).
      Holidays. "Holiday" when used on traffic control devices means the days
on which the following holidays are officially celebrated: New Year's Day,
Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
      Horse drawn cab. The term "horse drawn cab" shall mean a vehicle drawn by
a horse and used for the carriage of passengers for compensation in conformance
with a New York City Department of Consumer Affairs license. Where signs limit
parking to horse drawn cabs, only those cabs licensed by the New York City
Department of Consumer Affairs will be permitted.
      Impounded vehicle. A vehicle is considered "impounded" when the City of
New York takes it into custody by taking any action preventing the free use of
the vehicle by the motorist, including, but not limited to, beginning to attach
to the vehicle an immobilization device such as a "boot" or a hook on a
Department of Transportation tow truck.
      Law enforcement officer. The term "law enforcement officer" means a
police officer or any authorized agent of the Department of Transportation.
      Limited use vehicle. The term "limited use vehicle" means a motor
vehicle, other than a motorcycle, which has a maximum performance speed of
forty miles per hour.
      Marginal street. The term "marginal street" means any street, road,
place, area or way adjoining or adjacent to waterfront property and designated
as a marginal street, wharf or place on a plan or map adopted, pursuant to law.
      Motor vehicle. The term "motor vehicle" means every vehicle operated or
driven upon a public highway which is propelled by any power other than
muscular power, except as otherwise provided in § 125 of the Vehicle and
Traffic Law.
      Official time standard. The term "official time standard" means, whenever
certain hours are named in these rules or on traffic control devices, standard
time or daylight-saving time, whichever may be in current use in the City of
New York.
      Parking. "Parking" means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or
not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged
in loading or unloading property or passengers.
      Parking field. The term "parking field" means any parking lot containing
parking meters that is owned, operated and controlled by the City or its
contractor and is available for public use. The term "parking field" does not
include any parking lot operated by a City agency intended for exclusive use by
such agency's employees or by the public to conduct business with such agency.
      Parking meter. The term "parking meter" means a device which accepts
payment or a credential, including, but not limited to, a pay-and-display
parking meter or a pay-by-plate parking meter.
      Passenger car. The term "passenger car" when used on traffic control
devices means a motor vehicle designed and used for conveying not more than
eight people and includes motorcycles designed and used only for conveying
people.
      Pay-and-display parking meter. The term "Pay-and-display parking meter"
means an electronic parking meter that dispenses timed receipts that must be
displayed on the dashboard of a motor vehicle or in a visible and secure place
on a motorcycle.
      Pay-by-plate parking meter. The term "Pay-by-plate parking meter" means
an electronic parking meter that requires entry of license plate information or
other credential for proper registration of payment.
      Pedal-assist commercial bicycle. A "pedal-assist commercial bicycle"
shall mean a device upon which a person may ride equipped with a belt, a chain
or gears, fully operable pedals and an electric motor of less than seven
hundred fifty watts (one horsepower) whereby such electric motor engages only
when the operator is pedaling and the rate of speed of the bicycle is less than
fifteen miles per hour, and disengages or ceases to function when (i) the
operator applies the brakes, (ii) the operator stops pedaling, or (iii) the
bicycle achieves a speed of fifteen miles per hour and which is (A) more than
36 inches but no more than 48 inches wide and equipped with 2, 3, or 4 wheels
or (B) no more than 36 inches wide and equipped with 4 wheels. A pedal-assist
commercial bicycle shall not be equipped with any throttle capacity or have any
additional motorized equipment affixed to it. A pedal-assist commercial bicycle
shall not be more than eighty-four (84) inches in height or more than one
hundred and ninety-two (192) inches in length, including any attached trailer.
A pedal-assist commercial bicycle shall only be used to transport property in
commerce. For the purposes of this definition, the term “trailer” means a
device not propelled by its own power and towed by a pedal-assist commercial
bicycle.
      Pedestrian countdown display. The term "pedestrian countdown display"
means any automated digital reading used in a crosswalk that displays, at the
beginning of the flashing upraised hand signal, the number of seconds remaining
until the termination of such signal.
      Pedestrian Flow Zone. The term "Pedestrian Flow Zone" means an area
designated as such by the Department by signage and/or markings for the safe
and continuous movement of pedestrian traffic.
      Pedestrian Plaza. The term "pedestrian plaza" means an area designated by
the Department as such for pedestrian circulation, use and enjoyment on
property under the jurisdiction of the Department including, but not limited
to, property mapped as a public place or property within the bed of a roadway,
and which may contain amenities such as tables, seating, trees, plants,
lighting, bike racks, or public art.
      Pedestrian Plaza Partner. The term "pedestrian plaza partner" means an
organization selected by the Department to assist with functions related to
pedestrian plazas, pursuant to a nonexclusive agreement with the Department,
which may include, but is not limited to, a maintenance agreement or concession
agreement.
      Pedicab. "Pedicab" means a bicycle as defined in the vehicle and traffic
law or other device that is designed and constructed to transport or carry
passengers, that is solely propelled by human power, and that is operated to
transport passengers for hire.
      Person. "Person" means a natural person, partnership, corporation,
limited liability company, association or any other entity.
      Public highway. The term "public highway" means any highway, road,
street, avenue, alley, public place, public driveway or any other public way.
      Public transportation. The term "Public transportation" means:
         (i)   mass transportation services provided to the general public by
any public benefit corporation constituting a transportation authority, or a
subsidiary thereof, or any public transportation corporation constituted as an
instrumentality of a State, or a subsidiary thereof, directly or through a
contract with another entity; or
         (ii)   mass transportation services provided to the general public by
any county, City, town or village directly or through a contract with another
entity, pursuant to section one hundred nineteen-r of the general municipal
law, or provided to the general public by another state or any county, City,
town or village in a State other than New York directly or through a contract
with another entity, pursuant to a similar law of such other State.
      Service vehicle. The term "Service vehicle" means a commercial vehicle
used for providing commercial services other than making pickups and
deliveries, but does not include a vehicle bearing "A", "C" or "D" series
license plates issued by the U.S. Department of State and displaying a valid
non-transferable service vehicle decal issued by the City of New York that is
affixed to the inside of the operator's side of the windshield.
      Shared street. The term “shared street” means a street that is designed
for slow travel speeds where pedestrians, cyclists, and motorists all share the
right-of-way. Shared streets are typically implemented on low vehicle volume
and/or high pedestrian volume streets where drivers of vehicles are encouraged
to drive five miles per hour and the roadway portion of the street may be flush
from building line to building line (i.e., no curb), separated by bollards or
pedestrian amenities rather than the typical curb line grade separation. Slow
speeds are encouraged through traffic control devices and/or calming measures
(e.g., signage, markings, use of distinctive materials, furnishings, plantings,
and other visual cues) in the roadway that caution drivers.
      Sidewalk. "Sidewalk" means that portion of a street, whether paved or
unpaved, between the curb lines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the
adjacent property lines intended for the use of pedestrians. Where it is not
clear which section is intended for the use of pedestrians, the sidewalk will
be deemed to be that portion of the street between the building line and the
curb.
      Standing. "Standing" means the stopping of a vehicle, whether occupied or
not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged
in receiving or discharging passengers.
      Stopping. "Stopping" means any halting, even momentarily of a vehicle,
whether occupied or not.
      Taxi. A "taxi" means a motor vehicle used for the carriage of passengers
for compensation, equipped with a taxi meter, painted yellow or green and
displaying a current medallion or other license issued by the New York City
Taxi and Limousine Commission.
      Transitway. A "transitway" means any roadway or series of roadways
designated for the exclusive use of buses or taxis or such other designated
high occupancy vehicles as may be permitted, during certain hours of the day,
with access to such roadway(s) limited to one block thereof to other vehicles
for the purpose of delivery of goods or services or the picking up or dropping
off of passengers.
      Truck. For the purposes of parking, standing and stopping rules, a
"truck" is a commercial vehicle, as defined in Paragraph (i) of the definition
of commercial vehicle, above, except that, for the purposes of parking,
standing and stopping rules in the area bounded by 35th Street on the south,
41st Street on the north, Avenue of the Americas on the east, and 8th Avenue on
the west, all inclusive, in the Borough of Manhattan, between the hours of 7:00
a.m. to 7:00 p.m., a vehicle is not be deemed a truck unless it complies with
the provisions of 34 RCNY §
4-13(a)(1).
      Vehicle. A "vehicle" means every device in, upon, or by which any person
or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices
moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
      Waterfront property. The term "waterfront property" means all waterfront
property, City or privately owned, between salt water and the next adverse
owner. An adverse owner is the first private owner of property not designated
as waterfront property.
      Wharf property. The term "wharf property" means all wharves, piers, decks
and bulkheads and structures thereon and slips and basins, the land beneath any
of the foregoing, and all rights, privileges and easements appurtenant thereto
and land under water in the port of the City of New York, and such upland or
made land adjacent thereto owned by the City of New York as is vested in or may
be assigned to the Department of Small Business Services of the City of New
York.
(Amended City Record 6/2/2016, eff. 6/2/2016; amended City Record 1/20/2017,
eff. 2/19/2017; amended City Record 3/21/2017, eff. 4/20/2017; amended City
Record 6/28/2018, eff. 7/28/2018; amended City Record 7/2/2018, eff. 8/1/2018;
amended City Record 7/17/2018, eff. 8/16/2018; amended City Record 7/26/2018,
eff. 8/25/2018; amended City Record 1/4/2019, eff. 2/15/2019; amended City
Record 4/30/2019, eff. 5/30/2019; amended City Record 5/17/2019, eff. 6/16/
2019; amended City Record 1/10/2020, eff. 2/9/2020; amended City Record 12/9/
2021, eff. 12/9/2021; amended City Record 7/18/2022, eff. 8/17/2022; amended
City Record 2/28/2024, eff. 3/29/2024; amended City Record 3/27/2024, eff. 4/
26/2024; amended City Record 9/24/2025, eff. 10/24/2025; amended City Record
10/3/2025, eff. 11/2/2025)
§ 4-02 Compliance With and Effect of Traffic Rules.
   (a)   Applicability of rules. The provisions of these rules apply to all
vehicles, operators of vehicles, bicycles, operators of bicycles and
pedestrians upon highways, parkways, shopping center parking lots and municipal
areas including public housing, public hospital parking lots, and municipal
lots and garages. These rules also apply on wharf property and marginal
streets, in off-street parking facilities operated by the Department of
Transportation, on vacant lots, and upon private roads open to public motor
vehicle traffic, which for the purpose of application of these rules shall be
considered streets, highways or parkways, except where a different place is
specifically referred to.
   (b)   Suspension of rules. The Commissioner may, at his/her discretion,
suspend any regulation contained herein in situations involving public safety
and convenience.
   (c)   Dangerous driving. No person shall operate a vehicle in a manner that
will endanger any person or property.
   (d)   All persons are required to comply with traffic rules.
      (1)   Exceptions. It is a traffic infraction for any person, including
government employees, to do any act forbidden by or fail to perform any act
required by these rules, except as otherwise provided herein.
         (i)   Authorized emergency vehicles. The operator of an authorized
emergency vehicle when involved in an emergency operation as defined in § 114-
b of the Vehicle and Traffic Law may exercise the privileges set forth in §
1104 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law, subject to the conditions set forth
therein.
         (ii)   Traffic/parking control vehicles. Unless specifically made
applicable, the provisions of these rules shall not apply to operators of
designated traffic or parking control vehicles, including, but not limited to,
tow trucks, while actually engaged in activities necessary to perform their
duties.
         (iii)   Refuse collection vehicles. The operator of a refuse
collection vehicle working on behalf of the City of New York may:
            (A)   temporarily stand on the roadway side of a vehicle parked at
the curb, provided that no curb space is available within fifteen feet, while
loading refuse, subject to § 1102 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law; and
            (B)   drive on or across a designated bicycle lane while loading
refuse, subject to § 1102 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law.
         (iv)   Highway workers and vehicles. Unless specifically made
applicable, the provisions of these rules shall not apply to persons, teams,
motor vehicles, and other equipment working on behalf of the City of New York,
the State of New York or the federal government while actually engaged in work
while on a highway. Section 1103 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law is applicable
to any person or team or any operator of a motor vehicle or other equipment
while actually engaged in work on a highway. As section 1103 of the Vehicle and
Traffic Law provides, such persons are not relieved from the duty to proceed at
all times during all phases of such work with due regard for the safety of all
persons nor shall the foregoing provisions of this subparagraph protect such
persons or teams or such operators of motor vehicles or other equipment from
the consequences of their reckless disregard for the safety of others.
         (v)   Highway inspection and quality assurance vehicles, compliance
inspection unit and street assessment unit vehicles. Unless specifically made
applicable, the provisions of these rules which relate to parking and standing
shall not apply to operators of New York City Department of Transportation
highway inspection vehicles, compliance inspection vehicles, and street
assessment vehicles while actually engaged in activities necessary to perform
their duties.
         (vi)   Pedestrians. Pedestrians may cross any roadway, other than a
limited access highway, at any point, including points outside of a marked or
unmarked crosswalk, but must yield to other traffic that has the right of way,
provided that a failure to yield shall not be a violation of these rules.
      (2)   Public employees. The provisions of these rules shall apply to the
operator of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States
Government, New York State, New York City, or other states, cities, or any
borough, and it shall be unlawful for any such operator to violate any of the
provisions of these rules except as otherwise permitted by law.
   (e)   State law provisions superseded. Pursuant to authority provided by §
1642 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law, the following provisions of such law shall
not be effective in the City of New York: §§ 1112, 1142(b), 1150, 1151, 1152,
1153, 1156(b), 1157, 1171, 1201, 1202, and 1234.
(Amended City Record 5/27/2025, eff. 6/26/2025)
§ 4-03 Traffic Signals.
   (a)   Traffic control signals. Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic
control signals exhibiting different colored lights successively, the following
colors shall indicate and apply to operators of vehicles and to pedestrians,
except as superseded by pedestrian control signals, as follows:
      (1)   Green alone:
         (i)   Vehicular traffic facing such signals may proceed straight
through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits any such
movement. But vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left,
shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians.
         (ii)   Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway,
other than a limited access highway, at any point, including points outside of
a marked or unmarked crosswalk, but must yield to other traffic that has the
right of way, provided that a failure to yield shall not be a violation of
these rules.
      (2)   Steady yellow alone, dark period, or red-green combined when shown
following the green signal:
         (i)   Vehicular traffic facing such signal is thereby warned that the
red signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter and such vehicular traffic
shall not enter the intersection when the red signal is exhibited.
         (ii)   Pedestrians facing such signal are advised that there may be
insufficient time to cross the roadway. Pedestrians already in the roadway are
cautioned to proceed to the nearest safety island or sidewalk in the direction
of such signal. Other traffic must yield the right of way to pedestrians
proceeding across the roadway within the crosswalk towards such signal for as
long as such signal remains flashing.
      (3)   Steady red alone:
         (i)   Vehicular traffic facing such signal must stop before entering
the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then before
entering the intersection and must remain standing until an indication to
proceed is shown.
         (ii)   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subdivision
(a), or any provisions of state law, an operator approaching an intersection
where a sign authorizes right or left turns on red signal may make such turn
after coming to a complete stop, but must yield the right-of-way to all
vehicles lawfully within the intersection and pedestrians.
         (iii)   Pedestrians facing such signal do not have the right of way.
Pedestrians entering the roadway in the direction of such signal will be at
risk of injury due to other traffic that has the right of way. Pedestrians may
proceed across the roadway in the direction of a steady upraised hand but must
yield to other traffic that has the right of way, provided that a failure to
yield shall not be a violation of these rules.
         (iv)   Notwithstanding any other provision of these rules, a
pedestrian must exercise all duty of care when entering a roadway at a
crosswalk facing a pedestrian signal with a steady upraised hand or at a point
other than a marked or unmarked crosswalk. Nothing in these rules shall be
construed to relieve any person from the duty of due care for their safety or
the safety of others in a roadway.
      (4)   Arrows. When colored lights shaped as arrows are used as traffic
control signals, arrows pointing to the right shall apply to operators
intending to enter the intersection to turn to the right, arrows pointing
vertically shall apply to operators intending to enter the intersection to
proceed straight through, and arrows pointing to the left shall apply to
operators intending to enter the intersection to turn to the left. The colors
of arrows shall have the same meanings as colors of traffic signal lights, but
shall apply only to operators intending to enter the intersection to proceed in
the direction controlled by the arrow.
      (5)   Signs. Operators shall comply with signs that refer to traffic
control signals at places other than the intersections at which such signals
are located, for example, "Stop here on red."
      (6)   Signals not at intersections. In the event an official traffic
control signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection,
all the provisions of this subdivision (a) shall be applicable, except those
provisions which by their nature can have no application. Any stop required
shall be made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the stop
shall be made, but in the absence of any such sign or marking the stop shall be
made at the signal.
      (7)   Nonfunctioning signals. Vehicular traffic facing a signal that is
not working shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, if none, then before entering the intersection and shall
proceed with caution through the intersection.
   (b)   Blinking traffic control signals. 
      (1)   Red. Vehicular traffic facing such signals must come to a complete
stop and shall proceed only after yielding to any pedestrians and vehicles
approaching from the cross street.
      (2)   Yellow. Vehicular traffic facing such signals must proceed with
caution through the intersection and must yield to any pedestrians.
   (c)   Pedestrian control signals. Whenever pedestrian control signals are in
operation, showing symbols of a walking person, upraised hand, or upraised hand
with a pedestrian countdown display, or any other internationally recognized
representation concerning the movement of pedestrians, such signals shall
indicate as follows:
      (1)   Steady walking person. Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed
across the roadway in the direction of such signal, and other traffic must
yield the right-of-way to such pedestrians.
      (2)   Flashing upraised hand or flashing upraised hand with pedestrian
countdown display. Pedestrians facing such signal are advised that there may be
insufficient time to cross the roadway. Pedestrians already in the roadway are
cautioned to proceed to the nearest safety island or sidewalk in the direction
of such signal. Other traffic must yield the right-of-way to pedestrians
proceeding across the roadway towards such signal for as long as such signal
remains flashing.
      (3)   Steady upraised hand. Pedestrians crossing in the direction of such
signal do not have the right of way. Pedestrians entering the roadway in the
direction of such signal will be at risk of injury due to other traffic that
has the right of way. Pedestrians may proceed across the roadway in the
direction of a steady upraised hand but must yield to other traffic that has
the right of way, provided that a failure to yield shall not be a violation of
these rules.
(Amended City Record 1/20/2017, eff. 2/19/2017; amended City Record 5/27/2025,
eff. 6/26/2025)
§ 4-04 Pedestrians.
   (a)   Pedestrians subject to traffic rules, except as otherwise provided
herein. Pedestrians are advised to abide by traffic control signals and
pedestrian control signals as provided in 34 RCNY §
4-03(a) and (c) and to the lawful orders and directions of any law enforcement
officer, but at all other places pedestrians shall be accorded the privileges
and shall be subject to the restrictions stated in this section.
   (b)   Right-of-way in crosswalks. 
      (1)   Operators must stop for pedestrians in marked or unmarked
crosswalk. When traffic control signals or pedestrian control signals are not
in place or not in operation, any operator of a vehicle or operator of a
bicycle must stop for a pedestrian crossing a roadway within a marked or
unmarked crosswalk. Such operators of vehicles and operators of bicycles in any
lane of travel must stop and remain stopped for a pedestrian in such crosswalk
until such pedestrian crosses a roadway.
      (2)   Pedestrians are cautioned not to cross in front of oncoming
vehicles. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (1) of this subdivision
(b), pedestrians are cautioned not to suddenly leave a curb or other place of
safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is
impossible for the operator to yield.
      (3)   Vehicles stopped for pedestrians. Whenever any vehicle is stopped
to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the operator of any other vehicle
approaching from the rear in the same or adjacent lanes shall not overtake and
pass such stopped vehicle.
   (c)   Right-of-way outside of crosswalks. Pedestrians crossing at points
outside of a marked or unmarked crosswalk do not have the right of way.
Pedestrians may cross any roadway, other than a limited access highway, at any
point, including points outside of a marked or unmarked crosswalk, but must
yield to other traffic that has the right of way, provided that a failure to
yield shall not be a violation of these rules.
   (d)   Restrictions on crossings. 
      (1)   Pedestrians are cautioned against entering or crossing a roadway at
any point where signs, fences, barriers, or other devices are erected to
prohibit or restrict such crossing or entry.
      (2)   Pedestrians are cautioned against crossing any roadway at an
intersection except within a crosswalk.
      (3)   Pedestrians are cautioned against crossing a roadway except at a
crosswalk on any block in which traffic control signals are in operation at
both intersections bordering the block.
   (e)   Operators to exercise due care. Notwithstanding other provisions of
these rules, the operator of a vehicle must exercise due care to avoid
colliding with any pedestrian.
   (f)   Pedestrians to exercise due care. Notwithstanding other provisions of
these rules, pedestrians must yield to other traffic that has the right-of-way,
provided that a failure to yield shall not be a violation of these rules.
   (g)   Hitch-hiking and soliciting prohibited. 
      (1)   Talking or selling. No person shall stand in the roadway to talk
with or sell or offer to sell anything to an occupant of any vehicle.
      (2)   Soliciting rides. No person shall solicit a ride from the occupant
of a vehicle by word or gesture.
      (3)   Washing, polishing, cleaning and assisting parking. No person shall
approach an operator or other occupant of a passenger vehicle on any street,
while the vehicle has stopped temporarily, is about so to stop, is parked or is
about to be parked, for the purpose of washing, polishing, or cleaning such
vehicle or any part of it, or offering to do so. Nor shall any person approach
an operator or other occupant of a passenger vehicle for the purpose of
directing it to a place for parking on any street or assisting in such parking,
or offering any other service in relation to such vehicle, or soliciting a
gratuity, except services rendered in connection with emergency repairs at the
request of the operator of the vehicle.
      (4)   Opening or closing doors. No person, other than an occupant or
prospective occupant of a passenger vehicle on a street, shall open, hold open,
or close, or offer to open, hold open, or close any door of the vehicle. This
provision shall not apply to such acts when intended purely as a social amenity
without expectation or acceptance of a gratuity, nor to doormen or other
persons employed by owners, occupants, or managers of abutting premises to
render such service, nor when such service is incidental to other legitimate
service being rendered to such an occupant or prospective occupant of a
passenger vehicle.
      (5)   Hailing taxis. Unless asked to do so without advance solicitation
(direct or implied), no person shall hail or procure for another, not in his or
her social company, a taxi or other passenger vehicle.
(Amended City Record 1/20/2017, eff. 2/19/2017; amended City Record 12/20/2021,
eff. 1/19/2022; amended City Record 5/27/2025, eff. 6/26/2025)
§ 4-05 Turns.
   (a)   Compliance with turning restrictions. Whenever a traffic control
device regulates any turn or other movement at an intersection or other
location, no operator of any vehicle shall disregard the direction of such
device, unless directed to do so by a law enforcement officer.
   (b)   Limitations on turning around.
      (1)   The operator of any vehicle shall not make a U-turn upon any street
in a business district, as defined in § 105 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law.
      (2)   The operator of a vehicle shall not make a U-turn upon any street
outside a business district unless such turn is made without interfering with
pedestrians or the right-of-way of any vehicle.
(Amended City Record 5/27/2025, eff. 6/26/2025)
§ 4-06 Speed Restrictions.
   (a)   Maximum speed limits and basic rule.
      (1)   No person shall drive a vehicle at a speed greater than twenty-five
miles per hour except where official signs indicate a different maximum speed
limit.
      (2)   Where official signs are posted indicating a maximum speed limit,
no person shall drive a vehicle at a speed greater than such maximum speed
limit.
      (3)   [Reserved.]
   (b)   Maximum speed limits for bicycles with electric assist, electric
scooters, and pedal-assist commercial bicycles and basic rule. 
      (1)   No person shall operate a bicycle with electric assist, an electric
scooter, or a pedal-assist commercial bicycle at a speed greater than fifteen
miles per hour except where official signs indicate a different maximum speed
limit for a bicycle with electric assist, an electric scooter, or a pedal-
assist commercial bicycle.
      (2)   Where official signs are posted indicating a maximum speed limit
for a bicycle with electric assist, an electric scooter, or a pedal-assist
commercial bicycle, no person shall operate such a bicycle with electric
assist, electric scooter, or pedal-assist commercial bicycle at a speed greater
than such maximum speed limit.
(Amended City Record 9/24/2025, eff. 10/24/2025)
§ 4-07 Other Restrictions on Movement.
   (a)   Yield signs. The operator of a vehicle approaching a YIELD or YIELD-
RIGHT-OF-WAY sign shall slow to a reasonable speed for existing conditions of
traffic and visibility, stopping if necessary, and shall yield the right-of-way
to all traffic on the intersecting street which is so close as to constitute an
immediate hazard. Proceeding past such sign with resultant collision or other
impediment or interference with traffic on the intersecting street shall be
deemed prima facie evidence of a violation of this rule.
   (b)   Obstruction of traffic. 
      (1)   Traffic lane. No person shall operate a vehicle in a manner which
obstructs traffic in lanes specifically designated for the movement of traffic.
Such lanes include, but are not limited to, no standing zones and no stopping
zones.
      (2)   Spillback. No operator shall enter an intersection and its
crosswalks unless there is sufficient unobstructed space beyond the
intersection and its crosswalks in the lane in which he/she is traveling to
accommodate the vehicle, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication
to proceed.
   (c)   Restrictions on crossing sidewalks. 
      (1)   Driveways. No person shall drive within any sidewalk area except at
a permanent or temporary driveway.
      (2)   Avoiding intersections. No person shall drive across a sidewalk or
upon a driveway in order to avoid an intersection.
      (3)   Bicycles and limited use vehicles.
         (i)   No person shall ride or operate a bicycle upon any sidewalk area
unless permitted by sign. This prohibition shall not apply to the operation of
bicycles with wheels of less than 26 inches in diameter upon the sidewalk by
children of 12 years or less in age.
         (ii)   No person shall ride, park or operate a limited use vehicle
within any sidewalk area except where permitted by sign. This prohibition shall
not apply to the pushing of a limited use vehicle within a sidewalk area or to
the pushing of such a vehicle to an authorized parking area.
   (d)   Restrictions on backing. No person shall back a vehicle into an
intersection or over a crosswalk and shall not in any event or at any place
back a vehicle unless such movement can be made in safety.
   (e)   Play streets. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any
street or part thereof as a play street or play area, no person shall drive a
vehicle upon any such street or area between 8 a.m. and one-half hour after
sunset, unless other hours are prescribed by signs, except operators of
vehicles having business or whose residences are within such restricted area.
Any such operator shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon any such
street.
   (f)   Restrictions on learners.
      (1)   An operator with a learner's permit shall not operate a motor
vehicle in any park, on any play street, or along any block in which there is
an entrance to a public playground or park.
      (2)   The licensed operator accompanying an operator with a learner's
permit shall not permit such learner to violate paragraph (f)(1), above.
   (g)   Following emergency vehicles prohibited. The operator of any vehicle
other than one on official public business shall not follow any emergency
vehicle traveling in response to an emergency call closer than 200 feet, nor
drive into nor park such vehicle within the block where such emergency work is
in progress.
   (h)   Driving on divided highways.
      (1)   Whenever any highway is divided into two or more roadways by an
intervening space, physical barrier, or clearly indicated dividing section so
constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle shall be driven only
upon the right-hand roadway unless directed or permitted to use another roadway
by official traffic control devices or law enforcement officers. No vehicle
shall be driven over, across or within any such dividing space, barrier or
section, except through an opening in such physical barrier or dividing section
or space or at a crossover or intersection, as established, unless specifically
authorized by public authority.
      (2)   No vehicle shall make a U-turn on a divided highway, except where
permitted by sign or at the direction of a law enforcement officer.
   (i)   Towing of vehicles on parkways, expressways, drives, highways,
interstate routes, thruways, and bridges. 
      (1) Restrictions. No person shall cause or permit a disabled vehicle to
be towed except by a tow truck under permit issued by the commissioner of the
Police Department, or by a Police Department tow truck and then only by such
tow truck on the main roadway, including the berm or shoulder adjacent to said
roadways or entrances and exits of the following parkways, expressways,
thruways, and bridges:
         Belt Parkway System
         Bronx River Parkway
         Cross Island Parkway
         Grand Central Parkway
         Henry Hudson Parkway
         Hutchinson River Parkway
         Jackie Robinson Parkway
         Laurelton Parkway
         Mosholu Parkway Extension
         Richmond Parkway
         Shore Parkway
         Southern Parkway
         Brooklyn-Queens Expressway
         Bruckner Expressway
         Clearview Expressway
         Cross Bronx Expressway and Extension
         Franklin Delano Roosevelt Drive
         Gowanus Expressway
         Harlem River Drive
         Long Island Expressway
         Major Deegan Expressway
         Martin Luther King Expressway
         Miller Highway
         Nassau Expressway
         Northern Boulevard from Astoria Boulevard and Ditmars Boulevard
         Entrance to Linden Place Exit
         Governor Thomas E. Dewey Thruway (New England Section)
         Prospect Expressway
         Route 25A (Elevated Section) from 112th Place to 126th Street
         Sheridan Expressway
         Staten Island Expressway
         Throgs Neck Expressway
         Van Wyck Expressway and Extension
         West Shore Expressway
         Whitestone Expressway
         Brooklyn Bridge
         Manhattan Bridge
         Queensboro Bridge
         Williamsburg Bridge
         Alexander Hamilton Bridge
         Eastern Boulevard (Bruckner Boulevard) Bridge
         Hutchinson River Parkway Extension Bridge
         Kosciuszko Bridge
         Midtown Highway Bridge
         Mill Basin Bridge
         Third Avenue Bridge between Manhattan and Bronx
         Unionport Bridge
         Whitestone Expressway Bridge
         Willis Avenue Bridge
      (2)   Police commissioner may waive requirements. The commissioner of the
Police Department in his/her discretion may waive and reimpose the requirement
for a permit in the case of any specific bridge, highway, parkway, expressway,
drive, interstate route and thruway.
      (3)   Road service and towing rates. For the purpose of this paragraph,
road service shall mean service performed that will enable a vehicle to
continue under it's own power.
         (i)   Road service, all vehicles 
            (A)   Gasoline delivery, not including cost of gas.....$25.00
            (B)   Removing each flat tire and replacing each with spare
tire.....$25.00
            (C)   Battery charge.....$25.00
         (ii)   Passenger cars, hoist and tow, per mile and storage fees. Hoist
and tow fees, per mile fees, and storage fees for all passenger cars towed
pursuant to arterial tow service permits in the City of New York, shall be
those provided for such services in subdivisions a and b of 6 RCNY §
2-368.
         (iii)   Vehicles other than passenger cars 
            (A)   Any vehicle with a maximum gross vehicle weight over 4,500
lbs. and under 10,000 lbs.
               (a)   Preparation, hoist and tow, including first mile or
fraction thereof.....$125.00
               (b)   Each additional mile.....$5.00
               (c)   Storage per 24-hour period.....$35.00
            (B)   Any two axle truck or bus with a maximum gross vehicle weight
from 10,000 to 18,000 lbs.
               (a)   Preparation, hoist and tow, including first mile or
fraction thereof.....$175.00
               (b)   Each additional mile.....$10.00
               (c)   Use of under-lift.....$50.00
               (d)   Storage per 24-hour period.....$50.00
            (C)   Any two axle truck or bus with a maximum gross vehicle weight
from 18,000 to 26,000 lbs.
               (a)   Preparation, hoist and tow, including first mile or
fraction thereof.....$250.00
               (b)   Each additional mile.....$10.00
               (c)   Use of under-lift.....$50.00
               (d)   Storage per 24-hour period.....$50.00
            (D)   Any truck, bus or tractor trailer with a maximum gross
vehicle weight above 26,000 lbs.
               (a)   Preparation, hoist and tow, including first mile or
fraction thereof.....$300.00
               (b)   Each additional mile.....$10.00
               (c)   Use of under-lift.....$100.00
               (d)   Storage for tractor, per 24-hour period.....$50.00
               (e)   Storage for bus or trailer, per 24-hour period.....$75.00
            (E)   Labor per 1/4 hour per truck or per person or tow
operator.....$50.00
            Applies only to vehicles over 4,500 lbs. in the following
situations: overturned, wedged on guardrails, off-road recovery (embankment)
and may apply to jackknifed, wedged under overpass/bridge, or broken/defective
axle in which recovery (off-loading or positioning) must be performed prior to
actual tow.
            (F)   Special equipment such as fork lifts, cranes, loading
equipment, trailer, tractor, front end loaders and dump trucks will be
considered rented equipment. The cost for such equipment will be billed on a
daily basis with the approval of the Department.
            (G)   Tire service. If subcontracting to a tire company is required
for on-road service, the tow vehicle must remain on the scene. Billing will be
calculated for actual work time at $100.00 per hour. Subcontracting for off-
roadway service, no tow truck required to remain on scene: a one-time charge of
$55.00.
   (j)   Yearly and single issue permits for use of roadways.
      (1)   General information. Vehicles normally prohibited from roadways may
be issued yearly or single-use permits by the Department of Transportation upon
application in writing. Such permits must be displayed so that they are visible
through the windshield. The Commissioner or his/her designee may charge a fee
for such permits equal to the cost of administering the permit program.
      (2)   Eligible groups and vehicles. Yearly permits are available to the
following, as well as to any other groups or vehicles specified by the
Commissioner or his/her designee:
         (i)   companies that transport passengers to and from airports;
         (ii)   commuter and shuttle services;
         (iii)   ambulettes;
         (iv)   school bus companies;
         (v)   buses;
         (vi)   medical, blood and human service programs;
         (vii)   not-for-profit groups going to and from special events;
         (viii)   vehicles that service businesses accessible only by use of
parkways; and
         (ix)   service vehicles that repair and maintain highways and highway
facilities.
      (3)   Authorized roadways. Yearly and single issue permits will be
granted only for the following parkways or any other area designated by the
Department of Transportation:
         (i)   Belt Parkway
         (ii)   Bronx River Parkway
         (iii)   Cross Island Parkway
         (iv)   Eastern Parkway
         (v)   Grand Central Parkway: Between the TriBoro Bridge and the Van
Wyck Expressway
         (vi)   Harlem River Drive
         (vii)   Henry Hudson Parkway
         (viii)   Hutchinson River Parkway
         (ix)   Mosholu Parkway
         (x)   Pelham Parkway
         (xi)   Richmond Parkway
         (xii)   Willowbrook Parkway For reasons of safety, the use of these
roadways may be limited.
      (4)   Duration. Permits are issued for the minimum hours and days
essential for the activity. Bus permits are valid only while transporting
passengers. Yearly permits are issued on an annual basis on dates determined by
the Department of Transportation. These permits are renewable by reapplication
in writing to the Department of Transportation. The Commissioner or his/her
designee may, at his/her discretion, issue, extend or revoke any permit.
   (k)   Express lanes. 
      (1)   Restrictions. Wherever signs are erected on highways or bridges
giving notice of express lanes, except as otherwise posted, no person shall
operate a vehicle other than a vehicle as specified in paragraph (2) of this
subdivision, an emergency vehicle as specified in paragraph (4) of this
subdivision, or a vehicle classified as an HOV, with or without EZPASS as
specified on such sign, within a designated express lane on a highway or bridge
during the hours specified on such signs.
      (2)   Buses and Access-A-Ride vehicles. Vehicles registered as buses in
New York State, vehicles registered out-of-state that are equivalent to New
York State registered buses, Access-A-Ride vehicles and motorcycles shall be
eligible to use express lanes on highways or bridges pursuant to this
subdivision.
      (3)   Taxis and for-hire vehicles. Medallion taxis and for-hire vehicles
duly licensed by the New York City Taxi and Limousine Commission carrying at
least one passenger shall be allowed to use express lanes on highways or
bridges. Medallion taxis and for-hire vehicles without passengers shall not be
allowed to use express lanes on highways or bridges.
      (4)   Emergency vehicles. Emergency vehicles responding to emergencies
shall be allowed to use express lanes on highways or bridges. Emergency
vehicles not responding to emergencies shall not be allowed to use express
lanes on highways or bridges.
   (l)   Use of the Grand Central Parkway by certain vehicles. Notwithstanding
any other provision of these rules to the contrary, single-unit vehicles with
no more than three axles and ten tires may operate in both directions on the
roadway of the Grand Central Parkway, between the Triborough Bridge and the
western leg of the Brooklyn-Queens Expressway. Buses will continue to be
prohibited from operating on the Grand Central Parkway without consent.
   (m)   Use of the Korean War Veterans Parkway by certain vehicles.
Notwithstanding any other provision of these rules to the contrary, not more
than forty-ton motor vehicles commonly classified as construction trucks owned
and/or operated by the Department of Environmental Protection of the City of
New York, its agents or contractors shall be permitted the use of the Korean
War Veterans Parkway during remediation of the Brookfield landfill in Staten
Island for the purpose of the remediation of such landfill, provided that such
trucks comply with all other provisions of applicable state and local law,
including but not limited to 34 RCNY §
4-15.
   (n)   Mopeds restricted. No moped as defined in 34 RCNY §
4-19(a) is permitted to operate on the Brooklyn Bridge, Manhattan Bridge,
Williamsburg Bridge, and Ed Koch Queensboro Bridge, or on any limited access
highway, or on any bicycle lane or path.
(Amended City Record 4/30/2019, eff. 5/30/2019; amended City Record 1/10/2020,
eff. 2/9/2020; amended City Record 12/14/2021, eff. 12/14/2021)
§ 4-08 Parking, Stopping, Standing.
   (a)   General provisions. 
      (1)   Compliance with rules. No person shall stop, stand or park a
vehicle, whether attended or unattended, other than in accordance with
authorized signs, pavement markings, or other traffic control devices, unless
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or
direction of any law enforcement officer or other person authorized to enforce
these rules.
         (i)   Sign placement. For purposes of this 34 RCNY §
4-08, one authorized regulatory sign anywhere on a block, which is the area of
sidewalk between one intersection and the next, shall be sufficient notice of
the restriction(s) in effect on that block.
         (ii)   Pedicabs. No person shall park, stand, or stop a pedicab where
a person is prohibited from parking, standing or stopping a vehicle in
accordance with these rules.
      (2)   Stopping prohibited. When stopping is prohibited by signs or rules,
no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, whether attended or unattended.
      (3)   Standing prohibited. When standing is prohibited by signs or rules,
no person shall stop a vehicle, attended or unattended, except temporarily for
the purpose of and while actually engaged in expeditiously receiving or
discharging passengers.
         (i)   Dedicated use signs. Standing is prohibited when a dedicated use
is specified by a sign, including but not limited to the following curb
regulations: Commercial Vehicles Only, Truck Loading Only, Taxi Stand, Taxi
Relief Stand, Authorized Vehicles Only, NYP License Plates Only, Doctor License
Plates Only, For-Hire Vehicles Only, Ambulance Only, Ambulette Only, Medical
Facility Only, Bus Layover Only, NYS Road Test Only, Flea Market Loading Only,
Farmers Market Only, Waiting Line, Carshare Parking Only, Electric Vehicle
Charging Only, Loading Only, Commercial Bicycle Loading Only, Parking
Permitted, or Microhub Zone.
      (4)   Parking prohibited. When parking is prohibited by signs or rules,
no person shall stop a vehicle, attended or unattended, except temporarily for
the purpose of and while expeditiously receiving or discharging passengers or
loading of unloading property to or from the curb.
      (5)   Vehicles prohibited on berms and shoulders. Stopping, parking or
operating a motor vehicle is prohibited on the berm or shoulder adjacent to a
parkway or a highway as specified in 34 RCNY §
4-07(i), except for emergency purposes.
      (6)   Paper or other temporary signs. Any paper or other temporary signs
posted by authorized agencies shall supersede all existing posted rules for the
days and times specified.
      (7)   Holiday suspensions of parking rules.
         (i)   Major legal holidays. Except as provided in subparagraph (ii),
of this paragraph, stopping, standing, or parking rules that are indicated on
official signs shall be suspended on the days on which the following major
legal holidays are officially observed by the City of New York: New Year's Day,
Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day.
In addition, if New Year's Day, Independence Day or Christmas Day is officially
observed on a day other than January 1, July 4 or December 25, respectively,
then major legal holiday rules shall be in effect both on the official day of
observance and on the traditional day of observance.
         (ii)   Exception. Parking, standing and stopping rules that are
indicated on official signs shall remain in effect on the dates of both
official and traditional observance of the above-listed major legal holidays
only in areas where signs indicate that parking, standing and stopping rules
are in effect seven days a week, provided, however, that the activation of
meters that are required by posted sign to be activated seven days a week shall
be suspended on major legal holidays pursuant to subparagraph (i).
         (iii)   Street cleaning rules suspended. 
            (A)   Street cleaning parking rules are suspended on the days
listed in subparagraph (i) of this paragraph, and on the following holidays:
Yom Kippur, Rosh Hashanah, Ash Wednesday, Holy Thursday, Good Friday, Ascension
Thursday, Feast of the Assumption, Feast of All Saints, Feast of the Immaculate
Conception, first two days of Succoth, Shemini Atzereth, Simchas Torah,
Shavuot, Purim, Orthodox Holy Thursday, Orthodox Good Friday, first two and
last two days of Passover, Idul-Fitr, Idul-Adha, Asian Lunar New Year, on all
state and national holidays, on the following additional legal holidays: Martin
Luther King, Jr.'s Birthday, Lincoln's Birthday, President's Day, Columbus Day
– observed, Election Day, and Veteran's Day, and on such other days as
announced by the Commissioner or his/her designee.
            (B)   For the purposes of this subparagraph (iii), street cleaning
parking rules shall mean those rules (a) on posted signs consisting of the
letter "P" with a broom through it or (b) except as otherwise provided in item
(D) of this subparagraph, on posted signs containing "No Parking" rules
restricting parking on one day per week or on alternate days.
            (C)   "No Parking" street cleaning rules, located in parking meter
zones, are suspended on the days on which street cleaning rules are suspended
and on such other days as announced by the Commissioner or his/her designee.
Suspension of street cleaning rules does not affect the requirement of
activating the meter during the hours that such meter is in effect.
            (D)   Posted signs restricting parking for a period of six or more
consecutive hours on one day per week or on alternate days are not street
cleaning parking rules. However, such restrictions are suspended on the days
that street cleaning rules are suspended.
      (8)   Disabled vehicles. A vehicle that becomes disabled must be pushed
to the side of the road so that it obstructs traffic as little as possible, and
must be removed expeditiously.
      (9)   Immobilization and towing of illegally parked vehicles. 
         (i)   Time and manner of immobilization. Any illegally parked vehicle
found parked at any time upon any public highway in the City may, by or under
the direction of any person authorized by the Commissioner, be immobilized in
such manner as to prevent its operation, and thereafter may be removed to a tow
pound as provided in these rules; provided, however, that no such vehicle shall
be immobilized by any means other than by the use of a device or other
mechanism which will cause no damage to such vehicle unless such vehicle is
moved while such device or mechanism is in place.
         (ii)   Notice. Notice of immobilization pursuant to this paragraph
shall be placed in a conspicuous place on the vehicle. Such notice shall
contain:
            (A)   a warning that any attempt to move the vehicle may result in
damage to the vehicle; and
            (B)   the time, place and manner in which the vehicle may be
redeemed.
         (iii)   Immobilization fee. The registrant of an immobilized vehicle
which has not yet been removed to a tow pound pursuant to these rules, or any
other person authorized by the registrant of such vehicle, may secure the
release of the vehicle upon satisfaction of all parking summonses in judgment,
if any, for which the registrant of the immobilized vehicle is liable and
payment of an immobilization fee of $185.00.
         (iv)   Applicable rules. Where a vehicle has been both immobilized and
towed, the owner shall be subject to both the immobilization requirements of
this paragraph, and all applicable provisions of these rules.
         (v)   Right to immediate hearing. The registrant, title holder or
operator of any vehicle that has been immobilized shall have the right to an
immediate hearing during regular business hours at the Parking Violations
Bureau in relation to the immobilization.
         (vi)   Removal fee. The fee for removal of illegally parked vehicles
to a tow pound shall be determined in accordance with the following fee
schedule. Said fee shall be payable before such vehicles are released.
            (A)   The removal fee for Regular Towing shall be $185.00 and shall
apply to any vehicle that has a gross vehicle weight less than 6,500 pounds,
that may be towed through the use of a single tow truck not weighing more than
eight tons.
            (B)   The removal fee for Heavy Duty Towing shall be $370.00 and
shall apply to any vehicle that has a gross vehicle weight of 6,500 pounds or
greater, and/or requires either more than one tow truck or a single tow truck
which weighs in excess of eight tons, in order to be towed.
         (vii)   Storage fee. In addition to the removal fee set forth in
subparagraph (vi) of this paragraph (9), there shall be a storage fee of $20.00
for each day such vehicle remains in the possession of the city, up to and
including the day such vehicle is released. Said fee shall be payable before
such vehicle is released.
         (viii)   Vehicles not removed considered abandoned. Any vehicle which
is not removed from city property within 10 days following the mailing of a
request to remove it shall be deemed to be an abandoned vehicle pursuant to
paragraph (d) of subdivision 1 of § 1224 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law and
shall be disposed of by the Commissioner pursuant to such law. Such request
shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to the
registered owner of the vehicle, at the address contained on the registration
of such vehicle.
         (ix)   Release of vehicle in process of being removed. When a vehicle
has been hooked to a tow truck in preparation for removal to a pound but the
owner or other person lawfully entitled to possession of such vehicle appears
and requests the release of such vehicle before the tow truck is in motion,
such vehicle shall be unhooked and released, provided, however, that the person
to whom such vehicle is released must execute a binding agreement consenting to
pay the vehicle release penalty as set forth in subparagraph (x) of this
paragraph (9) within thirty days from the date of such agreement and, in the
event of non-payment, to the imposition of additional penalties in accordance
with subparagraph (xi) of this paragraph (9); and provided further that such
person present a current valid driver's license and either registration for the
vehicle, title to the vehicle, insurance identification and keys for the
vehicle, a rental agreement and keys for the vehicle in case of a rental
vehicle, or company identification and keys for the vehicle in the case of a
commercial vehicle.
         (x)   Vehicle release penalty. The penalty for the release of an
illegally parked vehicle under the circumstances permitted by subparagraph (ix)
of this paragraph (9) shall be $100.00 for illegally parked vehicles which meet
the criteria contained in subparagraph (vi)(A) of this paragraph (9), and
$200.00 for illegally parked vehicles which meet the criteria listed in
subparagraph (vi)(B) of this paragraph (9). This fee is in addition to any
other monetary fine(s) and penalty(ies) permitted by law for the underlying
parking violation(s); provided, however, that in no event shall a vehicle
release penalty be imposed if the underlying parking violation or, in the case
of multiple parking violations, all underlying parking violations, is (are)
dismissed by the Parking Violations Bureau.
         (xi)   Non-payment of vehicle release penalty. The Parking Violations
Bureau may, in accordance with law, prescribe additional penalties for non-
payment of the vehicle release penalty set forth in subparagraph (x) of this
paragraph (9) and enter and enforce default judgements for such vehicle release
penalty and additional penalties.
      (10)   Restricted area. The Parking Violations Bureau shall be authorized
to establish a separate fine schedule for violations committed in the
restricted area, as defined herein. Such fine schedule may be higher than the
fine schedule for violations committed outside the restricted area. As used
herein, restricted area shall mean all of Manhattan, south from the north
building line on 96th Street but excluding all of Central Park.
      (11)   Emergency Food Delivery Program. Notwithstanding any other
provision of these rules, the operator and owner of a vehicle designated by the
City of New York and engaged in delivering free meals to a recipient of food
pursuant to the emergency food delivery program established in
Title 72 of the Rules of the City of New York* shall be exempt from the parking
and standing rules of this section while such operator is actually performing a
delivery in such program, not to exceed 20 minutes. It shall be an affirmative
defense to any summons issued for violation of such rules that the operator of
the vehicle to which such summons was issued was engaged in the activity
described in this paragraph, upon presentation by such operator of proof of
such activity issued by the City of New York, and that such vehicle, at the
time of the issuance of such summons, was parked or standing for 20 minutes or
less.
* Editor's note: Subsection e. of 72 RCNY §
1-01 provided: "The program provided for in this section will terminate at the
end of the COVID-19 public health emergency, as determined by Order of the
Mayor, or on such other date as determined by the Commissioner of Emergency
Management or such other person as may be designated to succeed such
Commissioner in managing the program provided for in this section". Executive
Order 126, declaring the public health emergency, ended on June 20, 2023.
   (b)   Violation of posted no stopping rules prohibited. When official signs,
markings or traffic-control devices have been posted prohibiting, restricting
or limiting the stopping of vehicles, no person shall stop, stand or park any
vehicle in violation of the restrictions posted on such signs, markings or
traffic-control devices.
   (c)   Violation of posted no standing rules prohibited. When official signs,
markings or traffic-control devices have been posted prohibiting, restricting
or limiting the standing of vehicles, no person shall stand or park any vehicle
in violation of the restrictions posted on such signs, markings or traffic-
control devices, except as otherwise provided herein:
      (1)   Taxi stand. No person shall stand or park a vehicle other than a
taxi in a taxi stand when any such stand has been officially designated and
appropriately posted except that the operator of a vehicle may only temporarily
stand therein for the purpose of expeditiously receiving and discharging
passengers provided such standing does not interfere with any taxi about to
enter or leave such zone.
      (2)   Taxi and/or for hire vehicle relief stand. No person shall stand or
park a vehicle other than a taxi or for hire vehicle in a relief stand when any
such stand has been officially designated and appropriately posted. The
operator of a taxi or for hire vehicle may park at such stand for no more than
one hour.
      (3)   Bus stop. No person shall stand or park a vehicle other than an
authorized bus in its assigned bus stop when any such stop has been officially
designated and appropriately posted except that the operator of a vehicle may
temporarily stand therein for the purpose of expeditiously receiving and
discharging passengers provided such standing does not interfere with any bus
about to enter or leave such stop. Notwithstanding the aforementioned, an
authorized bus shall not park in an assigned bus stop when such stop has been
officially designated and appropriately posted.
      (4)   Authorized vehicles. Except as provided in paragraph (8) of this
subdivision, no person shall stand or park a vehicle that is not specifically
authorized by a dedicated use sign defined in 34 RCNY §
4-01 and as provided in Subparagraph (i) of Paragraph (3) of Subdivision (a) of
this section.
      (5)   Hotel loading zone. No person shall stand or park a vehicle in such
zone except temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
receiving or discharging passengers and their personal baggage at hotels.
      (6)   Commuter van stop. No person shall stand or park a vehicle other
than a commuter van in a commuter van stop when such a stop has been officially
designated and appropriately posted, except that an operator of such other
vehicle may temporarily stand therein for the purpose of expeditiously
receiving or discharging passengers provided such standing does not interfere
with any commuter van about to enter or leave such stop.
      (7)   For-hire vehicle stand. No person shall stand or park a vehicle
other than a for-hire vehicle in a for-hire vehicle stand when such a stand has
been officially designated and appropriately posted, except that an operator of
such other vehicle may temporarily stand therein for the purpose of
expeditiously receiving or discharging passengers provided such standing does
not interfere with any for-hire vehicle about to enter or leave such stand.
      (8)   Diplomatic and consular vehicles. 
         (i)   Where a posted sign reads "No Standing Except Vehicles with
Consul-C or Diplomat-A&D License Plates D/S Decals Only" or "Authorized
Vehicles Only Consul-C Diplomat-A & D License Plates D/S Decals Only", no
person may stand or park a vehicle in such area except as follows:
            (A)   a person may stand or park a vehicle in such area if such
vehicle bears "A", "C" or "D" series license plates issued by the U.S.
Department of State, such vehicle displays a valid non-transferable service
vehicle decal issued by the City of New York that is affixed to the inside of
the operator's side of the windshield, and such person is authorized to park or
stand in a space in such area by the foreign mission or consulate that has been
allocated such space by the Department; or
            (B)   a person may stand a vehicle temporarily (no more than thirty
(30) minutes) in such area for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
delivering, loading or unloading for official business if such vehicle bears
"A", "C" or "D" series license plates issued by the U.S. Department of State,
such vehicle displays a valid non-transferable delivery vehicle decal issued by
the City of New York that is affixed to the inside of the operator's side of
the windshield, such person is authorized to stand in a space in such area by
the foreign mission or consulate that has been allocated such space by the
Department, and a delivery is being made to such foreign mission or consulate.
         (ii)   Where a posted sign reads "No Standing Except Vehicles with
Consul-C or Diplomat-A&D License Plates Delivery Decal Required 30 Minute
Limit" or "Authorized Vehicles Only Consul & Diplomat License Plates Delivery
Decal Required", no person may stand or park a vehicle in such area except a
person may stand a vehicle temporarily in such area for the purpose of and
while actually engaged in delivering, loading or unloading for official
business if such vehicle bears "A", "C" or "D" series license plates issued by
the U.S. Department of State and displays a valid non-transferable delivery
vehicle decal issued by the City of New York that is affixed to the inside of
the operator's side of the windshield.
      (9)   Parking Permitted. No person shall stand or park a vehicle other
than on those day(s) and hour(s) specified on the posted sign, except
temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or
discharging passengers.
      (10)   Loading only zone. During the time specified on the posted
authorized sign, no person shall stand or park a vehicle in such zone, except
for the purpose of expeditiously receiving or discharging passengers or
actively engaging in loading or unloading goods for the purpose of making
pickups or deliveries to or from the curb.
      (11)   Microhub zone. During the time specified on the posted authorized
sign, no person shall stand or park a vehicle or device in such zone, except
for microhub operators, as defined in paragraph 7 of subdivision (o) of this
section, that are permitted to use such zone for the purpose of actively
engaging in the transfer of goods, parcels, and/or packages from commercial
vehicles to sustainable modes of transportation that deliver such parcels and
packages to the final point of delivery or receiver.
   (d)   Violation of posted no parking rules prohibited. When official signs,
markings or traffic control devices have been posted prohibiting, restricting
or limiting the parking of vehicles, no person shall park any vehicle in
violation of the restrictions posted on such signs, markings or traffic control
devices, except as otherwise provided herein:
      (1)   Street cleaning. No person shall park a vehicle in violation of
officially posted street cleaning rules, as defined in subsection (a)(7)(ii) of
these rules, unless such rules have been suspended by the Commissioner or his/
her designee pursuant to subsection (a)(7) of these rules.
      (2)   [Reserved.]
      (3)   No parking except parking permits for people with disabilities
(off-street). 
         (i)   No person shall park a vehicle in any off-street parking space
designated for use by a parking permit for people with disabilities pursuant to
§ 1203-c of the Vehicle and Traffic Law, or designated by blue painted lines or
markings displaying the international symbol of access unless:
            (A)   Such person is, or is transporting, a disabled permittee and
displays a state special vehicle identification permit issued by the NYS
Commissioner of Motor Vehicles, or
            (B)   Such vehicle is registered in accordance with § 404-a of the
Vehicle and Traffic Law and is being used for the transportation of disabled
persons, or
            (C)   Such vehicle displays a special license plate or parking
permit issued by any governmental entity subject to the laws of the United
States, or a foreign country for the purpose of granting special parking
privileges to people with disabilities.
         (ii)   License plates or parking permits issued to people with
disabilities by New York State or by any other state, district, territory or
other governmental entity or foreign country shall be valid only in designated
off-street parking areas. They are not valid in on-street parking areas.
      (4)   Official markings. When markings upon the pavement of a roadway
designate a parking space, no person shall stand or park a vehicle in such
designated parking space so that any part of the vehicle occupies more than one
space or protrudes beyond the markings designating such a space, except that a
vehicle which is of a size too large to be parked within a single designated
parking space shall be parked with the front bumper at the front of the space
with the rear of the vehicle extending as little as possible into the adjoining
space to the rear, or vice-versa. Notwithstanding the above, no vehicle that is
too long and/or too wide to be parked within a single designated parking space
shall be parked in such a space which is designated for angle parking.
   (e)   General no stopping zones (stopping, standing and parking prohibited
in specified places). No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any of
the following places, unless otherwise indicated by posted signs, markings or
other traffic control devices, or at the direction of a law enforcement
officer, or as otherwise provided in this subdivision:
      (1)   Traffic lanes. In any lane intended for the free movement of
vehicles, except a lane immediately adjacent to the curb, unless such lane is
designated by signs as a traffic lane, and except as otherwise provided in
subdivision (f), paragraph (1) below. In no instance shall a vehicle extend
more than 8 feet from the nearest curb.
      (2)   Hydrants. Within fifteen feet of a fire hydrant, unless otherwise
indicated by signs, or parking meters, except that during the period from
sunrise to sunset if standing is not otherwise prohibited, the operator of a
passenger car may stand the vehicle alongside a fire hydrant provided that the
operator remains in the operator's seat ready for immediate operation of the
vehicle at all times and starts the motor of the car on hearing the approach of
fire apparatus, and provided further, that the operator shall immediately
remove the car from alongside the fire hydrant when instructed to do so by any
member of the police, fire, or other municipal department acting in his/her
official capacity.
      (3)   Sidewalks. On a sidewalk.
      (4)   Intersections. Within an intersection, except on the side of a
roadway opposite a street which intersects but does not cross such roadway and
except as provided in paragraph (5), below.
      (5)   Crosswalks. In a crosswalk.
      (6)   Street excavations. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or
obstruction when stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct any traffic
lane.
      (7)   Tunnels and elevated roadways. Within a highway tunnel or upon an
elevated or controlled access roadway when all lanes are normally available for
moving traffic.
      (8)   Divided highways. Parking, standing and stopping are prohibited
alongside the median dividing a highway into two or more separate roadways.
However, alongside the medians of certain segments of such divided highways,
the department may post signs restricting parking, standing and stopping
alongside the medians of such segments only on specified days and/or hours.
Wherever such signs are so posted on a segment of a divided highway, parking,
standing and stopping are permitted alongside the median of such segment on the
days and/or hours when parking, standing and stopping are not specifically
prohibited by such signs. On segments of such highway where such signs are not
posted, parking, standing and stopping alongside the median are prohibited at
all times. For the purposes of this paragraph, a segment of a divided highway
is the area of such highway between adjacent intersections.
      (9)   Bicycle lanes. Within a designated bicycle lane.
      (10)   Restricted use and limited use streets. On any street designated
as a restricted use street or a limited use street as defined in 34 RCNY §
4-12(r)(4), except as otherwise provided in 34 RCNY §
4-12(r)(1).
      (11)   Major roadways. On the improved or paved roadway of any of the
arteries set forth in 34 RCNY §
4-07(i), or on improved or paved roadways in a park or in parks, for the
purpose of removing or replacing a flat tire, unless permitted by posted signs.
For the purposes of this rule, a vehicle is considered to be on the improved or
paved roadway unless the vehicle is completely off such roadway.
      (12)   Obstructing traffic at intersection. When vehicular traffic is
stopped on the opposite side of an intersection, no person shall drive a
vehicle into such intersection, except when making a turn, unless there is
adequate space on the opposite side of the intersection to accommodate the
vehicle the person is driving, notwithstanding the indication of a traffic
control signal which would permit the person to proceed.
   (f)   General no standing zones (standing and parking prohibited in
specified places). No person shall stand or park a vehicle in any of the
following places, unless otherwise indicated by posted signs, markings or other
traffic control devices, or at the direction of a law enforcement officer:
      (1)   Double parking. On the roadway side of a vehicle stopped, standing,
or parked at the curb, except a person may stand a commercial vehicle alongside
a vehicle parked at the curb at such locations and during such hours that
stopping, standing, or parking is not prohibited, for no more than 20 minutes,
while actively engaged in loading or unloading goods, tools, materials, or
other items for the purpose of making pickups, deliveries or service calls,
provided that there is no unoccupied parking space or designated loading zone
on the same side of the street within the same block that can be used for such
standing, and provided further that such standing is in compliance with the
provisions of §1102 of the State Vehicle and Traffic Law. A person may stand a
commercial vehicle along the roadway side of a bicycle lane provided all other
conditions of this paragraph are met. No person shall double park a commercial
vehicle when it blocks the only lane of travel in the same direction. No person
shall stand, stop or park a vehicle on a street at any time in such a manner or
under such conditions as to leave fewer than 10 feet of roadway width available
for the free movement of vehicular traffic. No person may stand a commercial
vehicle in or along the roadway side of a bus lane, unless otherwise indicated
by posted signs, markings or other traffic control devices, or at the direction
of a law enforcement officer or other person authorized to enforce this rule.
      (2)   Driveways. In front of a public or private driveway, except that it
shall be permissible for the owner, lessor or lessee of the lot accessed by a
private driveway to park a passenger vehicle registered to him/her at that
address in front of such driveway, provided that such lot does not contain more
than two dwelling units and further provided that such parking does not violate
any other provision of the Vehicle and Traffic Law or local law or rule
concerning the parking, stopping or standing of motor vehicles. The prohibition
herein shall not apply to driveways that have been rendered unusable due to the
presence of a building or other fixed obstruction and, therefore, are not being
used as defined in 34 RCNY §
4-01(b).
      (3)   Parks. In any park between one-half hour after sunset and one-half
hour before sunrise, except at places designated or maintained for the parking
of vehicles.
      (4)   Bus lane. In any lane designated for the exclusive use of buses.
      (5)   Railroad crossings. Within fifty feet of the nearest rail of a
railroad crossing.
      (6)   Safety zones. In a safety zone, between a safety zone and the
adjacent curb or within thirty feet of points on the curb immediately opposite
the ends of a safety zone.
      (7)   Pedestrian ramps. Alongside or in a manner which obstructs a curb
area which has been cut down, lowered or otherwise constructed or altered to
provide access for persons with disabilities at a marked or unmarked crosswalk
as defined in subdivision (b) of 34 RCNY §
4-01. A person may stop, stand or park a vehicle alongside or in a manner which
obstructs a pedestrian ramp not located within such crosswalk, unless otherwise
prohibited.
   (g)   General no parking zones (parking prohibited in certain places). No
person shall park a vehicle in any of the following places, unless otherwise
indicated by posted signs, markings or other traffic control devices:
      (1)   Emergency sites. Within a block where emergency work is in
progress, except that the operator of any vehicle on official public business
related to the emergency may park such vehicle at such sites.
      (2)   Vacant lots. In a vacant lot, unless the operator of the vehicle
has the written permission of the lot's owner so to park and has otherwise
complied with §§ 10-112 and 10-113 of the Administrative Code.
      (3)   Marginal street and waterfronts. On a marginal street or
waterfront, as defined in 34 RCNY §
4-01(b).
   (h)   On-street and off-street metered zones.
      (1)   Purchasing of parking time. No person shall park a vehicle, whether
attended or not, in any parking space controlled by a parking meter:
         (i)   Without first purchasing the amount of parking time desired from
a parking meter, or from a valid electronic communication device as described
in this section. This provision shall not apply to the time necessary to park
the vehicle or activate the parking meter or any other authorized grace period.
         (ii)   Without displaying a payment receipt on the vehicle's dashboard
or in a visible and secure place on a motorcycle, where such requirement is
indicated by posted signs, unless such parking time was purchased through an
authorized electronic communication device or a Pay-by-plate parking meter as
described in this section.
         (iii)   In excess of the amount of time indicated on the payment
receipt, electronic communication device, or on posted signs.
      (2)   Authorized payment methods; counterfeits prohibited. 
         (i)   Authorized payment methods. Parking meters must be activated by
the insertion of coin(s) of United States currency, or by the insertion of an
electronic debit card, credit card, Department issued parking card or other
authorized method of payment as described in this section or by entry of
license plate information or other credential for proper registration of
payment. Parking at an on-street or off-street parking space controlled by a
parking meter may also be paid for by an authorized electronic communication
device as approved by the Department as described in paragraph (3) of this
subdivision.
         (ii)   No person shall deposit or attempt to deposit any slug, button,
or any other unauthorized device or substance as a substitute for coins of
United States currency in any parking meter.
         (iii)   No person shall purchase a parking meter receipt from anywhere
other than a parking meter.
      (3)   Electronic communication device payments. 
         (i)   Despite any provision herein, any person may park at an on-
street or off-street parking space controlled by a parking meter by making
payment via an electronic communication device as approved by the Department.
         (ii)   The Department may designate locations containing on-street or
off-street parking spaces controlled by a parking meter as locations where
payment by an electronic communication device shall be permitted.
            (A)   The Department shall designate each location by the posting
of a sign.
            (B)   A person wishing to purchase parking time via an authorized
electronic communication device at a designated location may do so via the
authorized mobile payment for parking application by entering the applicable
zone number for the side of the block where the vehicle will be parked if the
vehicle is parked in an on-street parking zone or the posted zone sign if a
vehicle is parked in an off-street parking field.
      (4)   Transferability of parking meter time. Parking time may only be
utilized on the blockface for which it was purchased. Transfer of parking time
between blockfaces is prohibited.
      (5)   Parking at broken or missing parking meters. If all parking meters
in a parking field or on a blockface are missing or broken, a person shall be
allowed to park in such parking field or on such blockface up to the maximum
amount of time otherwise lawfully permitted by such parking meters in such
parking field or blockface.
      (6)   Restrictions and limitations. The provisions of this subdivision
(h) shall not relieve any person of the duty to observe other and more
restrictive provisions prohibiting, restricting, or limiting the stopping,
standing, or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times.
      (7)   Displaying, selling or offering merchandise for sale prohibited. No
peddler or vendor shall park a vehicle at a metered parking space for purposes
of displaying, selling, storing or offering merchandise for sale from the
vehicle.
      (8)   Parking by disabled persons permitted. Rules pertaining to the use
of parking meter zones shall not apply to vehicles operated by disabled persons
duly displaying New York City special parking identification permits issued by
the Department of Transportation pursuant to 34 RCNY §
4-08(o), other than at those periods of time when no standing and no stopping
restrictions are in effect in the metered zones.
   (i)   Municipal off-street parking facilities. 
      (1)   Parking fees. No person shall park a vehicle without paying the
appropriate fee in accordance with authorized fee schedules posted on the
facility.
      (2)   Hours of operation. No person shall park a vehicle before the
opening hour or after the closing hour, as specified on authorized signs.
      (3)   Parking Meters. No person shall park a vehicle, whether attended or
not, in any parking space controlled by a parking meter:
         (i)   Without first purchasing the amount of parking time desired from
a parking meter or from a valid electronic communication device as described in
this section. This provision shall not apply to the time necessary to park the
vehicle or activate the parking meter or any other authorized grace period.
         (ii)   Without displaying a payment receipt on the vehicle's dashboard
or in a visible and secure place on a motorcycle, where such requirement is
indicated by posted signs, unless such parking time was purchased through an
authorized electronic communication device or Pay-by-plate parking meter as
described in this section.
         (iii)   In excess of the amount of time indicated on the payment
receipt, electronic communication device, or on posted signs.
         (iv)   Unless a permitted carshare vehicle is parked in a carshare
parking space.
      (4)   Parking in a dangerous manner. No person shall park a vehicle in a
manner that will endanger any person or property.
      (5)   Operator responsible for loss. The operator enters the facility at
his/her own risk and the City of New York shall not be responsible for any
injury or loss due to fire, theft, accident, or other causes.
      (6)   Angle parking. No vehicle that is too long and/or too wide to be
parked within a single designated parking space shall be parked in such a space
which is designated for angle parking.
   (j)   Standing or parking vehicles that violate registration and inspection
rules are covered or have the VIN obscured. 
      (1)   Vehicles must be properly registered. No person shall stand or park
a vehicle bearing a New York license plate or plates unless it is properly
registered in accordance with the laws and rules of New York.
      (2)   Valid plates must be properly displayed. No person shall stand or
park a vehicle required to bear a license plate unless such vehicle properly
displays the current plate or plates lawfully issued to it. For the purposes of
this paragraph (j)(2), New York plates shall not be deemed properly displayed
unless they are: (i) conspicuously displayed, one on the front and one on the
rear of the vehicle, each securely fastened so as to prevent the same from
swinging, (ii) placed, whenever reasonably possible, not higher than 48 inches
and not lower than 12 inches from the ground, and (iii) kept clean and in a
condition so as to be readable. New York dealer or transporter plates issued
pursuant to § 415 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law shall be deemed properly
displayed if, in addition to complying with all other applicable requirements
of this subdivision, the one plate issued is placed on the rear of the vehicle
as described above. New York motorcycle plates and plates from other states
shall be deemed properly displayed if, in addition to complying with all other
applicable requirements of this subdivision, at least one plate is fastened on
the rear of the vehicle.
      (3)   Vehicles must display valid registration sticker. No person shall
stand or park a vehicle bearing a New York plate or plates unless it properly
displays a current registration sticker.
      (4)   Improper stickers prohibited. No person shall stand or park a
vehicle bearing a New York plate or plates displaying an expired, mutilated,
void, imitation, counterfeit or inappropriate New York registration sticker.
      (5)   Registration plates, stickers, and tags must match. No person shall
stand or park a vehicle bearing registration plates, stickers, and tags that do
not match as to information contained thereon.
      (6)   Vehicles must display valid inspection sticker. No person shall
stand or park a vehicle bearing New York plates unless it is properly inspected
and properly displays a current inspection sticker or certificate, in
accordance with § 306(b) of the Vehicle and Traffic Law unless it bears New
York dealer or transporter plates pursuant to § 415 of the Vehicle and Traffic
Law.
      (7)   Improper inspection stickers prohibited. No person shall stand or
park a vehicle bearing New York plates displaying any mutilated, imitation or
counterfeit of an official certificate of inspection.
      (8)   Vehicle covers prohibited. No person shall stand or park a vehicle
having a cover on it that obscures the make, color, vehicle identification
number (VIN), and/or registration and inspection stickers, and/or restricts
entry to the vehicle, if such vehicle is standing or parked in violation of
posted rules.
      (9)   Obscuring VIN prohibited. No person shall stand or park a vehicle
that has the vehicle identification number obscured in any manner.
      (10)   Obscuring, concealing, or distorting plates prohibited. No person
shall stand or park a vehicle having a license plate that is:
         (i)   Covered by glass or any plastic material;
         (ii)   Covered or coated with any material or substance that conceals
or obscures such plate or that distorts a recorded or photographic image of
such plate;
         (iii)   Covered with a material appearing to be a number plate for
display as proof of lawful registration, but which has not been lawfully issued
by the commissioner of the department of motor vehicles, such commissioner’s
agent, or the equivalent official or agent from another state, territory,
district, province, nation or other jurisdiction; or
         (iv)   Obstructed by any part of the vehicle or by anything carried
thereon, except for a receiver-transmitter issued by a publicly owned tolling
facility in connection with electronic toll collection when such receiver-
transmitter is affixed to the exterior of a vehicle in accordance with mounting
instructions provided by the tolling facility.
   (k)   Special rules for commercial vehicles. 
      (1)   Parking of unaltered commercial vehicles prohibited. No person
shall stand or park a vehicle with commercial plates in any location unless it
has been permanently altered with all seats and rear seat fittings, except the
front seats, removed, except that for vehicles designed with a passenger cab
and a cargo area separated by a partition, the seating capacity within the cab
shall not be considered in determining whether the vehicle is properly altered,
and has the name and address of the owner as shown on the registration
certificate plainly marked on both sides of the vehicle in letters and numerals
not less than three inches in height, in compliance with § 10-127 of the
Administrative Code and is also in compliance with paragraph (i) of the
definition of commercial vehicle as set forth in 34 RCNY §
4-01.
      (2)   No standing except trucks loading and unloading. Where a posted
sign reads "No Standing Except Trucks Loading and Unloading" or "Truck Loading
Only", no vehicle except a commercial vehicle or a service vehicle as defined
in 34 RCNY §
4-01(b), may stand or park in that area, for the purpose of expeditiously
making pickups, deliveries or service calls, and except that in the area from
35th St. to 41st St., Avenue of the Americas to 8th Avenue, inclusive, in the
Borough of Manhattan, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., no vehicle
except a truck as defined in 34 RCNY §
4-13(a)(1) may stand or park for the purpose of expeditiously making pickups,
deliveries, or service calls.
      (3)   Angle standing or parking of commercial vehicles. Commercial
vehicles standing or parking in authorized areas shall not be placed at an
angle to the curb unless such positioning is essential for loading or unloading
and then only for such period of time actually required for such purposes
provided that a sufficient space shall be left clear for the passage of a
vehicle between the angle-parked vehicle and the center of the street, the
opposite curb or a vehicle parked or standing thereat, whichever is closest. In
no event shall an angle-parked vehicle occupy more than a parking lane, plus
one traffic lane.
      (4)   Parking of trailers.
         (i)   No person shall park any trailer or semi-trailer on any street
or arterial highway, except while loading or unloading at off-street platforms,
unless such trailer or semi-trailer is attached to a motor vehicle capable of
towing it.
         (ii)   Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (i) above, where
posted signs permit, a trailer or semi-trailer may park while unattached to a
motor vehicle capable of towing it on streets in industrial zoned property as
defined in the Zoning Resolution. Such trailers or semi-trailers may park for
the length of time indicated on the posted signs. An owner of a trailer or
semi-trailer parked pursuant to this provision shall protect the streets from
damage that may be caused by parking the unattached trailer. All doors located
on such trailers or semi-trailers must be locked while the trailers are parked.
      (5)   Street storage of commercial vehicles prohibited. When parking is
not otherwise restricted, no person shall park a commercial vehicle in any
area, including a residential area, in excess of three hours.
      (6)   Nighttime parking of commercial vehicles prohibited. No person
shall park a commercial vehicle on a residential street, between the hours of 9
p.m. and 5 a.m. Where a commercial vehicle is parked in violation of this
paragraph, it shall be an affirmative defense to said violation, with the
burden of proof on the person who received the summons, that he or she was
actively engaged in business at the time the summons was issued at a premises
located within three city blocks of where the summons was issued. This
paragraph shall not apply to vehicles owned or operated by gas or oil heat
suppliers or gas or oil heat systems maintenance companies, the agents or
employees thereof, or any public utility.
      (7)   Vehicles equipped with platform lifts. Commercial vehicles may not
be parked on any city street with a platform lift set in a lowered position
while the vehicle is unattended.
   (l)   Midtown and other special zones. 
      (1)   [Reserved.]
      (2)   Special midtown rule: method of parking. Except where otherwise
restricted, between the hours of 7 a.m. and 7 p.m. daily, except Sundays, from
14th to 60th Streets, 1st to 12th Avenues, all inclusive, in the Borough of
Manhattan, no operator of a commercial vehicle shall stop, stand, or park in
any of the streets herein designated, other than parallel and no more than 12
inches from the curb, and in a way that such vehicle will not occupy more than
10 feet of roadway space from the nearest curb, and in no case shall any such
vehicle be backed in at an angle to the curb.
      (3)   Special midtown rule: standing time limit.
         (i)   Between the hours of 7 a.m. and 7 p.m., daily except Sundays,
from 14th to 60th Streets, 1st to 12th Avenues, all inclusive, in the Borough
of Manhattan no operator shall stand a commercial vehicle in any one block of
streets herein designated for a period of more than three hours unless
otherwise posted. A commercial vehicle not actively engaged in loading or
unloading goods, tools, materials, or other items for the purpose of pickups,
deliveries or service calls is deemed to constitute a parked vehicle subject to
parking rules applicable to that particular location.
         (ii)   Commercial parking meter area. Notwithstanding the provisions
of subparagraph (i) of this paragraph, where signs are posted regulating the
use of the curb by commercial vehicles it shall be unlawful to stand a vehicle
in any space on a block unless such vehicle is a "commercial vehicle" as
defined in 34 RCNY §
4-01(b)(i) or a vehicle with a valid "combination" registration from another
state, and unless such space is controlled by a parking meter. The maximum time
for such metered parking on a single block shall be a total of three hours,
unless otherwise indicated by a posted sign. The provisions of subdivision (h)
of this section shall apply to commercial vehicles parked at a parking meter
pursuant to this paragraph.
      (4)   Parking in garment district restricted to trucks. Notwithstanding
any provisions of these rules to the contrary, no vehicles except trucks and
vans bearing commercial plates shall stand at the curb for the purpose of
expeditiously loading and unloading between the hours of 7 a.m. and 7 p.m.
daily, including Sundays, from 35th Street to 41st Street, between Avenue of
the Americas and 8th Avenue, all inclusive, in the Borough of Manhattan. For
the purpose of this paragraph (4), passenger vehicles, or station wagons
bearing commercial plates shall not be deemed trucks or vans.
      (5)   Parking restricted in limited truck zones. No operator of truck
shall stop, stand or park his/her vehicle upon any streets designated as
"Limited Truck Zones," except for the purpose of making a delivery, loading or
servicing within said zone, and except as otherwise provided in 34 RCNY §
4-13(d)(3).
      (6)   Special Lower Manhattan Area Rule: standing time limit. Between the
hours of 7 a.m. and 7 p.m., daily, on any street south of Houston Street, from
the East River to the Hudson River, in the Borough of Manhattan:
         (i)   An operator must not stand or park a bus on any one block of
streets, including where a space on that block is regulated by a parking meter,
for more than three hours unless otherwise posted.
         (ii)   Where a space is regulated by a parking meter and signs are
posted restricting the use of the curb to buses, it is unlawful to stand or
park any vehicle at that regulated space unless the vehicle is a bus. The
provisions of subdivision (h) of this section shall apply to buses parked at
such a parking meter.
         (iii)   Where a parking sign designates a regulated space as "No
Standing/Parking Except Authorized Buses" or " Buses With Permit Only":
            (A)   It is unlawful to stand or park any vehicle at that regulated
space unless the vehicle is a bus and the operator has first obtained a permit
from the Department according to paragraph (4) of subdivision (o) of this
section.
            (B)   Where that space is also regulated by a parking meter, the
provisions of subdivision (h) of this section shall apply to permitted buses
parked at such a parking meter.
         (iv)   A bus not being used for the expeditious pickup and drop off of
passengers is deemed to constitute a parked vehicle subject to parking rules
applicable to that particular location.
   (m)   Additional parking rules. 
      (1)   Wrong way parking prohibited. Except where angle parking is
authorized, every vehicle stopped, standing, or parked partly upon a roadway
shall be so stopped, standing or parked parallel to the curb or edge of the
roadway. On a one-way roadway such vehicle shall be facing in the direction of
authorized traffic movement; on a two-way roadway such vehicle shall be facing
in the direction of authorized traffic movement on that portion of the roadway
on which the vehicle rests.
      (2)   Angle standing or parking. No person shall place a vehicle at an
angle to the curb, except when such angle placement is authorized by these
rules or by signs or markings. Notwithstanding the above, no vehicle that is
too long and/or too wide to be parked within a single designated parking space
shall be parked in such a space which is designated for angle parking.
      (3)   Angle parking of motorcycles, motor scooters and mopeds. A person
shall be permitted to park a motorcycle, motor scooter or moped at an angle to
the curb at times and at places when and where parking is permitted but only in
such manner that at least one wheel shall touch the curb. In no event shall any
portion of the motorcycle, motor scooter or moped be more than 6 feet from the
curb.
      (4)   Parking of doctors' and dentists' vehicles. Where parking is
prohibited by signs, but not where stopping or standing is prohibited, a duly
licensed physician or dentist may park his/her motor vehicle, identified by
"MD," "OP" or "DDS" New York registration plates, on a roadway adjacent to
hospitals or clinics for a period not to exceed three hours. For the purposes
of this paragraph, only those portions of a roadway corresponding to the shaded
areas on the diagrams below shall be considered adjacent to a hospital or
clinic. At other locations where parking is prohibited by signs, but not where
stopping or standing is prohibited, a duly licensed physician may park his/her
motor vehicle, identified by "MD" or "OP" New York registration plates, for a
period not to exceed one hour while actually attending to a patient in the
immediate vicinity.
      (5)   Bus parking on streets prohibited. No person shall park a bus at
any time on any street within the City of New York, unless authorized by signs,
except that a charter bus may park where parking is otherwise permitted at its
point of origin or destination. No operator of a bus shall make a bus layover,
except as otherwise provided in 34 RCNY §
4-10(c). Notwithstanding any local law or rule to the contrary, but subject to
the provisions of the Vehicle and Traffic Law, it shall be permissible for a
school bus owned, used or hired by a public or nonpublic school to park at any
time, including overnight, upon any street or roadway, provided said bus
occupies a parking spot in front of and within the building lines of the
premises of the public or nonpublic school.
      (6)   Time limits. Where signs are erected specifying time limits on
standing or parking, no person shall stand or park any vehicle in excess of the
time so prescribed.
      (7)   Emergency ambulance service vehicles. The operator of an ambulance,
as defined in section 100-b of the Vehicle and Traffic Law, while awaiting an
emergency call, may park at meters, truck loading and unloading zones, and "NO
PARKING" areas not specifically designated for other vehicles. (i.e. authorized
zones).
      (8)   Street storage of boat trailers, mobile homes and mobile medical
diagnostic vehicles prohibited. No person shall park any boat trailer (with or
without a boat attached), mobile home or mobile medical diagnostic vehicle in
any area, on any street, in excess of 24 hours.
      (9)   Street storage of vehicles prohibited. When parking is not
otherwise restricted, no person shall park any vehicle in any area, including a
residential area, in excess of seven consecutive days.
   (n)   Special restrictions on parking. 
      (1)   Parking for sales purposes prohibited. No person regularly engaged
in the sale of vehicles shall park a vehicle upon any roadway or off-street
parking facility for the principal purpose of displaying such vehicle for sale.
      (2)   Parking for certain purposes prohibited. No person regularly
engaged in the repair of vehicles shall park a vehicle upon any roadway or off-
street parking facility for the principal purpose of washing, greasing, or
repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency.
      (3)   Parking for the purposes of commercial advertising prohibited. No
person shall stand or park a vehicle on any street or roadway for the purpose
of commercial advertising, as defined in 34 RCNY §
4-12(j)(1), except as otherwise provided in that section.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4a77823de8d2ee472adfbde019448cdce82c4f8a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-298.gif]
 
      (4)   Peddlers, vendors and hawkers restricted. No peddler, vendor,
hawker, or huckster shall permit his car, wagon, or vehicle to stand on any
street when stopping, standing, or parking is prohibited or on any street
within 25 feet of any corner of the curb or to stand at any time on any
sidewalk or within 500 feet of any public market or within 200 feet of any
public or private school.
      (5)   Unattended motor vehicles. No person driving or in charge of a
motor vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended without first stopping the
engine, locking the ignition, removing the key from the vehicle, and
effectively setting the brake provided, however, the provision for removing the
key from the vehicle shall not require the removal of keys hidden from sight
about the vehicle for convenience or emergency.
      (6)   Moving parked vehicle. No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully
under his/her control into any position where stopping, standing, or parking
would be unlawful.
      (7)   Unofficial reserving of parking space. It shall be unlawful for any
person to reserve or attempt to reserve a parking space, or prevent any vehicle
from parking on a public street through his/her presence in the roadway, the
use of hand-signals, or by placing any box, can, crate, handcart, dolly or any
other device, including unauthorized pavement, curb or street markings or signs
in the roadway.
      (8)   Vehicles must have proper equipment. No person shall stand or park
a motor vehicle, motorcycle or limited use vehicle on any street at any time
unless it is equipped with head lamps, rear lamps, reflectors and any other
equipment required by any provision of the Vehicle and Traffic Law.
   (o)   Permits. For purposes of this section, a "permit" is the authorization
granted by the Department to qualified individuals for special parking
privileges as set forth in this subdivision. At the discretion of the
Department, a permit may be represented by a permit card inscribed with
information that describes the specific parking privileges it authorizes.
      (1)   Permits for people with disabilities.
         (i)   Authorized parking areas. An operator of a vehicle bearing a
valid New York City Special Parking Identification permit may park:
            (A)   in any "No Parking" zone,
            (B)   in any authorized vehicle zone, except in carshare parking
space(s), electric vehicle charging station(s), and microhub zone(s),
            (C)   at parking meters without using an authorized payment method,
and
            (D)   in "No Standing Except Trucks Loading and Unloading" or
"Truck Loading Only" zones.
         Such special parking permit shall be displayed so that it is visible
through the windshield.
         (ii)   Prohibited parking areas. Such special parking identification
permits do not authorize parking:
            (A)   in a bus stop,
            (B)   in a taxi-stand,
            (C)   within 15 feet of a fire hydrant,
            (D)   in a fire zone,
            (E)   in a driveway,
            (F)   in a crosswalk,
            (G)   in a no stopping zone,
            (H)   in a no standing zone,
            (I)   double parking,
            (J)   in carshare parking space(s),
            (K)   in any "Ambulette", "Ambulance", "Access-A-Ride", "Medical
Facility" zone or combination thereof,
            (L)   in a For-Hire-Vehicle stand,
            (M)   in electric vehicle charging station(s); or
            (N)   in a microhub zone.
         (iii)   Issuance of permits. The Special Parking Identification permit
shall be issued by the Commissioner or his/her designee to a New York City
resident certified by the Department of Health or a provider designated by the
Department or the Department of Health, who shall make such certification in
accordance with standards and guidelines prescribed by the Department of
Health, as having a permanent disability seriously impairing mobility, who
requires the use of a private automobile for transportation and to a non-
resident similarly certified who requires the use of a private automobile for
transportation to a school in which such applicant is enrolled or to a place of
employment. A permit shall also be issued to such person upon application made
on such person's behalf by a parent, spouse, domestic partner as defined in New
York City Administrative Code § 1-112(21), guardian, or other individual having
legal responsibility for the administration of such person's day to day
affairs. The permit may include no more than ten (10) license plate numbers for
the vehicle(s) which will be used to transport the permittee. Upon application
for a permit, applicant shall submit to the department a copy of the vehicle
registration for each license plate which will be registered on the permit. Any
vehicle displaying such a permit shall be used exclusively in connection with
parking a vehicle in which the person to whom it has been issued is being
transported or will be transported within a reasonable period of time.
         (iv)   Replacement permits. In case of a lost or stolen permit, the
permittee must, upon request for a replacement, submit to the department a copy
of a valid police report. In case of a stolen vehicle which is registered on
the permit, permittee must submit to the department a copy of a valid police
report. In the event a vehicle registered on the permit is unable to be used as
a result of an accident or mechanical defect, a substitution of plates will be
permitted only if the permittee has three or fewer plates registered on the
permit. The permittee must provide proof to the department of the inability to
use the vehicle. If the permittee has four or more plates registered on the
permit, no temporary substitution will be allowed.
         (v)   Revocation or Suspension. Any abuse by any person of any
privilege, benefit or consideration granted by such permit, will be sufficient
cause for revocation or suspension of said permit.
            (A)   If the Department determines that a permit holder has abused
a permit, the Department will issue a notice of intent to revoke or suspend the
permit. The Department will send such notice to the permit holder by mail, and
the notice will state the grounds for the proposed revocation or suspension.
The notice will also inform the permit holder that he or she has an opportunity
to be heard, either in-person or by teleconference.
            (B)   Grounds for suspension or revocation shall include, but not
be limited to the following:
               (1)   Use of the permit that does not meet the requirements of
Section 2903(15)(a) of the Charter, which states: "Any vehicle displaying such
permit shall be used exclusively in connection with parking a vehicle in which
the person to whom it has been issued is being transported or will be
transported within a reasonable period of time."
               (2)   Transfer of the permit, copying of the original permit,
use of a copied permit, or refusal to return an expired permit after receipt of
a new permit.
            (C)   If the permit holder wants an opportunity to be heard, the
permit holder must submit a request to the Department in writing. The
Department must receive such request within thirty (30) calendar days of the
date of the Department's notice. If the Department does not receive a written
request for an opportunity to be heard within thirty (30) calendar days of the
date of the Department's notice, the Department will revoke or suspend the
permit.
            (D)   If the permit holder submits a timely written request for an
opportunity to be heard, the Department will schedule such opportunity to take
place no later than thirty (30) calendar days from the date that the Department
receives the permit holder's request. The Department will notify the permit
holder of the date of the opportunity to be heard by mail.
            (E)   The permit holder may make a written request to receive
copies of the evidence used by the Department in its decision making. Such
request must be received by the Department at least fourteen (14) calendar days
in advance of the date of the opportunity to be heard. The Department will
provide a copy of the evidence in the manner requested by the permit holder
(e.g. mail, email, or in-person) no later than seven (7) days prior to the date
of the opportunity to be heard.
            (F)   Requests for rescheduling, by either the permit holder or the
Department, of the opportunity to be heard must be received by the other party
at least forty-eight (48) hours in advance of the originally scheduled date. If
the request for rescheduling is agreed upon by both the permit holder and the
Department, a new date will be scheduled within fourteen (14) days of the
original date as agreed upon by the permit holder and Department.
            (G)   The opportunity to be heard will be conducted by a designee
of the Commissioner. The designee will (1) review the Department's decision to
issue the notice of intent to revoke or suspend the permit, and (2) provide an
opportunity for the permit holder to present reasons and evidence why the
revocation or suspension is not warranted. The designee will issue findings of
fact and a recommendation following the opportunity to be heard.
            (H)   Within thirty (30) days of the opportunity to be heard, the
Commissioner, or his or her designee, other than the designee who conducted the
opportunity to be heard and issued the recommendation, will issue a final
decision. The final decision will include such findings of fact and
recommendation of the person who conducted the opportunity to be heard and will
accept, reject or modify that recommendation. The Department will send the
final decision to the permit holder via mail within five (5) calendar days. The
final decision will constitute a final agency determination.
      (2)   Municipal parking permit. A municipal parking permit licenses the
permittee to park one automobile at the permittee's risk in the area designated
by signs. Fees charged are for the use of a parking space in the designated
facility only. Only a license to park is granted by this permit and no bailment
is created. The Department of Transportation assumes no responsibility for loss
due to fire, theft, collision or otherwise to the car or its contents.
         (i)   A municipal parking permit must be displayed when parked in
authorized spaces, and in such a manner that the permit is visible through the
left side of the windshield. If the vehicle is part of the carshare program, it
must follow the permit display requirements of such program.
         (ii)   Except for a permitted carshare vehicle, a municipal parking
permit is to be displayed only on vehicles bearing license plate numbers on
file at the Department's Bureau of Parking. For license plate changes one must
complete and submit the appropriate form found on DOT's website.
         (iii)   A municipal parking permit is to be displayed only when a
vehicle is parked in areas reserved for use of this permit.
         (iv)   Failure to comply with the above regulations may result in a
summons.
      (3)   Agency-Authorized permits for parking in contradiction to rules on
City streets. Agency-Authorized permits are issued by the Department of
Transportation or any other agency authorized by the Department. Permits may be
issued to non-profit organizations for certain essential purposes such as
medical services, blood delivery and human services programs and to
governmental agencies and officials for governmental purposes. Permits may be
issued when the vehicle is essential to the performance of organizational
functions. Such permits shall be displayed in a place where it is visible
through the vehicle's windshield only when a vehicle is parked in areas
specified on the permit or electronically linked to the permit unless the
permit is affixed to the vehicle by the department or an agency authorized by
the department.
         (i)   Parking permitted. Parking with agency-authorized permits and
the display of a permit in the windshield of a vehicle or, where applicable, a
permit affixed to the vehicle by the department is permitted in areas specified
on or electronically linked to the permit and may include some or all of the
following:
            (A)   Parking meters,
            (B)   Truck loading and unloading zones,
            (C)   Authorized vehicle zones, when the organization or agency
named on the permit is indicated on the signs, and
            (D)   "No Parking" areas.
         (ii)   Parking not permitted. Parking with and display of agency-
authorized permits in the windshield of a vehicle or, where applicable, a
permit affixed to the vehicle by the department or any agency authorized by the
department is not permitted at:
            (A)   "No Standing" areas,
            (B)   "No Stopping" areas,
            (C)   Fire hydrants,
            (D)   Bus stops,
            (E)   Areas on the roadway side of a vehicle stopped, standing, or
parked at the curb (i.e., Double parking),
            (F)   Driveways,
            (G)   Bridges and highways,
            (H)   Areas where a traffic hazard would be created,
            (I)   Carshare parking space(s),
            (J)   Loading Only zones,
            (K)   “Commercial Bicycle Loading Only” zones,
            (L)   Microhub zones.
         (iii)   Duration. Agency-authorized permits are issued for the minimum
hours and days essential for the activity. Such permits are issued on an annual
basis on dates determined by the Department of Transportation.
         (iv)   Misuse and fraudulent use of parking permits. A violation of
this subparagraph (iv) will be issued in addition to any other violation issued
for parking in contravention of posted signs or written regulations. It shall
be unlawful:
            (A)   to display an agency-authorized permit in the windshield of a
vehicle or, where applicable, a permit affixed to the vehicle by the department
or any agency authorized by the department and park with the intent to avoid
compliance with posted signs or written regulations. In any proceeding relating
to the violation of this provision such intent shall be implied where:
               1.   the permit displayed in the windshield of the vehicle or,
where applicable, the permit affixed to the vehicle by the department or any
agency authorized by the department does not authorize parking in such space in
contravention of posted signs or written regulation.
               2.   the permit is displayed on a vehicle other than the one
described in the permit.
               3.   the permit displayed in the windshield of the vehicle is
copied, altered, or displayed in a manner that obscures the locations to which
it applies.
               4.   the permit displayed in the windshield of the vehicle or
where applicable the permit affixed to the vehicle by the department or any
agency authorized by the department is expired, suspended or revoked.
            (B)   to display a fraudulent parking permit in the windshield of a
vehicle and park in contravention of posted signs or written regulations. For
the purposes of this section, a fraudulent parking permit may be a counterfeit
of a Department-issued permit, resemble an official Department permit or
contain language falsely purporting to authorize parking in areas restricted by
posted signs or written regulations.
         (v)   Revocation of an agency-authorized permit. The Commissioner or
their designee may, at their discretion, revoke or suspend agency-authorized
permits.
            (A)   Notice. Except as otherwise provided herein prior to
revocation or suspension the permit holder will be notified of the proposed
suspension or revocation and the grounds and may appeal such determination in
accordance with item (B) within 15 days after the date set forth in such
notice. If no appeal is filed within such 15 day period such revocation or
suspension shall be effective upon the conclusion of the time for appeal. If an
appeal is filed within such 15 day period such revocation or suspension shall
be effective upon notice of the determination of the appeal unless such
determination is in favor of the permittee. Notwithstanding the foregoing where
the Commissioner finds that the continued use of an agency-authorized permit is
a danger to public safety, such revocation or suspension shall be effective
immediately upon the date of notice of the suspension or revocation of such
permit. Grounds for revocation or suspension will include:
               1.   Three or more violations of this Subdivision (o);
               2.   Any violation of Administrative Code § 19-166; or
               3.   Unpaid parking or traffic violations associated with the
license plate or individual permit holder in excess of $350.
            (B)   Appeal. A permit holder may appeal the determination to
revoke or suspend an agency-authorized permit in writing within fifteen (15)
days after the date of a notice provided in accordance with item (A) in the
manner described in such notice. The Department will respond to the appeal
within sixty (60) days except that where the revocation or suspension was
effective immediately upon the date of such notice the Department shall respond
to such appeal within fifteen (15) days.
         (vi)   Refusal to issue or renew an agency-authorized permit. The
commissioner or their designee may refuse to issue or renew an agency-
authorized permit for any of the grounds set forth in Subparagraph (v) that
apply to the revocation or suspension of such permit.
      (4)   Single issue permits for parking in contradiction to rules on city
streets. Single issue permits are issued by the Department of Transportation or
any other agency authorized by the Department to for-profit and not-for-profit
medical, blood and human service programs; press events; bus operators parking
pursuant to paragraph (6) of subdivision (l) of this section; and concerts,
film production companies, special events and emergencies. Such permits shall
be displayed so that they are visible through the windshield.
         (i)   Information required. The request for such a single issue permit
shall be made in writing to the Department of Transportation and must include:
            (A)   Date(s) of the event,
            (B)   Hours,
            (C)   Location,
            (D)   Number and size of vehicles, and
            (E)   License plates or identifying markings of the vehicles.
         (ii)   Parking permitted. Parking with single issue permits is
permitted in areas specified on or programmed into the permit and may include
some or all of the following:
            (A)   Parking meters,
            (B)   Truck loading and unloading zones,
            (C)   Authorized vehicle zones, except in carshare parking space
(s),
            (D)   "No Parking" areas, and
            (E)   No Standing/Parking Except Authorized Buses or Buses with
Permit Only.
         (iii)   Parking not permitted. Parking with single issue permits is
not permitted at:
            (A)   "No Standing" areas,
            (B)   "No Stopping" areas,
            (C)   Fire hydrants,
            (D)   Bus stops,
            (E)   Double parking,
            (F)   Driveways,
            (G)   On bridges and highways,
            (H)   In carshare parking space(s),
            (I)   Areas where a traffic hazard would be created,
            (J)   Loading Only zones,
            (K)   “Commercial Bicycle Loading Only” zones, and
            (L)   Microhub zones.
         (iv)   Duration. Single issue permits are issued for the minimum hours
and days essential for the event. The Commissioner or his/her designee may, at
his/her discretion, issue, extend or revoke these permits.
      (5)   Clergy parking permits.
         (i)   Definitions. 
            Funeral establishment. A place devoted to or used for the care and
preparation of a body of a deceased person for disposition and for mourning or
funeral ceremonial purposes.
            Hospital. A general hospital, nursing home or hospice in-patient
facility certified pursuant to the public health law or a psychiatric center
established pursuant to § 7.17 of the mental hygiene law.
            House of worship. A building or space owned or leased by a
religious corporation or association of any denomination or used by a religious
corporation or association of any denomination pursuant to the written
permission of the owner thereof, which is used by members principally as a
meeting place for divine worship or other religious observances presided over
by a member of the clergy and which is classified in occupancy group F-1(b)
pursuant to Article 8 of Subchapter 3 of Chapter 1 of Title 27 of the New York
City Administrative Code. Such term shall not include a dwelling unit as
defined in the Housing Maintenance Code.
            Member of the clergy. A clergyperson or minister as defined in the
religious corporations law including, but not limited to, a pastor, rector,
priest, rabbi or imam who officiates at or presides over services on behalf of
a religious corporation or association of any denomination and works an average
of at least twenty hours per week on behalf of such religious corporation or
association.
            Passenger car. Notwithstanding any other provision of these rules,
for the purposes of this paragraph (5), a passenger car shall mean a motor
vehicle, lawfully registered in any state, designed and used for carrying not
more than fifteen people, including the driver. Such term shall not include a
vehicle licensed to operate pursuant to Chapter 5 of Title 19 of the New York
City Administrative Code or a commercial vehicle as defined in § 19-170 of the
Code.
         (ii)   Application requirements.
            (A)   The religious corporation or association applying for a
permit on behalf of a member of the clergy shall submit an application on a
form to be provided by the department and signed by an officer of the
corporation or association or by a person otherwise authorized to act on behalf
of the corporation or association. Such application shall be accompanied by a
copy of a deed or lease and a certificate of occupancy indicating
classification in occupancy group F-1(b) (plus the type of house of worship)
for the New York City house of worship used by the religious corporation or
association. In the absence of a deed or lease, the religious corporation or
association shall submit a sworn written statement of the owner of the house of
worship attesting to the fact that said religious corporation or association
has the permission of said owner to use the premises as a house of worship. In
the event a house of worship was constructed prior to the existence of a
certificate of occupancy or occupancy group F-1(b) so that a certificate of
occupancy is not available, the religious corporation or association shall
submit such other documentation as the department may require.
            (B)   The religious corporation or association shall, on behalf of
a member of the clergy, submit a copy of title, registration or lease in the
member of the clergy's name or in the name of a religious corporation or
association employing such member of the clergy for a vehicle lawfully
registered in any state to be covered by a permit. Such religious association
or corporation shall, on behalf of a member of the clergy, also submit a copy
of a current automobile insurance identification card for such vehicle.
            (C)   The religious corporation or association shall certify on a
form provided by the Department that only the member of the clergy on whose
behalf the application is made will use such permit, that such use will occur
only while the member of the clergy is performing official duties at a funeral
establishment or the house of worship at whose services such member of the
clergy officiates or presides or while performing such official duties at a
hospital, that such member of the clergy works an average of at least twenty
hours per week on behalf of such religious corporation or association, that
such member of the clergy possesses a valid driver's license from any state and
that such member of the clergy otherwise qualifies for the benefits of this
permit.
            (D)   In addition, the religious corporation or association shall
submit any other documents deemed necessary by the Department.
         (iii)   Parking permitted. Parking is permitted only in "No Parking"
areas designated by posted sign for up to five hours on a roadway adjacent to
the house of worship's address as it appears on the permit, for up to three
hours on a roadway adjacent to a hospital when the member of the clergy is
performing official duties at such hospital, or for a period of up to four
hours on the roadway adjacent to a funeral establishment when such member of
the clergy is performing official duties at such funeral establishment. For the
purposes of this paragraph, only those portions of a roadway corresponding to
the shaded areas on the diagrams below shall be considered adjacent to a house
of worship or hospital or funeral establishment.
         (iv)   Issuance of permit. Only one permit shall be issued to any
religious corporation or association. The front of such permit shall include
the license plate numbers of up to three passenger cars, as defined in
subparagraph (i), above, that are owned, registered or leased by the members of
the clergy for whose benefit the religious corporation or association has
applied for such permit or by the religious corporation or association
employing such member of the clergy. No permit shall be issued with the license
plate number of any vehicle that has one or more summonses in judgment
according to the records of the New York City Parking Violations Bureau.
         (v)   Duration. Permits issued in accordance with this paragraph (5)
shall be valid for one year, unless revoked pursuant to subparagraph (viii).
         (vi)   Renewal. Sixty days prior to the expiration of the permit, the
religious corporation or association may apply for a renewal by completing a
form provided by the Department.
         (vii)   Replacement permits.
            (A)   In case of a lost or stolen permit, the religious corporation
or association shall, upon request for a replacement, submit to the Department
a copy of a valid police report. In the case of a stolen vehicle containing a
permit that was also stolen, the religious corporation or association shall
submit a copy of a valid police report for the stolen vehicle, which report
also lists the permit as stolen.
            (B)   To receive a replacement permit with a changed license plate
number or an additional plate number up to a total of three, the religious
corporation or association shall supply the documentation required by
subparagraphs (B), (C) and (D) of paragraph (ii), above, in addition to the
police report, if applicable. Changes to the permit may only be made by the
Department.
         (viii)   Revocation. A member of the clergy who engages in or allows
the improper use or alteration of a permit issued pursuant to this paragraph
may be excluded from the benefits of this paragraph. The department shall mail
written notice to the religious corporation or association with which such
clergy member is associated of the improper use of a permit issued to such
corporation or association. The religious corporation or association may submit
a response within ten days of the date of mailing of such notice. After ten
days from the date of mailing of such notice, the department may send notice to
the religious corporation or association of the exclusion of a member from the
permit and the corporation or association shall forthwith return the permit to
the department. If the permit contains more than one license plate number, the
license plate number of the vehicle of the excluded member shall be deleted and
the department shall promptly reissue the permit with the remaining license
plate numbers. If the permit contains only the license plate number of the
excluded member, the religious corporation or association may submit an
application for a new permit pursuant to this paragraph. The member of the
clergy who engaged in or allowed such improper use shall not be eligible for
inclusion in any future application submitted pursuant to this paragraph.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4a77823de8d2ee472adfbde019448cdce82c4f8a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-300.jpg]
 
      (6)   Permit for Carshare Parking. 
         (i)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
terms have the following meanings:
            Blockface. The term "blockface" means that portion of the street
along the curb on one side of a street which is between the boundaries of the
corner area at either end of the block.
            Carshare organization or CSO. The term "carshare organization" or
"CSO" means an organization that operates a program available to the general
public, in which access to a fleet of vehicles, except for limited use
vehicles, as defined in 34 RCNY §
4-01, is provided to members of the organization on an hourly or other short-
term basis. This is inclusive of one-way and round-trip carshare services who
apply to the Department for dedicated carshare parking spaces. This is also
inclusive of peer-to-peer carsharing programs licensed under Article 40 of the
New York State General Business Law.
            Carshare parking site. The term "carshare parking site" means an
on-street curbside location that consists of two carshare parking spaces.
            Carshare parking space. The term "carshare parking space" means a
location on-street curbside or in a municipal parking facility that the
Department reserves for the exclusive use by a carshare organization and its
members.
            Carshare vehicle. The term "carshare vehicle" means a vehicle used
by a carshare organization member that is owned, leased, or managed by such
carshare organization and available for rental 100% of the time with reasonable
allowances for maintenance of such vehicle.
            Equity parking site. The term "equity parking site" means a
carshare parking site located in an area that the Department has identified as
being underserved by existing carshare service based on, but not limited to,
demographic and socioeconomic characteristics such as median household income
as published by the U.S. Census Bureau American Community Survey.
            Handcontrol adapted carshare vehicle. The term "hand control
adapted carshare vehicle" means a vehicle equipped with professionally
installed hand controls allowing for the use of the vehicle by carshare members
with mobility impairments. These hand controls must have the capability of
being activated and deactivated for carshare members' needs and must not
prevent the operation of the vehicle using foot pedals.
            Municipal parking facility. The term "municipal parking facility"
means a City-owned parking facility regulated by the Department and operated by
the City or by a contractor on behalf of the City that is available for public
use. The term "municipal parking facility" does not include any parking
facility operated by a City agency that is intended for use exclusively by
agency employees or by the public to conduct business with the agency.
            One-way carshare service. The term "one-way carshare service" means
a system where a member of a carshare organization can pick up a carshare
vehicle at one location and drop it off at the end of the trip at a curbside
location within the CSO's service area.
            Round-trip carshare service. The term "round-trip carshare service"
means a system where a member of a carshare organization must drop off a
carshare vehicle at the same location where it was picked up in order to
complete the trip.
         (ii)   Registration required. A CSO must register with the Department
for the use of or operation on any public highway (as defined in 34 RCNY §
4-01). This registration establishes the CSO as a qualified operator, and
includes submission of the following information and documentation:
            (A)   Legal name of the CSO; its "Doing Business As" (DBA)
certificate; certified copy of the Certificate of Incorporation and proof of
registration with the New York State Department of State; company address;
contact name; contact telephone number; contact e-mail address;
            (B)   Information about the CSO's New York City-specific
operations, including the CSO's total carshare vehicle fleet size in New York
City, the number and location of private garages and carshare parking sites
from which it currently operates, and the current number of equity carshare
parking sites and;
            (C)   Information about the CSO's rates, including any geography or
time-based differences.
         Once a CSO satisfactorily completes its registration, it can apply for
a carshare parking site permit and/or carshare parking space in a municipal
parking facility pursuant to subparagraph (iv) below.
         (iii)   Permits and fees. In order to participate in the Department's
carshare program, a carshare parking permit is required and a CSO must pay to
the Department an annual carshare parking site permit fee in the amount of $475
for each new and/or existing carshare parking site. For carshare parking spaces
in municipal parking facilities, a CSO must pay an annual fee based on existing
rates at each municipal parking facility, which will be posted on the
Department's website.
         (iv)   Applications. Applications for new carshare parking permit(s)
or for the renewal of carshare parking permit(s) must be submitted on forms
prescribed by the Department which will include, but not be limited to, the
following information:
            (A)   Legal name of the CSO; address; contact name; contact
telephone number; contact e-mail address;
            (B)   Proof of vehicle registration for all carshare vehicles
intended for use in a carshare parking space;
            (C)   Proof of automobile insurance for all carshare vehicles
intended for use in a carshare parking space;
            (D)   Make, model, length, and combined city/highway miles per
gallon (MPG) according to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's MPG
ratings of vehicles intended for use in a carshare parking space and;
            (E)   Proposed locations of all requested carshare parking sites
for the permit term and one alternative location for each in case the proposed
site is not available.
            (F)   An equity plan outlining measures to provide access to
carshare vehicles deployed in carshare parking sites and/or municipal parking
facilities to low- and moderate-income residents, including discount pricing,
partnerships with community organizations, or other measures as deemed
appropriate by the Department.
            (G)   A community outreach plan that will guide the permit holder's
engagement of stakeholders around proposed carshare parking sites and/or
municipal parking facilities.
         If the Department declines to issue a permit based on any of the
foregoing requirements not being satisfied or if the application is incomplete,
the applicant may submit a written appeal to the Commissioner. Such appeal must
be submitted within fifteen days from the applicant's receipt of the denial.
The Department will make a final determination on the appeal within thirty days
of receipt of the appeal.
         (v)   Applications submission period. A CSO must submit an application
for a new permit and/or the renewal of a permit for carshare parking sites and
carshare parking spaces in municipal parking facilities annually within a time
period prescribed by the Department.
         (vi)   Review of applications for and issuance of permits. In
reviewing applications, the Department may limit the number of carshare
vehicles in the carshare program, use a utilization metric and define the
carshare program geography. The Department may decline to issue a permit to an
applicant that:
            (A)   Is in arrears to the City of New York for an amount totaling
more than one thousand dollars; or
            (B)   Does not provide automobile insurance as part of their
carshare vehicle rental price; or
            (C)   Does not allow its carshare vehicles to be rented on an
hourly basis or for smaller time intervals, and at rates which vary by time,
and/or distance.
         (vii)   Carshare parking permit assignment for on-street curbside
parking spaces. In assigning on-street curbside carshare parking sites, the
Department will consider criteria including, but not limited to:
            (A)   Traffic and pedestrian flow;
            (B)   Surrounding land uses and placement of street furniture;
            (C)   Preferred sites selected by CSOs;
            (D)   Feedback from CSO community outreach;
            (E)   The number of existing carshare parking sites and private
carshare parking locations in the surrounding area;
            (F)   Utilization metrics determined to be appropriate by the
Department for site expansion;
            (G)   The CSO's ratio of equity parking sites to general carshare
parking sites (equity parking sites must comprise at least 20% of a CSO's total
carshare parking sites);
            (H)   The CSO's compliance with the permit terms and conditions at
the site in the previous year, in case of a renewal permit;
            (I)   Proposed carshare parking site meets the siting criteria
published on the Department's website;
            (J)   Ongoing and/or upcoming construction projects in the vicinity
of the proposed location; and
            (K)   Any other criteria deemed appropriate by the Department
including, but not limited to, altered growth rates as program expands and
additional data sharing requirements.
         (viii)   Carshare parking permit assignments for carshare parking
spaces in municipal parking facilities. 
            (A)   The Department will post on its website a map of municipal
parking facility locations and specify the number of carshare parking spaces,
including those with electric charging stations, available at each facility.
            (B)   Registered CSOs must apply for new or renewal carshare
parking permits for each carshare parking space at which they wish to operate.
            (C)   The Department will allocate spaces to CSOs within each
facility initially based on renewal applications. If carshare parking spaces
remain in a facility, those spaces will be divided among interested CSOs at
increments of two spaces per CSO.
            (D)   For those municipal parking facilities where there are not
enough available spaces to accommodate the request for at least two spaces by
each interested CSO, the Department will assign the carshare parking spaces in
pairs using a multi-round selection process based on a rank order chosen
randomly. The CSO selection order will be re-established for each facility
where there are not enough available spaces to accommodate the request for at
least two spaces by each interested CSO.
            (E)   For carshare parking spaces in municipal parking facilities,
a CSO must pay an annual fee based on existing rates at each municipal parking
facility, which will be posted on the Department's website during the
submission period applicable to new space and renewal applications period.
         (ix)   Conditions of permit. The permit holder must:
            (A)   Indemnify the City against legal liabilities associated with
the use of on-street and off-street spaces for carshare operations;
            (B)   Provide a vehicle with professionally installed hand controls
to any carshare member within 48 hours of that member's request;
            (C)   Regularly report to the Department the data specified in
subparagraph (xv) of this paragraph;
            (D)   Actively use on-street and off-street carshare parking spaces
at all times to provide carshare services with reasonable allowances for
carshare vehicle maintenance;
            (E)   Maintain at least 20% of allotted on-street carshare parking
sites at equity parking sites;
            (F)   Comply with all applicable parking regulations, including but
not limited to regulations relating to construction activities and street
closures;
            (G)   Pay any parking fines received or any towing fees and fines
if carshare vehicles are towed;
            (H)   Provide the Department with 30 days' written notice if the
permit holder decides to discontinue service at a carshare parking site;
            (I)   Display the permit holder's name prominently on each carshare
vehicle using a carshare parking space;
            (J)   Comply with the Department's requirements to identify
vehicles as belonging to the carshare program;
            (K)   Promptly notify the Department of any changes to the
information provided in its application; and
            (L)   Comply with all applicable laws, rules and regulations
related to the operation of carshare.
         (x)   Sign installation and carshare parking site maintenance. 
            (A)   The permit holder must provide to the Department a vector
file graphic of its company logo to be incorporated into signs no later than
five days after the permit for a carshare parking site is approved.
            (B)   The Department will install all signage for all carshare
parking sites.
            (C)   For on-street carshare parking sites, permit holders will
clean the area on a City public street and road within the carshare parking
spaces, and also 15 feet on three sides of the carshare parking space.
Maintenance responsibilities will include the following:
               1.   Sweeping twice per week on the blockface on which the on-
street carshare parking site is located as specified in the permit;
               2.   Removing snow and ice as specified in the permit;
               3.   Maintaining the signs so that they are unobstructed and
free of dirt, stickers, and graffiti as specified in the permit; and
               4.   Keeping records of the maintenance for carshare parking
spaces, including date, time, and scope of maintenance as specified in the
permit.
            (D)   Permit holders shall install on-street markings at their
carshare parking sites.
            (E)   The on-street marking design and materials must be approved
by the Department and shall not include the permit holder's company logo.
            (F)   The permit holder is responsible for all aspects of on-street
marking maintenance, including installing, maintaining, and removing any on-
street markings relating to the carshare parking site.
            (G)   Permit holders must submit a permit bond to the Department
within 10 business days of permit issuance to cover costs and expenses that may
be incurred by the City as a result of failing to remove on-street markings or
for the purpose of otherwise safeguarding the interests of the City. The permit
bond must be in the form prescribed by the Department.
               1.   Bonds will be valid through the permit's term.
               2.   The issuer of the bond must give the Department at least 30
days' written notice prior to expiration or cancellation of such bond.
               3.   A receipt demonstrating full payment of the bond must be
filed with the Department.
               4.   A separate bond need not be filed for each location,
provided such coverage is in force for all operations in the City.
               5.   The permit bond must be submitted in the amount of $25,000
for the permit term.
            (H)   Any additional maintenance responsibilities will be provided
by the Department with a thirty-day notice to the permit holder.
            (I)   Permit holders' maintenance responsibilities extend through
the length of the permit for any carshare parking sites.
         (xi)   Permanent relocation of carshare parking sites. The Department
may relocate a carshare parking site upon a thirty-day notice to the permit
holder based on utilization rates, maintenance reports, and/or a request from a
CSO.
         (xii)   Temporary relocation or suspension of carshare parking sites. 
            (A)   The use of on-street carshare parking sites may be
temporarily suspended for up to thirty business days due to construction or
street repaving, or special events including but not limited to film shoots,
street fairs, parades, or block parties.
            (B)   When suspensions are expected to last longer than thirty
business days, the Department may temporarily relocate the carshare parking
site to a new, approved location within close proximity to the original
carshare parking site.
            (C)   The Department may remove or temporarily relocate a carshare
parking site for reasons attributable to public safety or other emergency or
temporary needs as it deems appropriate.
            (D)   The permit holder will be responsible for moving the carshare
vehicle from the carshare parking site under the circumstances identified in
clauses (A), (B), and (C) of this subparagraph.
         (xiii)   Relocation of impermissibly parked vehicle. If a vehicle is
impermissibly parked in an on-street carshare parking space, a CSO, at its sole
cost and expense, may relocate the impermissibly parked vehicle to the nearest
available lawful on-street parking space.
            (A)   For the purposes of this subparagraph, an "impermissibly
parked vehicle" means a vehicle located in an on-street carshare parking space,
where the logo and name indicated on the sign does not bear the same logo and
name as the vehicle or the vehicle has no logo or CSO affiliation.
            (B)   If a CSO chooses to relocate impermissibly parked vehicles,
it must establish a Department-approved means of relocating such vehicles and
notifying owners of such vehicles where their vehicles have been relocated.
         (xiv)   Suspension, reassignment, and revocation of permits.
            (A)   The Department may suspend or revoke a permit for failure to
comply with any of the terms and conditions of the carshare parking permit,
these rules, or other applicable laws or rules.
            (B)   Prior to suspending or revoking a permit, the permit holder
will be provided with an opportunity to be heard within ten business days.
            (C)   If the Department revokes a permit, the permit holder must
remove the carshare vehicle from the carshare parking space within 24 hours of
revocation.
         (xv)   Data reporting requirements. 
            (A)   Each permit holder must provide monthly data to the
Department within 10 business days of the end of the reporting month,
containing, but not limited to the data described below and in a form that is
prescribed by the Department.
            (B)   The monthly data must include, but not be limited to, the
following datasets and attributes:
               1.   Cleaning Summary (DOT Site ID, Cleaning Date, Cleaning
Time)
               2.   Space Summary (DOT Site ID, DOT Space ID, Total hours
active rental, total hours available for rental, total hours out-of-service/
unoccupied, number of reported blockages, total trips, total unique users,
average trip length, average trip duration)
            (C)   The Department reserves the right to audit full trip data to
ensure accuracy of space summary with 15 days' notice of request, except that
the Department reserves the right to audit complete vehicle availability data
specified in items (3) and (4) of this clause with 24 hours' notice of request.
Data shall include, but not be limited to, the following datasets and
attributes relating to the Trip Summary:
               1.   Unique Trip ID
               2.   DOT Site ID
               3.   DOT Space ID
               4.   Vehicle ID
               5.   Start Date
               6.   End Date
               7.   Start timestamp
               8.   End Timestamp
               9.   Mileage
            (D)   The Department may require each permit holder to transmit
data specified in items (C)(3) and (C)(4) of this subparagraph may be required
to be transmitted to the Department in real time, through a live application
programming interface (API) such as those described in the Mobility Data
Specification v1.0.0 or later, or comparable platforms.
            (E)   Each permit holder must also conduct an annual survey of its
members, with input from the Department.
            (F)   The Department will provide 30 days' notice of any new data
reporting requirements.
      (7)   Microhub Zone Permits. 
         (i)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
terms have the following meanings:
            Microhub operator. The term “microhub operator” means an
individual, corporation, partnership, association, municipality, or other legal
entity that, either on behalf of itself or others, utilizes a commercial
vehicle to deliver goods, parcels, or packages and transfers such goods,
parcels, or packages to a sustainable mode of transportation to a final point
of delivery or receiver.
            Microhub pilot program. The term “microhub pilot program” means a
local delivery initiative operated by the Department that is designed to reduce
emissions and alleviate vehicle congestion on city streets by providing
designated areas on-street (“microhub zone“) or off-street (“off-street
microhub zone“) for commerical vehicles to transfer goods, parcels, and
packages onto sustainable modes of transportation to the final point of
delivery or receiver.
            Microhub zone. The term “microhub zone” means an on-street area
along the curb designated by the Department for use by a microhub operator for
the exclusive transfer of goods, parcels, and packages from commercial vehicles
to modes of transportation designated as sustainable by the Department that
deliver such goods, parcels, and packages to the final point of delivery or
receiver.
            Off-street microhub zone. The term “off-street microhub zone” means
an off-street area used by a microhub operator for the transfer of goods,
parcels, and packages from commercial vehicles to modes of transportation
designated as sustainable by the Department that deliver such goods, parcels,
and packages to the final point of delivery or receiver.
            Sustainable mode of transportation. The term “sustainable mode of
transportation” means a low-emission or electric vehicle, bicycle, handcart, or
other legal mode of transportation designated as sustainable by the Department.
For the purposes of this rule, the term bicycle includes a pedal-assist
commercial bicycle as defined in 34 RCNY §
4-01(b) and a bicycle with electric assist as defined in section 102-c of the
vehicle and traffic law.
         (ii)   Permit required for on-street operation. A microhub operator
seeking to operate on-street in a microhub zone must first obtain a permit from
the Department.
         (iii)   Permit term, renewal, and fees. Each microhub permit will be
issued for a term of 1 year and may be renewed. Each microhub operator to which
a permit is issued must pay an initial permit fee of $2,350 at the time of
permit issuance. If the microhub permit is renewed, the microhub operator must
pay to the Department an annual microhub permit renewal fee of $950.
         (iv)   Application. An application for a permit must be submitted on a
form prescribed by the Department, which will include, but not be limited to,
the following information:
            (A)   Legal name of the applicant; its “Doing Business As” (DBA)
certificate; certified copy of the Certificate of Incorporation and proof of
registration with the New York State Department of State; company address;
contact name; contact telephone number; contact e-mail address;
            (B)   Make and model of commercial vehicle(s) and sustainable mode
(s) of transportation intended for use in the microhub pilot program;
            (C)   Proof of insurance for commercial vehicles;
            (D)   Applicant’s preferred microhub zone locations from among
those provided by the Department; and
            (E)   Any other information as specified by the Department.
         (v)   Review of applications for and issuance of microhub zone
permits. The Department may decline to issue a microhub zone permit to an
applicant that:
            (A)   Submits an incomplete application;
            (B)   Is in arrears to the City of New York for an amount totaling
more than $1,000;
            (C)   Does not provide proof of insurance; or
            (D)   Does not adhere to the conditions of any previously issued
permit.
         (vi)   If the Department declines to issue a permit based on any of
the grounds listed in subparagraph (v), the applicant may submit a written
appeal to the Commissioner. Such appeal must be submitted within 15 calendar
days from the applicant’s receipt of the denial. The Department will make a
final determination on the appeal within 30 calendar days of receipt of the
appeal.
         (vii)   Microhub zone permit assignments. In assigning on-street
curbside microhub zones to microhub operators issued a permit, the Department
will ensure interagency coordination, including but not limited to the New York
City Department of Sanitation and the Fire Department of the City of New York;
consult with community stakeholders; and consider criteria including, but not
limited to, the applicant’s:
            (A)   Preferred location(s) of microhub zone(s) from among those
provided by the Department;
            (B)   Company size and share of local employees;
            (C)   Current and projected sustainable fleet share and
sustainability goals;
            (D)   Type(s) of sustainable mode(s) of transportation for use in
the microhub; and
            (E)   Compliance with the permit terms and conditions at the
microhub zone in the previous year, in case of a renewal permit.
         (viii)   Conditions of microhub zone permit. The permit holder must:
            (A)   Indemnify the City against legal liabilities arising from the
permit holder’s participation in the microhub pilot program, including but not
limited to the use of the assigned designated microhub zone(s);
            (B)   Share and regularly report to the Department the data
specified in subparagraph (ix) of this paragraph;
            (C)   Actively use the designated microhub zone(s) and maintain
such zone(s) as specified in subparagraph (ix) of this paragraph;
            (D)   Transfer goods from a commercial vehicle to low-emission or
electric commercial vehicles, bicycles, handcarts, or other sustainable modes
of transportation in the designated microhub zone(s). The permit holder must
not conduct such activity within 1/4 mile of the assigned microhub zone(s) or
as otherwise specified on the permit except at the designated microhub zone(s);
            (E)   Only deliver goods by a sustainable mode of transportation as
defined in this section to final points of delivery or receivers located within
the delivery radius around the microhub zone(s) as specified in the permit;
            (F)   Comply with all applicable parking regulations and traffic
rules, including but not limited to regulations relating to construction
activities and street closures;
            (G)   Pay any fines issued to permit holder, including those due to
parking and traffic violations;
            (H)   Provide the Department with a thirty-day notice if a permit
holder decides to discontinue operations at a designated microhub zone;
            (I)   Display permit holder’s name prominently on each commercial
vehicle, low-emission or electric commercial vehicle, bicycle, handcart, or
other sustainable mode of transportation utilizing a microhub zone;
            (J)   Promptly notify the Department of any changes to the
information provided in its application; and
            (K)   Comply with all applicable laws, rules and regulations.
         (ix)   Sign installation and microhub zone maintenance. 
            (A)   The permit holder must provide to the Department a vector
file graphic of its company logo to be incorporated into on-street signage no
later than five days after receipt of the permit.
            (B)   The Department will install signage for all designated
microhub zones.
            (C)   The permit holder will maintain the City’s public streets
within the designated microhub zones. Specifically, the permit holder must keep
clean the area of the roadway within any microhub zone and extending one and
one-half feet beyond each side of such microhub zone.
            (D)   The permit holder must maintain their designated microhub
zones, including but not limited to the following:
               1.   Ensuring the microhub zone is kept clean, well-maintained,
and clear of trash, debris, graffiti, vermin, food scraps, and unsanitary
conditions at all times.
               2.   A routine cleaning schedule of not less than once per week
or pursuant to the frequency of street sweeping on the block face on which the
microhub zone is located, whichever is greater.
               3.   Removing snow and ice in a manner that does not block the
street or adjoining sidewalk as specified in the permit.
               4.   Maintaining the signs so that they are unobstructed and
free of dirt, stickers, and graffiti.
               5.   Keeping records of the maintenance of microhub zones,
including date, time, and scope of maintenance.
            (E)   Any additional maintenance responsibilities will be provided
by the Department with a thirty-day notice to the permit holder. The permit
holders’ maintenance responsibilities extend through the length of the permit.
         (x)   Relocation or temporary suspension of microhub zone(s). 
            (A)   In the event of an emergency, unforeseen circumstances or for
reasons attributable to public safety or other emergency or temporary needs as
it deems appropriate, the Department has the right to relocate a microhub zone
and will ensure interagency coordination, including but not limited to the New
York City Department of Sanitation and the Fire Department of the City of New
York and consultation with key community stakeholders. Wherever possible, the
microhub zone will be relocated within the same general area and with feedback
from the permit holder.
            (B)   The use of a microhub zone may be temporarily suspended for
up to thirty business days due to construction or street repaving, or special
events including but not limited to film shoots, street fairs, parades, or
block parties. When suspensions are expected to last longer than thirty
business days, the Department may temporarily relocate the microhub zone to a
new location.
         (xi)   Suspension or revocation of permits and enforcement of
maintenance requirements. 
            (A)   The Department may suspend or revoke a permit for failure to
comply with any of the terms and conditions of the microhub permit, these
rules, or other applicable law or rule.
            (B)   Prior to suspending or revoking a permit, the permit holder
will be provided with an opportunity to be heard within five business days of
the suspension or revocation.
            (C)   In the event that the Department suspends or revokes a
permit, the permit holder must cease using the microhub zone within 24 hours of
the effective date and time of such suspension or revocation.
            (D)   The Department of Sanitation may issue a notice to the permit
holder, with a copy to the Department of Transportation, upon observation of
any violation of the provisions of clause (C) and items 1, 2 and 3 of clause
(D) of subparagraph (ix) of this paragraph in accordance with and pursuant to
such Department’s responsibility for cleanliness of the streets in section 753
of the New York City Charter. The Department of Transportation may take such
notices into account when considering the suspension or revocation of a permit
pursuant to this subparagraph and when reviewing applications for permit
renewal pursuant to subparagraph (v) of this paragraph.
         (xii)   Relocation of impermissibly parked vehicle. 
            (A)   If a vehicle is impermissibly standing or parked in a
microhub zone, the microhub permit holder may, at its sole cost and expense,
relocate the impermissibly parked vehicle to the nearest available lawful on-
street parking space using a towing company licensed by the Department of
Consumer and Worker Protection.
            (B)   For the purposes of this subparagraph, an “impermissibly
parked vehicle” means a vehicle or device located in a microhub zone, where the
logo and name indicated on the sign does not bear the same logo and name as the
vehicle.
            (C)   If a microhub permit holder chooses to relocate impermissibly
parked vehicles, it must establish a Department-approved means of relocating
such vehicles and notifying owners of such vehicles where their vehicles have
been relocated.
            (D)   The microhub permit holder must establish a website or other
public notice system approved by the Department to communicate information
about the relocation of impermissibly parked vehicles or devices. The website
or other approved communication method must include the process by which an
impermissibly parked vehicle or vehicles is relocated, the specific location of
each relocated vehicle or device, and any other information deemed necessary by
the Department.
            (E)   If the Department determines that the microhub permit holder
or its employees or agents have relocated vehicles in violation of the
provisions of this paragraph, the Department may revoke the authority of the
microhub permit holder to relocate impermissibly parked vehicles from microhub
zones.
         (xiii)   Data sharing requirements. Microhub pilot program
participants must deliver a quarterly report to the Department by the 15th day
of the month following the end of the quarter or as otherwise specified by the
Department. Datasets may include but not be limited to the following (units or
other form of data in parentheses):
            (A)   Make and model of sustainable mode(s) of transportation used
in microhub zone(s) and/or off-street microhub zone(s) (make/model);
            (B)   Average daily/weekly utilization rate of microhub zone(s)
and/or off-street microhub zone(s) (hours);
            (C)   Total number of trips from microhub zone(s) and/or off-street
microhub zone(s) to final destination of delivery categorized by type of
sustainable mode of transportation (trips);
            (D)   Total number of daily vehicle miles traveled (VMT)
substituted by low or zero emission VMT (number);
            (E)   Estimated catchment radius for deliveries from microhub zone
(s) and/or off-street microhub zone(s) (miles);
            (F)   Average distance and duration of deliveries made from
microhub zone(s) and/or off-street microhub zone(s) to final destination
(miles, minutes);
            (G)   Estimated daily volume of deliveries made from microhub zone
(s) and/or off-street microhub zone(s) to final destination of delivery (number
of packages and/or total weight);
            (H)   Total number of instances where microhub zone is blocked
(incidents);
            (I)   Total number of traffic violations received by microhub
permit holder or by vehicles or employees of microhub permit holder within
microhub zone and/or off-street microhub zone and delivery radius (violations);
            (J)   Feedback on pilot experience, including feedback on the
design, placement, operations, and safety (in qualitative/survey form) of the
microhub zone and/or off-street microhub zone as requested by the Department;
and
            (K)   Any other dataset included in the terms and conditions of the
permit or requested by the Department.
   (p)   Engine idling.
      (1)   Idling of vehicle engines generally prohibited. Except as provided
for in paragraphs (2) and (3) of this subdivision, no person shall cause or
permit the engine of any vehicle, other than an authorized emergency vehicle,
to idle for longer than three minutes while parking, standing or stopping
unless the engine is being used to operate a loading, unloading or processing
device.
      (2)   Idling of bus engines prohibited. No person shall cause or permit
the engine of any bus to idle at a layover or terminal location, whether or not
enclosed, when the ambient temperature is in excess of forty (40) degrees
Fahrenheit. When the ambient temperature is forty (40) degrees Fahrenheit or
less, no person shall cause or permit any bus to idle for longer than three
minutes at any layover or terminal location. For the purpose of this rule, at a
layover or terminal location a bus engine shall not be deemed to be idling if
the operator is running the engine in order to raise the air pressure so as to
release the air brakes, provided however, that this shall not exceed a period
of three minutes.
      (3)   Idling of vehicle engines next to schools. 
         (i)   For the purposes of this paragraph, the term "school" shall mean
any public school under the jurisdiction of the New York city department of
education, or any non-public school that provides instruction to students in
any grade from prekindergarten to the twelfth grade.
         (ii)   No person shall cause or permit the engine of any vehicle,
other than an authorized emergency vehicle, to idle for longer than one minute
if the vehicle is next to a school, while parking, standing or stopping, unless
the engine is being used to operate a loading, unloading or processing device,
and provided that idling of an engine of a school bus may be permitted as
needed:
            (A)   for mechanical work;
            (B)   to maintain an appropriate temperature for passenger comfort;
or
            (C)   in emergency evacuations where necessary to operate
wheelchair lifts.
(Amended City Record 10/14/2015, eff. 11/13/2015; amended City Record 3/21/
2017, eff. 4/20/2017; amended City Record 9/11/2017, eff. 10/11/2017; amended
City Record 7/2/2018, eff. 8/1/2018; amended City Record 5/13/2019, eff. 6/12/
2019; amended City Record 5/17/2019, eff. 6/16/2019; amended City Record 2/7/
2020, eff. 3/8/2020; amended City Record 6/1/2020, eff. 6/1/2020; amended, City
Record 9/21/2020, eff. 9/21/2020; amended City Record 12/20/2021, eff. 1/19/
2022; amended City Record 4/25/2022, eff. 5/25/2022; amended City Record 7/18/
2022, eff. 8/17/2022; amended City Record 3/21/2023, eff. 4/20/2023; amended
City Record 3/27/2024, eff. 4/26/2024; amended City Record 1/14/2025, eff. 2/
13/2025*; amended City Record 3/17/2025, eff. 4/16/2025)
* Editor's note: Pursuant to § 7 of the rule published in the City Record on 1/
14/2025, eff. 2/13/2025, the rule expires and is deemed repealed on 2/13/2028.
§ 4-09 Equipment.
   (a)   Brakes. No person shall operate or park a motor vehicle unless such
vehicle is in compliance with § 375(1) of the Vehicle and Traffic Law.
   (b)   Lights while driving.
      (1)   When the display of head lamps is required, no operator shall
operate the vehicle with parking lights only. The operator shall use the lower
beam of multiple beam head lamps, except that the upper beam may be used where
the street is not lighted sufficiently to reveal any person, vehicle or
substantial object straight ahead of such vehicle for a distance of at least
350 feet, and provided that there is no vehicle within 500 feet approaching
from the direction ahead.
      (2)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle or motorcycle on any street
at any time unless it is equipped with head lamps, rear lamps and reflectors
complying with the provisions of §§ 375(2) and 376 of the Vehicle and Traffic
Law.
   (c)   Colored lights prohibited. No operator of a motorcycle or motor
vehicle, other than authorized emergency vehicles, shall operate said vehicle
when displaying other than white or yellow lights visible from in front of the
vehicle. No operator of an authorized emergency vehicle shall operate said
vehicle when displaying other than white or yellow lights visible from in front
of the vehicle except when actually engaged in emergency service.
   (d)   Lights on horse-drawn cabs and pushcarts. No person shall drive a
horse-drawn cab or propel a pushcart in the roadway between sunset and sunrise
unless such horse drawn cab or pushcart displays a white or yellow light
visible from 200 feet directly in front and a red light visible from 200 feet
directly to the rear.
(Amended City Record 1/4/2019, eff. 2/15/2019)
§ 4-10 Buses.
   (a)   Franchise regulations.
      (1)   Franchise required. No person shall operate or cause to be operated
on any street a bus for the operation of which a franchise, consent, or
certificate of convenience and necessity, order, or other authorization of any
municipal, state, or federal authority is required, unless such franchise,
consent, certificate of convenience and necessity, order or other authorization
shall have been obtained. No person shall operate or move or cause to be
operated or moved on any street a bus operating pursuant to a certificate of
convenience and necessity, order or other written authorization of any state or
federal authority for which operation of a franchise or consent of the
Department of Transportation of the City of New York is not required, unless
there shall be filed with the Commissioner, not later than two weeks after
issuance, duly authenticated copies of such certificates, orders,
authorizations and amendments thereto.
      (2)   Franchise not required. Every person applying to any governmental
authority other than the City of New York for authorization to operate a bus
into or through the City of New York, for which operation or a franchise or
consent of the Department of Transportation of the City of New York is not
required, shall, within ten days after the date of submitting such application
to such governmental authority, file a duly authenticated copy thereof with the
Commissioner, and attach thereto a statement setting forth the address, by
street and number, of any proposed off-street terminal or terminals to be used
within the City of New York.
   (b)   Designated routes. No person shall operate or cause to be operated on
any street a bus operating pursuant to a franchise or consent of the Department
of Transportation of the City of New York which designates the route to be
followed, except on the route so designated. No person shall operate or cause
to be operated on any street any other bus, other than a charter bus, except
over a route designated by the Commissioner in writing.
   (c)   Pickup and discharge of passengers and layovers.
      (1)   Pickup and discharge of passengers at assigned bus stops. Except as
provided in paragraph (2) below, no operator of a bus, except a charter or
school bus, shall pick up or discharge passengers on a street except at a bus
stop assigned for the use of that operator by the Department in writing. A bus
may only stop at a location that has been assigned to it by the Department.
Charter buses, school buses, buses licensed by the New York City Taxi and
Limousine Commission, buses operated by the Metropolitan Transportation
Authority or any of its subdivisions or buses operating pursuant to a contract
or franchise with the City of New York are not required to obtain permits for
bus stop assignments. For all other bus types, bus stop assignments will be
made by the Department under a permit system in accordance with subdivisions
(d) and (j) of this section. A charter bus may stop on a highway at points of
origin and destination for the purpose of expeditiously receiving or
discharging passengers, except where prohibited by sign or by the Department.
While picking up or discharging passengers, a bus must be within twelve inches
of the curb and parallel thereto, except where a bus stop is physically
obstructed.
      (2)   Pickup and discharge of passengers at locations other than assigned
bus stops. 
         (i)   (A)   At times and along those portions of bus routes assigned
by the Department, an operator of a bus authorized to operate in the City of
New York that provides local or express service along a bus route may discharge
a passenger, on such passenger's request, at a curbside location other than a
bus stop as described in paragraph (1) above, provided that such location
affords the passenger getting off the bus a safe point of departure from the
bus and provided that complying with such request will not interfere with the
flow of traffic.
            (B)   Prospective passengers shall be picked up only at a bus stop
as provided in paragraph (1) above.
            (C)   The provisions of this subparagraph shall be clearly posted,
in a format approved by the Department, in all buses authorized to discharge
passengers between assigned stops.
            (D)   Clause (A) of this subparagraph does not apply to intercity
buses.
         (ii)   A charter bus may stop on a highway at points of origin and
destination for the purpose of expeditiously picking up or discharging
passengers, except where prohibited by sign or by the Department.
      (3)   Layovers. No operator of a bus shall make a bus layover, except in
locations designated by sign or by the Department in writing. For the purposes
of this rule, layover is defined as follows: for a bus without passengers a
layover consists of waiting at a curb or other street location; for a bus with
passengers a layover consists of waiting at a curb or other street location for
more than five minutes. The Department may define the terms, including duration
and authorized companies, for use of layover areas.
   (d)   Intercity Bus Permit System.
      (1)   Permit Required. The owner or operator of an intercity bus must
obtain an Intercity Bus Permit from the Department to be assigned an on-street
bus stop location. A separate Intercity Bus Permit is required for each on-
street bus stop location designated to such owner or operator.
      (2)   Applications. An application must be filed with the Department for
new Intercity Bus Permit(s) or the renewal of Intercity Bus Permit(s).
         (i)   An application for new Intercity Bus Permit(s) or for the
renewal of Intercity Bus Permit(s) must be submitted on a form provided by the
Department, which will include, but not be limited to, the following
information:
            (A)   Name, address, telephone number, e-mail address and motor
carrier number of the intercity bus owner or operator, United States Department
of Transportation number and/or New York State Department of Transportation
number for each bus that would use the proposed location(s).
            (B)   Proposed on-street bus stop location(s) and two or more
alternative locations for each proposed location.
            (C)   Number of bus trips per day that would use the proposed
location(s).
            (D)   Proposed intercity bus schedule for the proposed location.
            (E)   Final destination(s) of proposed bus service.
            (F)   Number of passengers per bus anticipated for each bus trip.
            (G)   Planned garage or other parking location of the bus during
periods when the bus is not being used to pick up or drop off passengers.
            (H)   The total number of buses that will be used for the permitted
bus operations during the full permit term.
         (ii)   Renewal applications must be submitted to the Department no
earlier than six months and no later than three months prior to the expiration
of an Intercity Bus Permit.
         (iii)   The Department will have up to one hundred fifty days to make
a determination on any new Intercity Bus Permit application.
         (iv)   The Department will have up to ninety days to make a
determination on any renewal Intercity Bus Permit application.
      (3)   Review and issuance of permits.
         (i)   The Commissioner may refuse to issue a permit to an applicant
who:
            (A)   Is in arrears to the City of New York for an amount totaling
more than one thousand dollars;
            (B)   Has been issued five of more violations pursuant to this
subdivision;
            (C)   Is currently under suspension of its authorization to operate
by either the United States Department of Transportation Federal Motor Carrier
Safety Administration and/or the New York State Department of Transportation.
         (ii)   Owners or operators of buses operating intercity bus service
who have been assigned on-street bus stop locations by the department that are
still in effect upon the effective date of this subdivision will, upon
application submitted to the department within thirty days of the effective
date of this subdivision, be issued Intercity Bus Permits by the department for
a term of up to three years. Such owners or operators who had previously been
assigned on-street bus stop locations by the department and who submitted an
application within such thirty day period may continue to use such assigned on-
street bus stop locations for a period of up to ninety days from the effective
date of this subdivision, or until the Intercity Bus Permit is issued by the
department, whichever date is sooner. Intercity Bus Permits issued pursuant to
this subparagraph are subject to all provisions of this subdivision.
         (iii)   The Department will post on its website all approved on-street
bus stop locations and a copy of all approved applications within thirty days
of approval.
         (iv)   On-street bus stop location assignment criteria. On-street bus
stop assignments will be made based on the following criteria:
            (A)   Traffic, pedestrian flow, and safety.
            (B)   Preferences of the Intercity Bus Permit applicant.
            (C)   Location of planned garage or other parking location during
periods when the bus is not being used to pick up or discharge passengers.
         (v)   Consultation about proposed on-street bus stop locations. 
            (A)   The Department will notify the local community board for the
district encompassing the location of a proposed on-street bus stop at least
forty-five calendar days prior to the issuance of an Intercity Bus Permit or
the relocation of an assigned on-street bus location, in order to provide the
community board the opportunity to comment on the proposed on-street bus stop
location.
            (B)   The Department will consult with the Metropolitan
Transportation Authority, if the location of a proposed on-street bus stop
overlaps with an existing Metropolitan Transportation Authority bus stop.
            (C)   The Department will consult with the Port Authority of New
York and New Jersey, if the location of a proposed on-street bus stop overlaps
with an existing Port Authority of New York and New Jersey bus facility.
         (vi)   If the Department refuses to issue a permit pursuant to
subparagraph (i) of this paragraph, or disapproves of all of an applicant's on-
street bus stop location(s) requested in its application based on the bus stop
assignment criteria in subparagraph (iv) of this paragraph, the applicant will
have fifteen days to appeal such determination by the Department or submit
alternative bus stop location(s). The Department will make a final
determination on such appeal within thirty days.
      (4)   Relocation of on-street bus stop locations. The Department may
relocate an assigned on-street bus stop location based on the criteria provided
in subparagraph (iv) of paragraph (3) of this subdivision and upon ninety days
notice to the permit holder.
      (5)   Permit fees. Permittees must pay an annual fee of thirty dollars
for each scheduled weekly pick-up or drop-off listed on the Intercity Bus
Permit issued by the Department. If the total permit fee exceeds $275 per
vehicle used in the permitted bus operations, based on the documentation
provided by permittee in its application, the permit fee will be reduced by the
department to a maximum total of $275 per vehicle actually used in such
permitted bus operations. If the permittee adds any buses to its operations not
listed in its application pursuant to 34 RCNY §
4-10(2)(H) during the term of such permit, and if the permittee's fee has
already been reduced to a $275 per vehicle fee as provided for herein at the
time of permit issuance, then the permittee shall be charged a fee of $275 for
each additional vehicle.
      (6)   Term of Intercity Bus Permits. Intercity Bus Permits will be issued
for a term of up to three years.
      (7)   Permittee obligations. All Intercity Bus Permit permittees must
comply with the following obligations:
         (i)   Promptly notify the Department of changes to information
provided in its application.
         (ii)   Prominently display a copy of the Intercity Bus Permit in each
intercity bus operating pursuant to such Intercity Bus Permit.
         (iii)   Display on each intercity bus using the designated location(s)
the operator's name, address and telephone number permanently affixed in
characters at least five inches high on both sides of the vehicle, with such
display being in a color contrasting with that of the vehicle and placed
approximately midway vertically on doors or side panels. Permittees may also
meet the display obligations by prominently marking buses in such a way that
such markings clearly identify the bus operator when observed from the closest
sidewalk that the bus stop at which the bus in question is stopped.
         (iv)   Pick-up and discharge passengers only at on-street bus stops
designated by the Commissioner for use by the permittee.
         (v)   Not stop or stand in its assigned on-street bus stop location
except when actively engaged in the pick-up or discharge of passengers.
         (vi)   Not alter any Intercity Bus Permit issued pursuant to this
section.
         (vii)   Notify the Department of the issuance of any violation by the
United States Department of Transportation Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Administration or the New York State Department of Transportation within five
days of the issuance thereof.
      (8)   Suspension and revocation of Intercity Bus Permits.
         (i)   The Department may suspend or revoke an Intercity Bus Permit for
failure to comply with any of the requirements of this subdivision or in the
event of suspension or termination of the authorization to operate its buses by
either the United States Department of Transportation Federal Motor Carrier
Safety Administration or the New York State Department of Transportation.
         (ii)   Prior to suspending or revoking an Intercity Bus Permit the
Department will give the permittee an opportunity to be heard with at least two
business days notice.
         (iii)   If the Department determines that an imminent peril to life or
property exists, including but not limited to, if any permittee's driver has
been issued a violation for driving while intoxicated or driving under the
influence pursuant to the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law, or if a
permittee's bus has been involved in an accident resulting in a fatality, the
Department may suspend or revoke an Intercity Bus Permit without providing the
permittee an opportunity to be heard prior to such suspension or revocation.
Upon request of the permittee, the Department will provide the permittee an
opportunity to present its objections to such suspension or revocation within
five business days after the Department receives the request. Any such request
by a permittee must be made within thirty business days of such suspension or
revocation.
      (9)   Temporary relocation of intercity on-street bus stops. The
Department may temporarily relocate a designated intercity on-street bus stop
location for a period of up to ninety days for reasons of public safety or
other emergency or temporary need as determined by the Department. The
Department will notify the local community board for the district encompassing
the location within thirty days of such temporary relocation.
   (e)   Routes.
      (1)   Operators of empty buses and buses with "charter," "special,"
"contract carriage" or similar non-route specific authority given by the City
of New York, the Department of Transportation, the Interstate Commerce
Commission, or other legally authorized body, must adhere to the truck routes
as described in 34 RCNY §
4-13, or other additional bus routes, except that an operator may operate on a
street not designated as a truck route or bus route for the purpose of arriving
at his/her destination. This shall be accomplished by leaving a designated
truck route or bus route at the intersection that is nearest to his/her
destination, proceeding by the most direct route, and then returning to the
nearest designated truck route or bus route by the most direct route. If the
operator has additional destinations in the same general area and there is no
designated truck route or bus route that can be taken to the next destination,
the operator may proceed to his/her next destination without returning to a
designated truck route or bus route. The operator shall have in his/her
possession throughout each trip a route slip, or similar document, showing the
points of origin and destination of the trip. Upon the request of a law
enforcement officer, or other authorized person, the bus operator shall present
for inspection the above stated document or documents.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the provisions of 34 RCNY §
4-10 paragraph (e)(1) above, no operator of a bus as described in paragraph (1)
shall operate his/her vehicle upon any of the streets within the area served by
the limited local truck route network in Staten Island as described in 34 RCNY
§
4-13(c), except for the purpose of arriving at a destination within the area
served by the network. This shall be accomplished by using a designated truck
route or bus route to the closest limited local truck route to the destination,
using this limited local truck route to the intersection that is nearest to the
destination. The operator shall then continue via the most direct route to the
closest designated limited local truck route and then to the closest designated
truck route or bus route. If the operator has additional destinations in the
same general area, and there is no designated truck route, limited local truck
route, or bus route that can be taken to the next destination, he/she may
proceed to his/her next destination without returning to a designated limited
local truck route.
   (f)   Required inspection of buses. No person shall operate or cause to be
operated on any street any bus required by law, ordinance, resolution, or rule
of any municipal, state, or federal authority to display a certificate, disc,
sticker, poster, or other insignia evidencing that such bus has been inspected
and is mechanically fit, or has been bonded or insured, or that prescribed fees
have been paid, unless such a certificate, disc, sticker, poster or other
insignia, currently valid, shall be displayed in the lower right hand corner of
the interior surface of the windshield of such bus. In the event it is required
that any writing be placed on any such certificate, disc, sticker, poster, or
other insignia by someone other than a public official, no person shall operate
or move or cause to be operated or moved on any street any such bus unless such
writing shall have been placed on such certificate, disc, sticker, poster, or
other insignia in black ink and in letters or numbers no less than one inch in
height and three-fourths of an inch in width.
   (g)   Leased and rented buses. No person shall operate or cause to be
operated a bus leased, rented, or borrowed from another person unless there is
marked on the side of the bus in letters at least three inches in height the
words "chartered by" followed by the name of the person operating such leased,
rented, or borrowed bus. Notwithstanding the foregoing, buses leased, rented or
borrowed from the City of New York shall not be required to have such markings.
   (h)   Limitation on backing buses. No person shall back any bus from or into
any street or across or along any sidewalk.
   (i)   Bus parking on streets prohibited. No person shall park a bus at any
time on any street within the City, unless authorized by signs, except that a
charter bus may park where parking is otherwise permitted at point of
destination.
   (j)   Bus Stop Permits for Non-Intercity Buses. 
      (1)   Permit Required. The owner or operator of a sight-seeing bus,
shuttle bus, or public transportation bus, that makes on-street stops to pick
up or discharge passengers in the City of New York must obtain a Bus Stop
Permit from the Department for each on-street bus stop location. This
subdivision does not apply to charter buses, school buses, buses operated by
the Metropolitan Transportation Authority or any of its subdivisions or buses
operating pursuant to a contract or franchise with the City of New York.
      (2)   Applications. An initial application for Bus Stop Permit(s) and a
renewal application for Bus Stop Permit(s) must be filed with the Department on
a form provided by the Department.
         (i)   Applications must include, but not be limited to, the following
information:
            (A)   Company legal name and any and all assumed name(s); the
principal address; the telephone number; the e-mail address; the names of the
principal(s) and the title(s); the United States Department of Transportation
number and the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration MC number; and/or
the New York State Department of Transportation number; the New York City
Department of Consumer Affairs existing license number for renewal
applications; and the vehicle registration for each bus that would stop at the
proposed location(s).
            (B)   Proposed on-street bus stop location(s) and two or more
alternative locations for each proposed location if applicable.
            (C)   Number of stops to be made per day at the proposed location
(s).
            (D)   Proposed bus schedule for the proposed location(s).
            (E)   Origin and final destination(s) of the proposed bus service.
            (F)   Maximum passenger capacity of the bus(es) to be used at the
proposed location.
            (G)   Planned garage or other parking location of the bus(es)
during periods when the bus(es) is/are not being used to pick up or drop off
passengers.
            (H)   Number of buses planned to be used in the operation of the
proposed bus service.
         (ii)   Renewal applications must be submitted to the Department no
earlier than three months and no later than one month prior to the expiration
of a Bus Stop Permit.
      (3)   Review and issuance of Bus Stop Permits. 
         (i)   The Department may refuse to issue or renew a Bus Stop Permit
under this subdivision to an applicant or Bus Stop Permit holder who:
            (A)   Is in arrears for an amount totaling more than one thousand
dollars owed to the City of New York;
            (B)   Has been issued five or more total violations and/or one or
more violations per vehicle in operation pursuant to this subdivision within
the preceding year;
            (C)   Has failed to provide location data or other information as
required by this subdivision. This subparagraph applies only to sight-seeing
bus applicants or permit holders;
            (D)   Has been found to operate without a New York City Department
of Consumer Affairs license, if such license is required, within the last year
or had a license revoked by the New York City Department of Consumer Affairs or
has been found in violation of any of the applicable New York City Department
of Consumer Affairs rules and regulations;
            (E)   Has had its Bus Stop Permit(s) revoked within the last two
years; or
            (F)   Is currently not authorized to operate a bus by either the
United States Department of Transportation Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Administration (or any successor agency) and/or the New York State Department
of Transportation (or any successor agency) and/or the New York City Department
of Consumer Affairs (or any successor agency).
         (ii)   The owner or operator of a bus company that has been assigned
on-street bus stop location(s) by the Department, which are still in effect
upon the effective date of this subdivision will, upon application to the
Department, within thirty days of the effective date of this subdivision, be
issued a Bus Stop Permit by the Department for a term of up to three years.
Such owner or operator who had previously been assigned on-street bus stop
location(s) by the Department and who submits an application within such thirty
day period may continue to use such assigned on-street bus stop location(s) for
a period of up to ninety days from the effective date of this subdivision, or
until a Bus Stop Permit is issued by the Department for such location(s),
whichever date is sooner.
         (iii)   In assigning on-street bus stop locations, the Department will
consider criteria: including, but not limited to:
            (A)   Traffic, pedestrian flow, and public safety;
            (B)   Preferences of the applicant;
            (C)   Consultation with the local community board for the district
encompassing the location to be authorized, including but not limited to a
notice and comment period of 45 days prior to the authorization or permanent
amendment;
            (D)   The number of stops proposed and the viability of a proposed
bus stop schedule as determined by the Department;
            (E)   The availability and location of planned garage or other
parking space for periods when buses picking up or discharging passengers at
the authorized stops are not in use;
            (F)   Ongoing and/or upcoming construction projects in the vicinity
of the proposed location(s); and
            (G)   Any other criteria deemed appropriate by the Department.
         The Department must approve or deny such authorizations no later than
180 days from the date of the application.
         (iv)   The Department will notify the local community board for the
community district encompassing the location of a proposed on-street bus stop
at least forty-five business days prior to the issuance of a Bus Stop Permit,
or the permanent relocation of an assigned on-street bus stop location, in
order to provide the community board an opportunity to comment on the proposed
on-street bus stop location.
         (v)   If the Department denies an application submitted pursuant to
subparagraph (i) of this paragraph, or disapproves of all of an applicant's on-
street bus stop locations requested in its application based on the bus stop
assignment criteria set forth in subparagraph (iii) of this paragraph, the
applicant will have fifteen calendar days to appeal such determination in the
form prescribed by the Department or submit alternative bus stop locations. The
Department will make a final determination on such appeal within thirty days
      (4)   Relocation of on-street bus stop locations. 
         (i)   Permanent relocation of on-street bus stops. The Department may
relocate an assigned on-street bus stop location based on the criteria provided
in subparagraph (iii) of paragraph (3) of this subdivision and upon ninety
calendar days' notice to the permit holder.
         (ii)   Temporary relocation of on-street bus stops. The Department may
temporarily relocate an assigned on-street bus stop location for reasons of
public safety or other emergency or temporary need as determined by the
Department. The Department will notify the local community board for the
community district encompassing the location within thirty calendar days of
such temporary relocation.
      (5)   Permit Fees. For any new sightseeing bus stop application, an
applicant must pay a fee of five hundred and twenty dollars for each bus stop.
For any renewal sightseeing bus stop application, an applicant must pay a fee
of one hundred fifty five dollars for each bus stop.
      (6)   Term of Bus Permits. The Department will fix the term of each Bus
Stop Permit, which will not exceed three years.
      (7)   Permittee obligations. Bus Stop Permit holders must:
         (i)   Promptly notify the Department of changes to information
provided in its application.
         (ii)   Keep all the Bus Stop Permits in each bus permitted to use the
assigned bus stops and present such permits for inspection upon request of any
law enforcement officer or other person authorized to enforce this rule.
         (iii)   Prominently display a list of all Bus Stop Permits and
specific bus stop locations authorized by such permits in each bus permitted to
use the assigned bus stop in a way that such list can be clearly observed from
the closest curb at which the bus is stopped.
         (iv)   Display on each bus authorized hereunder to stop at an on-
street bus stop the owner or operator's name, address and telephone number
permanently affixed in characters at least five inches high on both sides of
the bus, with such display being in a color contrasting with that of the bus
and placed approximately midway vertically on doors or side panels. Bus
operators may also meet the display obligations by prominently marking buses in
such a way that such markings clearly identify the bus operator when observed
from the closest curb at which the bus is stopped.
         (v)   Pick up and discharge passengers only at on-street bus stop(s)
assigned by the Department.
         (vi)   Not stop or stand in an assigned on-street bus stop location
except when actively engaged in the pick-up or discharge of passengers.
         (vii)   Not alter any permit issued pursuant to this section.
         (viii)   Notify the Department of the issuance of any violation,
revocation, suspension, or other status change, to the bus operating authority,
by the United States Department of Transportation Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Administration or the New York State Department of Transportation, or the New
York City Department of Consumer Affairs within five calendar days of the
issuance thereof.
         (ix)   Notify the Department of the issuance of any traffic or parking
violations within thirty calendar days of the issuance thereof and the issuance
of any traffic violation committed by a driver while operating the sight-seeing
bus that could be the basis for the assignment of points within three calendar
days of the issuance thereof.
         (x)   Not transfer, sell, give or otherwise reassign the Bus Stop
Permit(s) except as authorized by the Department.
         (xi)   Provide the Department, in the form prescribed by the
Department, with quarterly reports containing Global Positioning System data
for each bus operated by the permit holder, recorded at one-minute intervals,
including, but not limited to, vehicle identification number, time and date of
ping, time zone, latitude and longitude, ignition status, speed, and odometer
reading, except as authorized by the Department. This subparagraph applies only
to sight-seeing Bus Stop Permit holders.
      (8)   Suspension and revocation of Bus Stop Permits. 
         (i)   The Department may suspend or revoke a Bus Stop Permit:
            (A)   For failure to comply with any of the requirements of this
subdivision;
            (B)   In the event of suspension or termination of the
authorization to operate a bus by either the United States Department of
Transportation Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration or the New York
State Department of Transportation or the New York City Department of Consumer
Affairs;
            (C)   Based on any grounds listed in subparagraph (i) of paragraph
(3) of this subdivision;
            (D)   If an operator does not provide a bus service for a period of
one month.
         (ii)   Prior to suspending or revoking a Bus Stop Permit, the
Department will give the bus company an opportunity to be heard upon at least
two business days' notice.
         (iii)   If the Department determines that an imminent peril to life or
property exists, the Department may suspend or revoke a bus stop authorization
without providing the permittee an opportunity to be heard prior to such
suspension or revocation. Upon request of the permittee, the Department will
provide the permittee an opportunity to present its objections to such
suspension or revocation within five business days after the Department
receives the request. Any such request by a permittee must be made within
thirty business days of such suspension or revocation.
(Amended City Record 4/12/2016, eff. 5/12/2016; amended City Record 1/10/2020,
eff. 2/9/2020)
§ 4-11 Taxis, Commuter Vans, For-Hire and Certain Diplomatic and Consular
Vehicles.
   (a)   Standing. No operator of a taxi, while awaiting employment shall stand
his/her vehicle in any street except:
      (1)   At an authorized taxi stand.
      (2)   In front of fire hydrants where standing or stopping is not
prohibited by signs or rules, provided that the operator remains in the
operator's seat ready for immediate operation of the taxi at all times and
starts the motor on hearing the approach of fire apparatus, and provided
further, that the operator shall immediately remove the taxi from in front of
the fire hydrant when instructed to do so by any member of the police, fire, or
other municipal department acting in his/her official capacity.
   (b)   Cruising prohibited. An operator of a vehicle other than a taxi shall
not operate his/her vehicle along a street for the purpose of soliciting
passengers or searching for passengers.
   (c)   Pickup and discharge of passengers by taxis, commuter vans and for-
hire vehicles. Operators of taxis, commuter vans and for-hire vehicles may, in
the course of the lawful operation of such vehicles, temporarily stop their
vehicles to expeditiously pick up or discharge passengers at the curb in areas
where standing or parking is prohibited. Taxis, commuter vans and for-hire
vehicles, while engaged in picking up or discharging passengers must be within
12 inches of the curb and parallel thereto, but may stop or stand to pick up or
discharge passengers alongside a vehicle parked at the curb only if there is no
unoccupied curb space available within 100 feet of the pickup or discharge
location; however, picking up or discharging passengers shall not be made:
      (1)   Within a pedestrian crosswalk.
      (2)   Within an intersection, except on the side of a roadway opposite a
street which intersects but does not cross such roadway.
      (3)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation when stopping to pick
up or discharge passengers obstructs traffic.
      (4)   Under such conditions as to obstruct the movement of traffic and in
no instance so as to leave fewer than 10 feet available for the free movement
of vehicular traffic.
      (5)   Where stopping is prohibited.
      (6)   Within a bicycle lane.
      (7)   Within horse-drawn cab passenger boarding areas.
   (d)   Pickup and discharge of passengers by certain diplomatic and consular
vehicles. A vehicle bearing "A", "C" or "D" series license plates issued by the
U.S. Department of State and displaying a valid non-transferable service
vehicle decal issued by the City of New York that is affixed to the inside of
the operator's side of the windshield shall be treated like a for-hire vehicle
while actively engaged in and for the purpose of expeditiously picking up or
discharging passengers, in a manner that does not obstruct traffic, provided
that the operator of such vehicle bearing such "A" "C" or "D" series license
plates and displaying such non-transferable service vehicle decal:
      (1)   may not pick up or discharge passengers in a for-hire vehicle stop;
      (2)   remains in attendance at the vehicle; and
      (3)   shall immediately remove such vehicle when instructed to do so by
any law enforcement officer.
(Amended City Record 7/2/2018, eff. 8/1/2018; amended City Record 1/4/2019,
eff. 2/15/2019)
§ 4-12 Miscellaneous.
   (a)   Compliance with directions of law enforcement officers.
      (1)   An operator must at all times comply with any direction given by a
law enforcement officer, a bridge and tunnel officer of the Port Authority of
New York and New Jersey, or an officer of the Triborough Bridge and Tunnel
Authority authorized to enforce these rules, or a school crossing guard by
hand, voice, whistle or mechanical device.
      (2)   A law enforcement officer, school crossing guard or a bridge and
tunnel officer may disregard any traffic light signal or rule in order to
expedite the movement of traffic or to safeguard pedestrians or property.
      (3)   Vehicle operators must present and/or surrender their operator's
license, vehicle registration and insurance documents upon request of a law
enforcement officer.
   (b)   Passengers in vehicle. No person shall ride in any place or in any
part of a vehicle except that provided for passenger carrying purposes, nor
shall he/she permit any part of his/her body to extend outside of any part of a
vehicle, except when required to extend the hand to indicate an intention to
turn, slow down, stop, or start from the curb.
   (c)   Getting out of vehicle. No person shall get out of any vehicle from
the side facing on the traveled part of the street in such manner as to
interfere with the right of the operator of an approaching vehicle or a
bicycle.
   (d)   Fire drill line. The operator of any vehicle, except authorized
emergency vehicles, shall not drive through or approach within one hundred feet
of a line of children during a fire drill, nor interfere with, hinder,
obstruct, or impede in any way whatsoever any such fire drill.
   (e)   Operator's hand on steering device. No person shall operate or ride a
motor vehicle or bicycle without having his/her hand on the steering device or
handle bars. A person riding or leading a horse or driving a horse-drawn
carriage shall have the reins in his/her hand continuously.
   (f)   Unbridled horse. No person shall leave a horse unbridled or unattended
in a street or unenclosed place unless the horse is securely fastened, or
harnessed to a vehicle with wheels so secured as to prevent it from being
dragged faster than a walk.
   (g)   Peddlers. 
      (1)   No peddler, vendor, hawker, or huckster shall permit his cart,
wagon, or vehicle to stand on any street when stopping, standing, or parking is
prohibited or on any street within 25 feet of any corner of the curb or to
stand at any time on any sidewalk or within 500 feet of any public market or
within 200 feet of any public or private school.
      (2)   No peddler, vendor, hawker, or huckster shall stop, remain upon or
otherwise encumber, or permit any cart, table, wagon, vehicle, or other object
owned or controlled by such peddler, vendor, hawker or huckster to stop, remain
upon or otherwise encumber, any elevated pedestrian walkway or bicycle lane on
a bridge or a bridge approach for the purpose of selling, displaying, storing
or creating merchandise or providing a service. For purposes of this
subdivision, the term “bridge” means a structure erected to allow for travel
over a highway, body of water, railway or other obstacle; the term “elevated
pedestrian walkway” means a portion of a bridge that is separated from
vehicular traffic and is intended for use by pedestrians; and the term “bridge
approach” means the area within the envelope of a bridge that connects a bridge
to the street.
   (h)   Reporting accidents by operators of other than motor vehicles. The
operators of any bicycle or vehicle other than a motor vehicle involved in an
accident resulting in death or injury to a person or damage to property must
stop and give their names and addresses and information concerning liability
insurance coverage to the party sustaining injuries or damage, and in the case
of death or injury, he/she must, in addition to the above, without delay report
the accident to the nearest police station, unless he/she has supplied the
information to a police officer on the scene. Accidents involving motor
vehicles must be reported as required by the Vehicle and Traffic Law.
   (i)   Horn for danger only. No person shall sound the horn of a vehicle
except when necessary to warn a person or animal of danger.
   (j)   Commercial advertising vehicles. 
      (1)   Restrictions. No person shall operate, stand, or park a vehicle or
bicycle on any street or roadway for the purpose of commercial advertising.
Advertising notices relating to the business for which a vehicle is used may be
put upon a motor vehicle when such vehicle is in use for normal delivery or
business purposes, and not merely or mainly for the purpose of commercial
advertising, provided that no portion of any such notice shall be
reflectorized, illuminated, or animated, and provided that no such notice shall
be put upon the top of the vehicle and that no special body or other object
shall be put upon vehicles for commercial advertising purposes. Advertisements
may be put upon vehicles licensed by the New York City Taxi and Limousine
Commission in accordance with the Commission's rules.
      (2)   Buses and Sanitation Vehicles. Notwithstanding the foregoing
provisions of this subdivision (j), buses operated pursuant to a franchise or
consent from the Department of Transportation of the City of New York, and
cleaning and collection vehicles owned or operated by the New York City
Department of Sanitation may display commercial advertisements, including
reflectorized and illuminated advertisements, on the exterior surface areas of
such vehicles and may have installed on such vehicles the necessary frames,
supports and related appurtenances in order to display such advertisements.
   (k)   Snow Emergency.
      (1)   Standing and Parking Prohibited. When the Commissioner declares a
state of snow emergency, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon a street
designated by signs as a snow street, or upon any part of the right-of-way,
including the berm or shoulder adjacent to the roadways, entrances and exits of
the expressways, parkways, bridges and tunnels set forth in 34 RCNY §
4-07(i), except in such areas and for such purposes as shall be designated by
the Commissioner, until the Commissioner declares the prohibition of such
standing or parking terminated. On certain designated snow streets, posted
signs may prohibit parking on only one side of the street.
      (2)   Operating vehicles prohibited. When the Commissioner declares a
state of snow emergency, no person shall operate a vehicle upon a street
designated by signs as a snow street or upon any part of the right-of-way,
including the berm or shoulder adjacent to the roadways, entrances, and exits
of the expressways, parkways, bridges and tunnels set forth in 34 RCNY §
4-07(i) unless the drive, traction or powered wheels of said vehicle are
equipped with skid chains or snow tires, until the Commissioner declares the
state of snow emergency terminated.
      (3)   Snow tires defined. For the purposes of this rule, snow tires are
defined as:
         (i)   Any radial tire (a radial tire is a tire in which the ply cords,
extending to the beads, are nearly at right angles to the center line of the
tread).
         (ii)   Any tire with tread which has ribs, lugs, blocks or buttons
arranged in a generally discontinuous pattern; when inflated, a substantial
number of the lug, block or rib edges in the tread design are at an angle
greater than 30 degrees to the tire circumferential center line; and, on at
least one side of the tread design, have shoulder lugs that protrude at least
one-half inch in a direction generally perpendicular to the direction of
travel.
         (iii)   Any tire labelled on the sidewall with the words "MUD AND
SNOW" or any contraction using the letters "M" and "S" (e.g. MS, M/S, M-S or
M&S).
      (4)   Worn or damaged tires. Worn or damaged tires which no longer
provide effective traction shall not constitute snow tires within the meaning
of this section regardless of their original classification or designation.
      (5)   Use of parkways by certain vehicles. Notwithstanding any other
provision of these rules, during snow emergencies declared by the Commissioner,
commercial vehicles owned or operated by oil heating companies that are no more
than 7 feet in height, no more than 8,500 pounds in maximum gross weight, and
have no more than two axles and four tires may travel on parkways and other
roadways where commercial vehicles are normally prohibited when such vehicles
are responding to heat emergencies which require the repair of heating and hot
water equipment. Such vehicles must abide by all posted weight limits and
clearances on such roadways.
   (l)   Emergency repairs. No person shall solicit or render repair service or
push or tow any vehicle on any part of the right-of-way, including the berm or
shoulder adjacent to the roadways, entrances and exits of the expressways and
parkways, and bridges enumerated in § 4-07(i), except persons and vehicles
operating pursuant to a permit issued by the Commissioner. This subdivision (l)
shall not be deemed to prohibit emergency repairs by the occupants of a
disabled vehicle.
   (m)   Bus lane restrictions on city streets. 
      (1)   Bus lanes. 
         (i)   When signs are erected giving notice of bus lane restrictions,
except as otherwise posted, no person shall drive a vehicle other than a bus or
a wheelchair accessible Access-A-Ride vehicle having a seating capacity of four
or more passengers, within a designated bus lane during the restricted hours,
except:
            (A)   to use such a bus lane that is not a busway in a safe manner
in order to make a right hand turn where permitted into a public or private
street or driveway provided that the vehicle does not drive through an
intersection; o
            (B)   to use such a bus lane that is not a busway in a safe manner
to make a right hand turn where permitted, within two hundred feet of entry
into such bus lane, into a public or private street or driveway even if such
activity requires driving through an intersection; or
            (C)   to approach to or leave the curbside space, unless standing
or stopping at the curb is prohibited by sign or rule; or
            (D)   temporarily to enter or leave the bus lane for the purpose of
and while actually engaged in expeditiously receiving or discharging
passengers, except when such activity is prohibited by signs or rules; or
            (E)   to avoid an obstacle which obstructs the roadway and leaves
fewer than ten feet of roadway width available for the free movement of
vehicular traffic (except for temporary situations such as slow moving traffic
and vehicles loading refuse); or
            (F)   to comply with the direction of any law enforcement officer
or other person authorized to enforce this rule.
         (ii)   With respect to the exceptions in clauses (C) through (F) of
subparagraph (i) of this paragraph, a vehicle must exit the bus lane at the
nearest opportunity where it is safe and legal to do so.
      (2)   Busways. 
         (i)   When signs are erected giving notice of bus lane restrictions
relating to busways, no person shall drive a vehicle other than a bus or a
wheelchair accessible Access-A-Ride vehicle having a seating capacity of four
or more passengers during restricted hours except where permitted by sign or at
the direction of a law enforcement officer or other person authorized to
enforce this rule.
         (ii)   A vehicle must follow posted signs when exiting a busway.
      (3)   Notwithstanding any other provision of these rules, no person may
drive a vehicle within a designated bus lane or busway in a manner that
interferes with the safety and passage of buses operating thereon.
      (4)   The same rights and restrictions that apply to vehicles pursuant to
this subdivision also apply to horse-drawn vehicles and devices moved by human
power.
   (n)   Work affecting traffic. The rules contained in the New York State
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices shall be complied with by public and
private organizations when temporary disruption of street traffic is required
for street repaving or repairs, subsurface utility line installations or other
repairs and similar projects.
   (o)   Use of roadways. 
      (1)   Pedestrians, horses, bicycles and limited use vehicles prohibited.
In order to provide for the maximum safe use of the expressways, drives,
highways, interstate routes, bridges and thruways set forth in 34 RCNY §
4-07(i) and to preserve life and limb thereon, the use of such highways by
pedestrians, riders of horses and operators of limited use vehicles and
bicycles is prohibited, unless signs permit such use.
      (2)   Flat tires. No operator shall stop on the improved or paved roadway
of any of the arteries set forth in 34 RCNY §
4-07(i), for the purpose of removing or replacing a flat tire. No person shall
remove or replace a flat tire unless the vehicle is completely off the improved
or paved roadway so that no part of the vehicle or person is exposed to passing
vehicles.
   (p)   Bicycles.
      (1)   Bicycle riders to use bicycle lanes. Whenever a usable path or lane
for bicycles has been provided, bicycle riders shall use such path or lane only
except under any of the following situations:
         (i)   When preparing for a turn at an intersection or into a private
road or driveway.
         (ii)   When reasonably necessary to avoid conditions (including but
not limited to, fixed or moving objects, motor vehicles, bicycles, pedestrians,
pushcarts, animals, surface hazards) that make it unsafe to continue within
such bicycle path or lane.
      (2)   Driving on or across bicycle lanes prohibited. No person shall
drive a vehicle on or across a designated bicycle lane, except when it is
reasonable and necessary:
         (i)   to enter or leave a driveway; or
         (ii)   to enter or leave a legal curbside parking space; or
         (iii)   to cross an intersection; or
         (iv)   to make a turn within an intersection; or
         (v)   to comply with the direction of any law enforcement officer or
other person authorized to enforce this rule; or
         (vi)   to avoid an obstacle which leaves fewer than ten feet available
for the free movement of vehicular traffic. Notwithstanding any other rule, no
person shall drive a vehicle on or across a designated bicycle lane in such
manner as to interfere with the safety and passage of persons operating
bicycles thereon.
      (3)   Bicycles permitted on both sides of 40-foot wide one-way roadways.
Any person operating a bicycle upon a roadway that carries traffic in one
direction only and is at least 40 feet wide may ride as near as is practicable
to either the left or the right hand curb or edge of such roadway, provided
that bicycles are not prohibited from using said roadway.
      (4)   Business using a bicycle for commercial purposes. 
         (i)   Definitions. For purposes of this paragraph, the following terms
have the following meanings:
            (A)   "Business using a bicycle for commercial purposes" means a
person, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, or other
entity that, either on behalf of itself or others, delivers packages, parcels,
papers or articles of any type by bicycle.
            (B)   "Bicycle operator" means a person who delivers packages,
parcels, papers, or articles of any type by bicycle on behalf of a business
using a bicycle for commercial purposes and who is paid by such business.
         (ii)   Registration information. A business using a bicycle for
commercial purposes that does not have a site within the City of New York that
is open and available to the public must register with the Department and
provide, upon a form prescribed by the Department, the following information:
            (A)   the name under which such business is authorized to do
business in the State, pursuant to the Business Corporation Law;
            (B)   the name of the owner of such business;
            (C)   the registered agent upon whom process against such business
may be served and the address of such agent, or, if the business has designated
the Secretary of State as its agent for receiving such process, the post office
address to which the Secretary of State may mail a copy of such process;
            (D)   the list of entities such business is providing services for;
            (E)   the roster with such business's bicycle operator information
as required by § 10-157(d) of the New York City Administrative Code, and
            (F)   any other information requested by the Department.
         (iii)   Bicycle safety poster or notice. Every business using a
bicycle for commercial purposes must post at least one bicycle safety poster at
each business site using a bicycle for commercial purposes; provided, however,
that if such business has only a post office address within the City, such
business must provide a written notice to each of its bicycle operators.
            (A)   The bicycle safety poster or notice must be in English,
Spanish and any other language spoken predominately by any bicycle operator
utilized by the business. The poster must be clear, prominent, and large enough
to be visible to the bicycle operators and patrons of the business; however,
the size of the poster must be printed in at least 10 point font and on paper
that is at least 11 inches x 17 inches.
            (B)   The poster must be printed in a manner so as to be legible
even to people who are colorblind.
            (C)   An example of the type of poster required to be posted must
be made available on the Department's website.
            (D)   The poster must consist of a header or title, which will
appear at the top of the poster, Sections 1 through 4, and a footer, which will
appear at the bottom of the poster, as more fully described below:
               1.   Header/Title: Commercial Bicyclist Safety
               2.   Section 1: This poster must be displayed where delivery
cyclists will easily see it. Sections 10-157 and 10-157.1 of the New York City
Administrative Code regulate businesses using a bicycle for commercial
purposes. The responsibilities listed below are imposed by law. Failure to
comply with these requirements may subject violators to legal sanctions.
               3.   Section 2: Commercial bicyclists must obey all traffic laws
and rules. These laws include, but are not limited to, the following
requirements:
                  • Yield to pedestrians.
                  • Ride in the direction of traffic
                  • Stay off the sidewalk
                  • Stop at all red lights and stop signs
                  • Do not wear more than one earphone while riding
                  • Use a white headlight and red taillight at night
               4.   Section 3: Commercial bicyclists must:
                  • Wear retro-reflective outermost upper body apparel with the
business's name and bicyclist's 3 -digit ID number on the back in lettering at
least 1 inch high.
                  • Wear a bicycle helmet that is in good condition
                     o Every business using a bicycle for commercial purposes
must provide or ensure the availability of protective headgear for each of its
bicycle operators at no cost to such operators.
                  • Carry a business ID card at all times when making
deliveries or operating a bicycle on behalf of the business, which includes the
information below:
                     o Business name, address and phone number
                     o Bicycle operator's name, photo and 3 -digit ID number
                  • Every business using a bicycle for commercial purposes must
provide the above items.
               5.   Section 4: Every business using a bicycle for commercial
purposes must:
                  • Equip each commercial bicycle with the following, in
addition to the items required above:
                     o A bell or other audible device
                     o White headlight and red taillight
                     o Reflex reflectors
                     o Brakes
                  • Maintain a roster of its bicycle operators, which includes
each bicyclist's:
                     o Name, home address, employment start date and, where
applicable, date of discharge
                     o Unique 3-digit ID number
                     o Date of completion of DOT Commercial Bicyclist Safety
course
               6.   Footer: For more information, please visit nyc.gov/bikes 
      (5)   Additional requirements for pedal-assist commercial bicycles. 
         (i)   No person shall operate or park a pedal-assist commercial
bicycle on any public highway in the City of New York unless such bicycle has
permanently affixed in a prominent location on the electric motor of the
bicycle or elsewhere on the bicycle a legible original label of the
manufacturer of the bicycle and/or of the electric motor containing the maximum
motor-assisted speed and motor wattage of the bicycle.
         (ii)   All pedal-assist commercial bicycles and their operators must
comply with the provisions of Article 34 of the New York State Vehicle and
Traffic Law relating to the operation of bicycles, except as provided in 34
RCNY §
4-02(e).
         (iii)   A pedal-assist commercial bicycle that has been modified in
any of the following ways shall not be considered a pedal-assist commercial
bicycle and may not be operated or parked on any public highway:
            A.   Any modification that increases the output of such bicycle to
seven hundred fifty watts or greater;
            B.   Any modification that prevents the motor from disengaging when
(i) the operator applies the brakes, (ii) the operator stops pedaling, or (iii)
the bicycle achieves a speed of fifteen miles per hour; or
            C.   Any modification that accelerates the speed of the pedal-
assist commercial bicycle motor by means other than pedaling.
         (iv)   A pedal-assist commercial bicycle may not be parked or left
unattended on a sidewalk.
         (v)   A pedal-assist commercial bicycle shall comply with
manufacturer’s weight rating specifications.
      (6)   Operating a bicycle sharing system without written authorization
prohibited. No person may operate a bicycle sharing system in the City of New
York without the prior written authorization of the Department.
      (7)   No person or such person's agent or employee shall leave
unattended, or permit to be left unattended, any bicycle, whether or not owned
by such person, in any city owned bike-rack within the jurisdiction of the
department of transportation in excess of seven consecutive days. A notice may
be affixed to any unattended bicycle advising that the bicycle must be removed
within seven days from the date of the notice. This notice shall also state
that the failure to remove the unattended bicycle within the designated time
period will result in the removal of the unattended bicycle by the department
of transportation, the police department, or any other agency delegated by the
department of transportation. Nothing in this section shall preclude the
immediate removal of any bicycle or the taking of any other action by any
agency if the presence of such bicycle creates a dangerous condition by
restricting vehicular or pedestrian traffic. Bicycles removed pursuant to this
paragraph shall be treated as lost property pursuant to article 7-B of the
Personal Property Law.
      (8)   Additional requirements for commercial bicycles. 
         (i)   Commercial bicycles must display a color contrasting
identification label on both sides of each bicycle indicating the name or
symbol of the business in which such bicycle is used and if more than one
bicycle is used, a unique ID number assigned by the business.
         (ii)   Commercial bicycles may park or stand in commercial bicycle
loading only zones when actively engaged commercially in loading or unloading
property and for the duration of the posted sign.
         (iii)   Commercial bicycles may park or stand in the parking lane on a
street wherever commercial vehicles may park or stand including commercial
vehicle metered parking or truck loading zones and shall be exempt from paying
parking meter fees. Bicycles must be parked perpendicular to the curb provided
there is space for the passage of a vehicle between the bicycle and the center
of the street.
   (q)   Transportation of radioactive materials. Shipments of radioactive
materials meeting or exceeding the specifications of "large quantities" and/or
"fissile Class III" as specified by the Interstate Commerce Commission and the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission, shall follow the same truck routes designated
for vehicles having an overall length of 33 feet or more, in 34 RCNY §
4-13 of these rules. All such shipments are required to be so classified under
the NRC license or contract before being shipped and the carrier shall obtain
the proper classification. All vehicles carrying such shipments shall adhere to
the rules of the fire department, the Department of Environmental Protection
and 24 RCNY Health Code §
175.111.
   (r)   Restricted use and limited use streets.
      (1)   Restrictions. No operator of a vehicle or combination of vehicles
shall operate, enter, stop, stand or park any such vehicle on any street
designated as a restricted use street or a limited use street by the Department
of Transportation, unless such vehicle or combination of vehicles
         (i)   is being used for the purpose of loading or unloading at
premises legally utilizing an entrance, loading bay or elevator that fronts
upon said street during authorized hours or,
         (ii)   is a bus traversing a route, franchised by the Department of
Transportation, which includes said street, and the vehicle stands only at a
designated bus stop or,
         (iii)   is a maintenance or utility vehicle operated or engaged by
proper authority for the purpose of construction or maintenance of said street
or any utility located on, above or below the street surface or for the
construction or maintenance of any structure located on said street.
      (2)   Driving across permitted. Notwithstanding any other provision
stated herein, the operator of any vehicle may drive across any restricted use
or limited use street that intersects the street along which he is travelling.
      (3)   Commissioner may suspend. The commissioner, upon 24 hours' notice
to the public, may suspend the application of this subdivision (r) for a
specified period or indefinitely. If suspended for a specific period, the
provisions of this subdivision (r) shall become effective at the termination of
such period. If suspended indefinitely, the provisions of this subdivision (r)
shall become effective upon order of the Commissioner and 48 hours notice to
the public.
      (4)   Definitions. For the purpose of this subdivision (r), a restricted
use street is a legally mapped street to be permanently closed to motor
vehicles by the Department of Transportation, except as provided herein, and
open to use by pedestrians. A limited use street is a legally mapped street to
be temporarily closed to motor vehicles by the Department of Transportation,
except as provided herein, and in accordance with lawfully authorized signs or
other traffic control devices.
   (s)   Crossing buffer zones.
      (1)   For the purposes of this subdivision, a buffer zone is defined as
an area in the roadway, created by white lines, that is used to separate a
parking lane from a travel lane or a bicycle lane from a travel lane, as
indicated on the diagram below.
      (2)   No person shall drive a motor vehicle on or across a designated
buffer zone, except when it is reasonable and necessary to enter or leave a
legal curbside parking space or a driveway.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4a77823de8d2ee472adfbde019448cdce82c4f8a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-302.jpg]
   (t)   Horse drawn cab passenger boarding areas. 
      (1)   No person operating a horse drawn cab shall solicit, pick up or
discharge passengers at any location other than a location described in
paragraph (2) of this subdivision or a location designated by the department by
a posted sign as a horse drawn cab passenger boarding area. This subdivision
shall not apply to a horse drawn cab ride that is prearranged as described in §
19-174 of the New York City Administrative Code.
      (2)   Except as otherwise indicated by a posted sign, operators of horse
drawn cabs must expeditiously pick up or discharge passengers only at locations
within Central Park indicated by sign and on the map below:
         (i)   Grand Army Plaza. In the center lane at the Grand Army Plaza
entrance to Central Park.
         (ii)   Seventh Avenue Entrance. On the east curb, approximately 20
feet north of Central Park South.
         (iii)   Sixth Avenue. Between 59th Street and Center Drive.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4a77823de8d2ee472adfbde019448cdce82c4f8a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-15765.jpg]
      (3)   Temporary relocation or suspension of horse drawn cab passenger
boarding areas in parks. In exceptional circumstances, the Commissioner of
Parks and Recreation or the commissioner, subject to approval of the
Commissioner of Parks and Recreation, may temporarily relocate or suspend horse
drawn cab passenger boarding areas. For purposes of this paragraph, exceptional
circumstances shall include, but not be limited to construction, maintenance,
unusually heavy pedestrian or bicycle traffic, existence of any obstructions, a
parade, demonstration, special event, or other such similar event or occurrence
at or near such location. Temporarily relocated horse drawn cab passenger
boarding areas shall be located in Central Park and denoted by appropriate
signage.
(Amended City Record 6/28/2018, eff. 7/28/2018; amended City Record 7/2/2018,
eff. 8/1/2018; amended City Record 7/17/2018, eff. 8/16/2018; amended City
Record 7/26/2018, eff. 8/25/2018; amended City Record 1/4/2019, eff. 2/15/2019;
amended City Record 4/30/2019, eff. 5/30/2019; amended City Record 12/20/2021,
eff. 1/19/2022; amended City Record 1/3/2024, eff. 1/3/2024; amended City
Record 3/27/2024, eff. 4/26/2024; amended City Record 10/3/2025, eff. 11/2/
2025)
§ 4-13 Truck Routes.
   (a)   General provisions.
      (1)   Definitions. For the purpose of these rules, a truck is defined as
any vehicle or combination of vehicles designed for the transportation of
property, which has either of the following characteristics: two axles, six
tires; or three or more axles
      (2)   Exceptions. These rules do not apply to authorized emergency
vehicles and authorized public utility company vehicles engaged in an emergency
operation as defined in § 114-b of the Vehicle and Traffic Law.
      (3)   Enforcement. An operator of any truck as defined above shall have
in his/her possession throughout each trip a bill of lading, or similar
document, showing the points of origin and destination of the trip. Upon the
request of a law enforcement officer or other authorized person, the truck
operator shall present for inspection the above stated document or documents.
   (b)   Truck routing rules for the Borough of Queens.
      (1)   Through trucks. An operator of any truck as defined above, having
neither an origin nor a destination within the Borough of Queens shall restrict
the operation of such vehicle to those street segments on the following list.
These are designated as "Through Truck Routes." All trucks must adhere to all
posted signs indicating locations that limit the height of vehicles permitted
to operate thereon.
Through Truck Route Network
Street Limits
Street                                  Limits
Astoria Blvd. (North and South)         29th St. to Northern Blvd.
Atlantic Avenue                         Kings County Line to Van Wyck
                                        Expressway
Beach Channel Drive                     Marine Pkway Bridge to Nassau County
                                        Line
Braddock Avenue                         Hillside Avenue to Jamaica Avenue
Bradley Avenue                          Greenpoint Avenue to Van Dam Street
Bridge Plaza                            Queensboro Bridge to Jackson Avenue
Brooklyn-Queens Expressway              Kings County Line to Astoria Boulevard
                                        (North and South)
Clearview Expressway                    Throgs Neck Bridge to Hillside Avenue
Crescent Street                         41st Avenue to Bridge Plaza
Cross Island Parkway Service Roads      Whitestone Expressway to Francis Lewis
                                        Boulevard
Francis Lewis Boulevard                 Cross Island Parkway Service Road to
                                        Springfield Boulevard
Grand Central Parkway                   Triborough Bridge to the Brooklyn-
                                        Queens Expressway (western leg)
Greenpoint Avenue                       Van Dam Street to Queens Boulevard
Hempstead Avenue                        Jamaica Avenue to Nassau County Line
Hillside Avenue                         Myrtle Avenue to Nassau County Line
Hoyt Avenue (North and South)           Astoria Boulevard to 21st Street
Jackson Avenue                          Borden Avenue to Northern Boulevard
Jamaica Avenue                          Francis Lewis Boulevard to Nassau
                                        County Line
Linden Boulevard                        Kings County Line to North and South
                                        Conduit Avenue
Long Island Expressway                  Queens Midtown Tunnel to Nassau County
                                        Line
Myrtle Avenue                           Kings County Line to Hillside Avenue
North and South Conduit Avenue (Sunrise Linden Boulevard to Nassau County Line
Highway
Northern Boulevard                      Jackson Avenue to Nassau County Line
Queens Boulevard                        Jackson Avenue to Hillside Avenue
Rockaway Boulevard                      North and South Conduit Avenue to
                                        Nassau County Line
Springfield Boulevard                   Jamaica Avenue to North and South
                                        Conduit Avenue
Thomson Avenue                          Jackson Avenue to Queens Boulevard
Van Dam Street                          Greenpoint Avenue to Queens Boulevard
Van Wyck Expressway                     Whitestone Expressway to North and
                                        South Conduit Avenue
Whitestone Expressway                   Whitestone Bridge to Astoria Boulevard
21st Street                             Borden Avenue to 24th Avenue
24th Avenue                             21st Street to 29th Street
29th Street                             24th Avenue to Astoria Boulevard
41st Avenue                             21st Street to Crescent Street
213th Street                            Hempstead Avenue to Jamaica Avenue
 
      (2)   Local trucks. An operator of any truck as defined in paragraph (a)
(1) above, with an origin or destination for the purpose of delivery, loading
or servicing within the Borough of Queens, shall only operate such vehicle over
the following listed streets, except that an operator may operate on a street
not designated below for the purpose of arriving at his/her destination. This
shall be accomplished by leaving a designated truck route at the intersection
that is nearest and provides the most direct route to his/her destination,
proceeding by the most direct route while observing existing street directions
and turn restrictions, and then returning to the nearest designated truck route
by the most direct route. If the operator has additional destinations in the
immediate vicinity, he/she may proceed by the most direct route to his/her next
destination without returning to a designated truck route, provided that the
operator's next destination does not require that he/she cross a designated
truck route. All trucks must adhere to all posted signs indicating locations
that limit the height of vehicles permitted to operate thereon.
Local Truck Route Network 
Street Limits
Street                                  Limits
Astoria Blvd. (North and South)         8th Street to Northern Boulevard
Atlantic Avenue                         Kings County Line to Van Wyck
                                        Expressway
Baisley Boulevard                       Rockaway Boulevard to Merrick Boulevard
Beach Channel Drive                     Marine Pkway Bridge to Nassau County
                                        Line
Borden Avenue                           2nd Street to Greenpoint Avenue
Braddock Avenue                         Hillside Avenue to Jamaica Avenue
Bradley Avenue                          Greenpoint Avenue to Van Dam Street
Bridge Plaza                            Queensboro Bridge to Jackson Avenue
Broadway                                Vernon Boulevard to Queens Boulevard
Brooklyn-Queens Expressway              Kings County Line to Astoria Boulevard
                                        (North and South)
Central Avenue                          Myrtle Avenue to Cooper Avenue
Clearview Expressway                    Throgs Neck Bridge to Hillside Avenue
Clintonville Street                     Cross Island Parkway South Service Road
                                        to 7th Avenue
College Point Avenue                    Long Island Expressway to 14th Avenue
Cooper Avenue                           Kings County Line to Woodhaven
                                        Boulevard
Crescent Street                         41st Avenue to Bridge Plaza
Cross Bay Boulevard                     Liberty Avenue to Beach Channel Drive
Cross Island Pkwy. Service Rds.         Whitestone Expressway to Francis Lewis
                                        Boulevard
Cypress Avenue                          Flushing Avenue to Cooper Avenue
Ditmars Boulevard                       49th Street to Hazen Street
Ditmars Boulevard                       81st Street to 23rd Avenue
Dunkirk Street                          Liberty Avenue to Linden Boulevard
Farmers Boulevard                       Liberty Avenue to North and South
                                        Conduit Avenue
Flushing Avenue                         Kings County Line to 55th Street
Francis Lewis Boulevard                 Cross Island Parkway Service Roads to
                                        Springfield Boulevard
Fresh Pond Road                         Metropolitan Avenue to Myrtle Avenue
Grand Avenue                            Kings County Line to Rust Street
Grand Avenue                            Borden Avenue to Queens Boulevard
Greenpoint Avenue                       Van Dam Street to Queens Boulevard
Guy R. Brewer Boulevard                 Liberty Avenue to North and South
                                        Conduit Avenue
Hazen Street                            20th Avenue to Astoria Boulevard
Hempstead Avenue                        Jamaica Avenue to Nassau County Line
Hillside Avenue                         Myrtle Avenue to Nassau County Line
Hoyt Ave. (North and South)             Astoria Boulevard to 21st Street
Jackson Avenue                          Borden Avenue to Northern Boulevard
Jamaica Avenue                          Merrick Boulevard to Nassau County Line
Junction Boulevard                      32nd Avenue to Queens Boulevard
Kissena Boulevard                       Main Street to Parsons Boulevard
Laurel Hill Boulevard                   Review Avenue to 54th Avenue
Liberty Avenue                          Van Wyck Expressway to Farmers
                                        Boulevard
                                        Kings County Line to North and South
Linden Boulevard                        Conduit Avenue, and Newburg Street to
                                        Farmers Boulevard
Linden Place                            Whitestone Expressway to Northern
                                        Boulevard
Long Island Expressway                  Queens Midtown Tunnel to Nassau County
                                        Line
Main Avenue                             Vernon Boulevard to Astoria Boulevard
Main Street                             Northern Boulevard to Queens Boulevard
Maurice Avenue                          L.I.E. to 56th Terrace
Maspeth Avenue                          49th Street to 48th Street
Maspeth Avenue                          Page Place to Maurice Avenue
Merrick Boulevard                       Hillside Avenue to Nassau County Line
Metropolitan Avenue                     Kings County Line to Hillside Avenue
Myrtle Avenue                           Kings County Line to Hillside Avenue
North and South Conduit Avenue (Sunrise Linden Boulevard to Nassau County Line
Highway)
Northern Boulevard                      Jackson Avenue to Nassau County Line
Page Place                              Grand Avenue to Maspeth Avenue
Parsons Boulevard                       Kissena Boulevard to Union Turnpike
Queens Boulevard                        Jackson Avenue to Hillside Avenue
Review Avenue                           Borden Avenue to Laurel Hill Boulevard
Rockaway Boulevard                      Atlantic Avenue to Nassau County Line
Roosevelt Avenue                        Queens Boulevard to Main Street
Rust Street                             58th Street to Flushing Avenue
Rust Street                             56th Terrace to 58th Street
Springfield Boulevard                   Jamaica Avenue to North and South
                                        Conduit Avenue
Steinway Street                         Northern Blvd. to Astoria Blvd. North
Steinway Street                         Astoria Blvd. North to 19th Avenue
Sutphin Boulevard                       94th Avenue to Liberty Avenue
Thomson Avenue                          Jackson Avenue to Queens Boulevard
Union Turnpike                          Myrtle Avenue to Nassau County Line
Van Dam Street                          Queens Boulevard to Greenpoint Avenue
Van Wyck Expressway                     Whitestone Expressway to John F.
                                        Kennedy International Airport
Vernon Boulevard                        Borden Avenue to 8th Street
Whitestone Expressway                   Whitestone Bridge to Astoria Boulevard
Willets Point Boulevard                 Roosevelt Avenue to Northern Boulevard
Woodhaven Boulevard                     Liberty Avenue to Queens Boulevard
8th Street                              Astoria Boulevard to Vernon Boulevard
14th Road                               College Point Boulevard to 110th Street
                                        Cross Island Parkway Service Road to
14th Avenue                             Whitestone Expressway and College Point
                                        Boulevard to 110th Street
15th Avenue                             College Point Boulevard to 1l0th Street
19th Avenue                             Steinway Street to 81st Street
20th Avenue                             21st Street to Hazen Street
20th Avenue                             Whitestone Expressway to College Point
                                        Boulevard
21st Street                             Borden Avenue to 20th Avenue
23rd Avenue                             Astoria Boulevard South to Ditmars
                                        Boulevard
24th Avenue                             21st Street to 29th Street
29th Street                             24th Avenue to Astoria Boulevard
39th Street                             Queens Boulevard to Northern Boulevard
41st Avenue                             21st Street to Crescent Street
43rd Street                             53rd Avenue to 54th Avenue
47th Street                             Grand Avenue to 58th Road
48th Street                             Long Island Expressway to 55th Avenue
48th Street                             Maspeth Avenue to 58th Road and 55th
                                        Avenue to 56th Road
49th Street                             Ditmars Boulevard to Astoria Boulevard
49th Street                             Maspeth Avenue to 56th Road
53rd Avenue                             43rd Street to 48th Street
54th Avenue                             Laurel Hill Boulevard to 43rd Street
54th Street                             Flushing Avenue to Grand Avenue
55th Avenue                             48th Street to 58th Street
55th Drive                              Maurice Avenue to 58th Street
55th Street                             Flushing Avenue to Grand Avenue
56th Drive                              56th Road to 58th Street
56th Road                               Laurel Hill Boulevard to 56th Drive
56th Road                               56th Drive to 56th Terrace
56th Terrace                            58th Street to Rust Street
57th Place                              Maspeth Avenue to Rust Street
58th Road                               47th Street to 48th Street
58th Street                             Queens Boulevard to Maspeth Avenue
62nd Drive                              Junction Boulevard to Queens Boulevard
69th Street                             Long Island Expressway to Metropolitan
                                        Ave.
94th Avenue                             Van Wyck Expressway to Sutphin
                                        Boulevard
94th Street                             La Guardia Airport to 32nd Avenue
108th Street                            Astoria Boulevard to Queens Boulevard
110th Street                            14th Avenue to 15th Avenue
126th Street                            Northern Boulevard to Roosevelt Avenue
154th Street                            Cross Island Parkway North Service Road
                                        to 10th Avenue
168th Street                            Merrick Boulevard to Hillside Avenue
213th Street                            Hempstead Avenue to Jamaica Avenue
 
   (c)   Truck routing rules for the Borough of Staten Island. 
      (1)   Through trucks. An operator of any truck as defined in paragraph
(a)(1) above, having neither an origin nor a destination within the Borough of
Staten Island, shall restrict the operation of such vehicle to those street
segments on the following list. These are designated as "Through Truck Routes."
All trucks must adhere to all posted signs indicating locations that limit the
height of vehicles permitted to operate thereon.
Through Truck Route Network
Street Limits
Street                                 Limits
Bayonne Bridge                         Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Expressway
                                       to New Jersey State Line
Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Expressway Victory Boulevard to Bayonne Bridge
Goethals Bridge                        Staten Island Expressway to New Jersey
                                       State Line
Outerbridge Crossing                   West Shore Expressway to New Jersey
                                       State Line
Staten Island Expressway               Goethals Bridge to Verrazano Narrows
                                       Bridge
Verrazano-Narrows Bridge               Staten Island Expressway to Kings County
                                       Line
West Shore Expressway                  Staten Island Expressway to Richmond
                                       Parkway
 
      (2)   Local trucks. (i) 2 axles, 6 tires. An operator of any truck as
defined in paragraph (a)(1) above, with 2 axles, 6 tires and having an origin
or destination for the purpose of delivery, loading or servicing within the
Borough of Staten Island, shall only operate such vehicle over the following
listed "Local Truck Routes" and "Limited Local-Truck Routes," except that an
operator may drive on a street not designated below for the purpose of arriving
at his/her destination. This shall be accomplished by leaving a designated
truck route at the intersection which is nearest and provides the most direct
route to his/her destination, proceeding by the most direct route while
observing existing street directions and turn restrictions, and then returning
to the nearest designated truck route by the most direct route. If the operator
has additional destinations in the immediate vicinity, he/she may proceed by
the most direct route to his/her next destination without returning to a
designated truck route, provided that the operator's next destination does not
require that he/she cross a designated truck route. All trucks must adhere to
all posted signs indicating locations that limit the height of vehicles
permitted to operate thereon.
         (ii)   3 or more axles. An operator of any truck as defined in
paragraph (a)(1) above, with 3 or more axles, and having an origin or
destination for the purpose of delivery, loading or servicing within the
Borough of Staten Island, shall only operate such vehicle over the following
listed "local truck routes," except under the conditions described in
subparagraph (2)(i), above.
Local Truck Route Network
Street Limits
Street                                 Limits
Amboy Road                             Richmond Road to Wards Point Avenue
Arden Avenue                           Veterans Road West to Hylan Boulevard
Arthur Kill Road                       Richmond Road to Main Street
Bay Street                             Richmond Terrace to School Road
Bayonne Bridge                         Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Expressway
                                       to New Jersey State Line
Bloomfield Avenue                      Chelsea Road to Gulf Avenue
Bloomingdale Road                      Amboy Road to Arthur Kill Road
Boscombe Avenue                        Page Avenue to Weiner Street
Bradley Avenue                         South Gannon Avenue to Victory Boulevard
Broad Street                           Van Duzer Street to Bay Street
Broadway                               Forest Avenue to Richmond Terrace
Buel Avenue                            Hylan Boulevard to Richmond Road
Castleton Avenue                       Jewett Avenue to Jersey Street
Castleton Avenue                       Jewett Avenue to Port Richmond Avenue
Chelsea Road                           South Avenue to Bloomfield Avenue
Clarke Avenue                          Arthur Kill Road to Amboy Road
Clove Road                             Narrows Road South to Richmond Terrace
Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Expressway Victory Boulevard to Bayonne Bridge
Draper Place                           Richmond Avenue to Richmond Avenue
Drumgoole Road East                    Bloomingdale Road to Richmond Avenue
Drumgoole Road West                    Arthur Kill Road to Veterans Road
Ebbitts Avenue                         Hylan Boulevard to Mill Road
Edgewater Street                       Bay Street to Hyland Boulevard
Edward Curry Avenue                    Chelsea Road to South Avenue
Englewood Avenue                       Veterans Road West to Veterans Road East
Fahy Avenue                            South Avenue to Lamberts Lane
Father Capodanno Blvd. (Seaside Blvd.) Midland Avenue to Lily Pond Avenue
Forest Avenue                          Western Avenue to Victory Boulevard
Foster Road                            Woodrow Road to Amboy Road
Front Street                           Bay Street to Murry Hulbert Avenue
Giffords Lane                          Arthur Kill Road to Amboy Road
Glen Street                            Edward Curry Avenue to Fahy Avenue
Goethals Bridge                        Staten Island Expressway to New Jersey
                                       State Line
Goethals Road North                    Western Avenue to West Caswell Avenue
Gulf Avenue                            Forest Avenue to Edward Curry Avenue
Guyon Avenue                           Hylan Boulevard to Amboy Road
Huguenot Avenue                        Arthur Kill Road to Hylan Boulevard
Hylan Boulevard                        Satterlee Avenue to Steuben Street, and
                                       Narrows Road South to Edgewater Street
Jersey Street                          Richmond Terrace to Victory Boulevard
Jewett Avenue                          Richmond Terrace to Victory Boulevard
Justin Avenue                          Amboy Road to Hylan Boulevard
Lamberts Lane                          Fahy Avenue to Victory Boulevard
Lily Pond Avenue                       School Road to Father Capodanno
                                       Boulevard (Seaside Boulevard)
Lincoln Avenue                         Hyland Boulevard to Richmond Road
Little Clove Road                      Renwick Avenue to Narrows Road North
Main Street                            Arthur Kill Road to Hylan Boulevard
Manor Road                             Schmidts Lane to Victory Boulevard
Meeker Avenue                          Forest Avenue to Gulf Avenue
Midland Avenue                         Richmond Road to Father Capodanno
                                       Boulevard (Seaside Boulevard)
Milford Drive                          Renwick Avenue to Clove Road
Mill Road                              Tysens Lane to New Dorp Lane
Morley Avenue                          Richmond Road to Richmond Road
Morningstar Road                       Richmond Terrace to Richmond Avenue
Narrows Road North                     Verrazano Narrows Bridge to Little Clove
                                       Road
Narrows Road South                     Clove Road to Verrazano Narrows Bridge
Nelson Avenue                          Amboy Road to Hylan Boulevard
New Dorp Lane                          Mill Road to Hylan Boulevard
North Bridge Street                    Veterans Road West to Arthur Kill Road
North Gannon Avenue                    Slosson Avenue to Willow Road East
Outerbridge Crossing                   West Shore Expressway to New Jersey
                                       State Line
Page Avenue                            South Bridge Street to Hylan Boulevard
Port Richmond Avenue                   Forest Avenue to Richmond Terrace
Renwick Avenue                         Milford Drive to Little Clove Road
Richmond Avenue                        Hylan Boulevard to Forest Avenue
Richmond Parkway                       Outerbridge Crossing to West Shore
                                       Expressway
Richmond Road                          Van Duzer Street to Morley Avenue and
                                       Morley Avenue to Arthur Kill Road
Richmond Terrace                       Western Avenue to Bay Street
Richmond Valley Road                   Arthur Kill Road to Page Avenue
Rossville Avenue                       Arthur Kill Road to Woodrow Road
St. Pauls Avenue                       Van Duzer Street to Van Duzer Street
Schmidts Lane                          Manor Road to Slosson Avenue
School Road                            Lily Pond Avenue to Bay Street
Seaview Avenue                         Father Capodanno Boulevard (Seaside
                                       Boulevard) to Hylan Boulevard
Seguine Avenue                         Amboy Road to Hylan Boulevard
Sharrott Avenue                        Amboy Road to Hylan Boulevard
Sharrots Road                          Veterans Road East to Veterans Road West
Slosson Avenue                         Victory Boulevard to Schmidts Lane
South Avenue                           Richmond Terrace to Chelsea Road
South Bridge Street                    Arthur Kill Road to Page Avenue
South Gannon Avenue                    Victory Boulevard to Manor Road
Staten Island Expressway               Goethals Bridge to Verrazano Narrows
                                       Bridge
Steuben Street                         Hylan Boulevard to Narrows Road South
Targee Street                          Van Duzer Street to Richmond Road
Tompkins Avenue                        Hylan Boulevard to Broad Street
Trantor Place                          Walker Street to Dr. Martin Luther King,
                                       Jr. Expressway
Travis Avenue                          South Avenue to Draper Place
Tyrellan Avenue                        Boscombe Avenue to Veterans Road West
Tysens Lane                            Mill Road to Hylan Boulevard
Vanderbilt Avenue                      Richmond Road to Bay Street
Van Duzer Street                       Richmond Road to Victory Boulevard
Van Duzer St. Extension                Van Duzer Street to Bay Street
Verrazano-Narrows Bridge               Staten Island Expressway to Kings County
                                       Line
                                       Drumgoole Road West to Sharrotts Road,
Veterans Road East                     and Bloomingdale Road to Arthur Kill
                                       Road
Veterans Road West                     Arden Road to Bloomingdale Road, and
                                       Sharrotts Road to Arthur Kill Road
Victory Boulevard                      West Shore Expressway to Bay Street
Walker Street                          Morningstar Road to Port Richmond Avenue
West Caswell Avenue                    Goethals Road North to Willow Road West
West Shore Expressway                  Staten Island Expressway to Outerbridge
                                       Crossing
Western Avenue                         Forest Avenue to Richmond Terrace
Willow Road East                       North Gannon Avenue to Forest Avenue
Willow Road West                       Forest Avenue to West Caswell Avenue
Woodrow Road                           Bloomingdale Road to Arthur Kill Road
Woolley Avenue                         South Gannon Avenue to Victory Boulevard
 
Limited Local Truck Route Network
Street Limits 
Street            Limits 
Bradley Avenue     Brielle Avenue to South Gannon Avenue
Brielle Avenue     Rockland Avenue to Manor Road
Forest Hill Road   Richmond Hill Road to Willowbrook Road
Manor Road         Brielle Avenue to Schmidts Lane
Ocean Terrace      Manor Road to Todt Hill Road
Richmond Hill Road Richmond Avenue to Forest Hill Road
Richmond Road      Rockland Avenue to Morley Avenue
Rockland Avenue    Richmond Avenue to Richmond Road
Slosson Avenue     Schmidts Land to Todt Hill Road
Todt Hill Road     Slosson Avenue to Richmond Road
Woolley Avenue     Willowbrook Road to South Gannon Avenue
 
   (d)   Truck routing rules for the Borough of Manhattan. (1) Through trucks.
An operator of any truck as defined in paragraph (a)(1) above, having neither
an origin nor a destination within the Borough of Manhattan, shall restrict the
operation of such vehicle to those street segments designated on the following
list as "Through Truck Routes." All trucks must adhere to all posted signs
indicating locations that limit the height of vehicles permitted to operate
thereon.
Through Truck Route Network
Street Limits
Street                  Limits
Allen Street            Delancey Street to Houston Street
Avenue of the Americas  West Broadway to Houston Street
Beach Street            West Broadway to Varick Street
Canal Street            Manhattan Bridge to West Street
Chrystie Street         Delancey Street to Houston Street
Delancey Street         Williamsburg Bridge to Bowery
Dyer Avenue             34th Street to Lincoln Tunnel
Dyer Avenue             Lincoln Tunnel to 42nd Street
Houston Street          Allen Street to Varick Street
Hudson Street           Laight Street to Holland Tunnel Entrance
Kenmare Street          Bowery to Lafayette Street
Lafayette Street        Kenmare Street to Canal Street
Laight Street           Varick Street to Canal Street
**Queens Midtown Tunnel 34th Street to Tunnel Approach
**Queens Midtown Tunnel 34th Street to Tunnel Exit
Trans-Manhattan Expway  Alexander Hamilton Bridge to George Washington Bridge
Varick Street           Houston Street to Holland Tunnel Entrance
Walker Street           Canal Street to West Broadway
West Broadway           Beach Street to Avenue of the Americas
West Street             Brooklyn Battery Tunnel to Gansevoort Street
11th Avenue             Gansevoort Street to 22nd Street
11th Avenue             34th Street to 42nd Street
12th Avenue             22nd Street to 34th Street
**34th Street           Queens Midtown Tunnel Entrance to Dyer Avenue
34th Street             Dyer Avenue to 12th Avenue
40th Street             Lincoln Tunnel entrance to 11th Avenue
42nd Street             Dyer Avenue to 11th Avenue
 
** All through trucks are prohibited from 34th Street between the Queens
Midtown Tunnel and Dyer Avenue between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
      (2)   Local trucks. An operator of any truck as defined in paragraph (a)
(1) above, having an origin or destination for the purpose of delivery, loading
or servicing within the Borough of Manhattan, shall restrict the operation of
such vehicle to those street segments designated on the following list as
"Local Truck Routes," except that an operator may operate on a street not
designated below for the purpose of leaving his/her origin or arriving at his/
her destination (subject to restrictions specified in 34 RCNY §
4-13(d)(3) through (d)(5)). This shall be accomplished by leaving a designated
truck route at an intersection that is nearest and provides the most direct
route to his/her destination, proceeding by the most direct route while
observing existing street directions and turn restrictions, and then returning
to the nearest designated truck route by the most direct route. If the operator
has additional destinations in the immediate vicinity, he/she may proceed by
the most direct route to his/her next destination without returning to a
designated truck route, provided that the operator's next destination does not
require that he/she cross a designated truck route. All trucks must adhere to
all posted signs indicating locations that limit the height of vehicles
permitted to operate thereon.
Local Truck Routes
Street Limits
Street                                  Limits
Adam Clayton Powell, Jr., Blvd.         Central Park North to 155th Street
Allen Street                            Division Street to Houston Street
Amsterdam Avenue                        59th Street to 181st Street
Avenue of the Americas (6th Avenue)     Church Street to 31st Street
Barclay Street                          Broadway to West Street
Battery Park Underpass                  South Street to West Street
Battery Place                           State Street to West Street
Beach Street                            West Broadway to Varick Street
Bowery                                  St. James Place to Cooper Square
Broadway                                State Street to 14th Street
Broadway                                17th Street to 31st Street
Broadway                                Columbus Circle to 230th Street
Broome Street                           Centre Street to Watts Street
Canal Street                            Chrystie Street to West Street
Canal Street                            Chrystie Street to Forsyth Street
Cathedral Parkway (110th Street)        8th Avenue to Broadway
Central Park North                      Adam Clayton Powell, Jr., Blvd. to 8th
                                        Ave.
Central Park South                      Columbus Circle to Grand Army Plaza
Central Park Traverse Roads 1, 2, 3 & 4 Fifth Avenue to Central Park West
Central Park West                       81st Street to 82nd Street
Centre Street                           Canal Street to Broome Street
Chrystie Street                         Canal Street to Houston Street
Church Street                           Liberty Street to Avenue of the
                                        Americas
Clarkson Street                         7th Avenue South to West Street
Columbus Avenue                         59th Street to Cathedral Parkway
Columbus Circle                         Entire Length
Cooper Square                           Bowery to Third Avenue
Delancey Street                         Williamsburg Bridge to Bowery
Division Street                         Bowery to Pike Street
Dyer Avenue                             Lincoln Tunnel to 42nd Street
Dyer Avenue                             Lincoln Tunnel to 34th Street
Forsyth Street                          Division Street to Canal Street
Fort Washington Avenue                  178th Street to 181st Street Avenue
Grand Street                            Allen Street to West Broadway
Greenwich Avenue                        Avenue of the Americas to 8th Avenue
Houston Street                          1st Avenue to West Street
Hudson Street                           Worth Street to 8th Avenue
Kenmare Street                          Bowery to Lafayette Street
Lafayette Street                        Kenmare Street to Canal Street
Laight Street                           Varick Street to Canal Street
Lexington Avenue                        23rd Street to 125th Street
Lincoln Tunnel Access                   30th Street to Lincoln Tunnel
Madison Avenue                          84th Street to 86th Street
Madison Avenue                          96th Street to 97th Street
Madison Avenue                          125th Street to Madison Avenue Bridge
Maiden Lane                             South Street to Water Street
Nagle Avenue                            Broadway to 10th Avenue
Pearl Street                            Water Street to St. James Place
Pike Slip                               South Street to Cherry Street
Pike Street                             Cherry Street to Division Street
Queens Midtown Tunnnel Approach         34th Street to Tunnel
Queens Midtown Tunnel Exit              34th Street to Tunnel
St. James Place                         Pearl Street to Bowery
South Street                            State Street to Pike Slip
State Street                            South Street to Broadway
Trans-Manhattan Expway                  Alexander Hamilton Bridge to George
                                        Washington Bridge
Trinity Place                           Brooklyn Battery Tunnel to Liberty
                                        Street
Union Square East                       14th Street to 17th Street
Varick Street                           West Broadway to 7th Avenue South
Vesey Street                            Broadway to West Street
Walker Street                           Canal Street to West Broadway
Water Street                            State Street to Pearl Street
Watts Street                            Broome Street to Holland Tunnel
                                        entrance
West Broadway                           Worth Street to Varick Street
West Broadway                           Beach Street to Grand Street
West Street                             Battery Park Underpass to Gansevoort
                                        Street
Worth Street                            St. James Place to Hudson Street
1st Avenue                              Houston Street to Willis Avenue Bridge
2nd Avenue                              Houston Street to 128th Street
3rd Avenue                              Cooper Square to 125th Street
5th Avenue                              22nd Street to 26th Street
5th Avenue                              85th Street to 86th Street
5th Avenue                              125th Street to 138th Street
6th Avenue (Avenue of the Americas)     Church Street to 31st Street
7th Avenue                              14th Street to 31st Street
7th Avenue South                        Varick Street to 14th Street
8th Avenue                              Hudson Street to Columbus Circle
8th Street                              Avenue of the Americas to Broadway
9th Avenue                              14th Street to 59th Street
10th Avenue                             Little West 12th Street to 59th Street
10th Avenue                             Nagle Avenue to Broadway
11th Avenue                             Gansevoort Street to 57th Street
11th Ave. service road                  Gansevoort Street to 23rd Street
12th Avenue                             22nd Street to 59th Street
14th Street                             1st Avenue to 11th Avenue
15th Street                             9th Avenue to 11th Avenue
17th Street                             Union Square East to Broadway
22nd Street                             5th Avenue to Broadway
23rd Street                             1st Avenue to 12th Avenue
26th Street                             5th Avenue to Broadway
30th Street                             Broadway to 11th Avenue
31st Street                             3rd Avenue to 10th Avenue
34th Street                             1st Avenue to 12th Avenue
36th Street                             Queens Midtown Tunnel entrance to 2nd
                                        Ave.
40th Street                             Lincoln Tunnel entrance to 11th Avenue
41st Street                             9th Avenue to Lincoln Tunnel entrance
42nd Street                             1st Avenue to 12th Avenue
57th Street                             1st Avenue to 12th Avenue
59th Street                             1st Avenue to Grand Army Plaza
60th Street                             1st Avenue to Lexington Avenue
65th Street                             1st Avenue to 5th Avenue
65th Street                             Central Park West to Amsterdam Avenue
66th Street                             1st Avenue to 5th Avenue
66th Street                             Central Park West to Amsterdam Avenue
75th Street                             Amsterdam Avenue to Broadway
79th Street                             1st Avenue to 5th Avenue
79th Street                             Columbus Avenue to Broadway
81st Street                             Central Park West to Columbus Avenue
82nd Street                             Central Park West to Broadway
84th Street                             Madison Avenue to 5th Avenue
86th Street                             1st Avenue to 5th Avenue
86th Street                             Central Park West to Broadway
96th Street                             1st Avenue to 5th Avenue
96th Street                             Central Park West to Broadway
97th Street                             Madison Avenue to 5th Avenue
97th Street                             Central Park West to Broadway
116th Street                            1st Avenue to Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.,
                                        Blvd.
124th Street                            1st Avenue to Triborough Bridge
                                        entrance
125th Street                            1st Avenue to Broadway
128th Street                            2nd Avenue to 3rd Avenue Bridge
138th Street                            Madison Avenue Bridge to 5th Avenue
145th Street                            145th Street Bridge to Broadway
155th Street                            Macombs Dam Bridge to Broadway
178th Street                            Amsterdam Avenue to George Washington
                                        Bridge exit
179th Street                            Amsterdam Avenue to George Washington
                                        Bridge entrance
181st Street                            Washington Bridge to Fort Washington
                                        Ave.
207th Street                            University Heights Bridge to Broadway
215th Street                            Tenth Avenue to Broadway
 
      (3)   Limited truck zones. 
         (i)   Restrictions. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs (a),
(d)(1) and (d)(2) of this section, no operator of a truck as defined in
paragraph (a)(1) of this section shall operate, enter, stop, stand or park his/
her vehicle upon any of the streets designated on the following list as
"Limited Truck Zones" except for the purpose of making a delivery, loading or
servicing within said zone. This shall be accomplished by leaving a designated
truck route at the intersection that is nearest and provides the most direct
route to his/her destination, proceeding by the most direct route while
observing existing street directions and turn restrictions, and then returning
to the nearest designated truck route by the most direct route. If the operator
has additional destinations in the immediate vicinity, he/she may proceed by
the most direct route to his/her next destination without returning to a
designated truck route provided that the operator's next destination does not
require that he/she cross a designated truck route.
         (ii)   Time period. 24 hours per day, 7 days per week.
         (iii)   Zones
            Zone A – Chelsea Bounded by the northern property line of 16th
Street, the eastern property line of Ninth Avenue, the northern property line
of 18th Street, the eastern property line of Tenth Avenue, the southern
property line of 30th Street, the western property line of Eighth Avenue, the
southern property line of 25th Street, the western property line of Seventh
Avenue, the northern property line of 19th Street and the western property line
of Eighth Avenue. Trucks passing completely through the designated area, or
entering it for the purpose of reaching or leaving a street within these
boundaries, are permitted to traverse 23rd Street, Eighth Avenue and Ninth
Avenue only.
            Zone B – Chinatown Bounded by the northern property line of Worth
Street, the eastern property line of Baxter Street, the southern property line
of Canal Street, the western property line of the Bowery, and the western
property line of Chatham Square.
            Zone C – Greenwich Village Bounded by the northern property line of
Spring Street, the eastern property line of Varick Street, the eastern property
line of Seventh Avenue South, the northern property line of Clarkson Street,
the eastern property line of Hudson Street, the northern property line of
Morton Street, the eastern property line of Washington Street, the southern
property line of Gansevoort Street, the southern property line of 14th Street,
the western property line of Avenue of the Americas, the southern property line
of 12th Street, the western property line of University Place, the southern
property line of 8th Street, the western property line of Mercer Street, the
northern property line of Houston Street, and the western property line of West
Broadway. Trucks passing completely through the designated area, or entering it
for the purpose of reaching or leaving a street within these boundaries, are
permitted to traverse Avenue of the Americas, Eighth Avenue, Eighth Street,
Greenwich Avenue, Hudson Street (Northbound only), Seventh Avenue South, Varick
Street and Houston Street only. Trucks with neither an origin nor a destination
within Manhattan are restricted to Houston Street and Avenue of the Americas
between Spring and Houston Streets only.
            Zone D – Little Italy Bounded by the northern property line of
Canal Street, the eastern property line of Centre Street, the eastern property
line of Cleveland Place, the eastern property line of Lafayette Street, the
southern property line of Houston Street and the western property line of
Bowery. Trucks passing completely through the designated area, or entering it
for the purpose of reaching or leaving a street within these boundaries, are
permitted to traverse Grand Street, Kenmare Street and Canal Street only.
Trucks with neither an origin nor a destination within Manhattan are restricted
to Canal Street only.
            Zone E – Lower East Side Bounded by the northern property line of
Senator Robert F. Wagner Place, the eastern property line of St. James Place,
the eastern property line of East Broadway, the southern property line of
Montgomery Street, and the western property line of South Street. Trucks
passing completely through the designated area, or entering it for the purpose
of reaching or leaving a street within these boundaries, are permitted to
traverse Pike Slip and Pike Street only.
      (4)   Special garment center rule. 
         (i)   Restrictions. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs (a),
(d)(1) and (d)(2) of this section, no operator of a truck as defined in
paragraph (a)(1) of this section shall operate, enter, stop, stand or park his/
her vehicle upon any of the streets included within the boundaries designated
below except for the purpose of making a delivery, loading or servicing on said
streets. An operator shall not enter a street within the designated boundaries
for the sole purpose of gaining access to a designated truck route, or to an
adjacent street within said boundaries.
         (ii)   Time period. 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.
         (iii)   Boundaries. Bounded by the northern property line of 34th
Street, the eastern property line of Eighth Avenue, the southern property line
of 42nd Street and the western property line of Avenue of the Americas. Trucks
passing completely through the designated area, or entering it for the purpose
of reaching or leaving a street within these boundaries, are permitted to
traverse Seventh Avenue and Broadway only.
      (5)   Operation of vehicles 33 feet or more in length restricted.
Notwithstanding the provisions of 34 RCNY §
4-08(1)(2) and (3) and 34 RCNY §
4-13, no operator of a vehicle or combination of vehicles used for the
transportation of merchandise, having an overall length of 33 feet or more
including load and bumpers, shall operate, enter, traverse, stop, stand, or
park any such vehicle or combination of vehicles upon any of the streets
included in the area bounded by the south property line of West 42nd Street,
the west property line of 5th Avenue, the north property line of West 34th
Street, and the east property line of 9th Avenue, all in the Borough of
Manhattan, between the hours of 8 a.m. and 10 a.m., and between 12 noon and 6
p.m., Monday through Friday inclusive, except that the operator of any such
vehicle or combination of vehicles who has lawfully entered this area may allow
such vehicle or combination of vehicles to remain therein while being
expeditiously loaded or unloaded, but must remove same therefrom before 12
noon, and provided that any vehicle or combination of vehicles 33 feet or more
in length may enter such area in order to reach an off-street parking facility
or terminal therein where such parking facility or terminal is sufficient in
size to accommodate the vehicle or combination of vehicles, and where no
waiting, loading, or unloading on the street by such vehicle or combination of
vehicles will take place. Such vehicle or combination of vehicles may not stop
between an entry point into the area and its destination for any purpose other
than to conform with traffic rules.
      (6)   Special rules for vehicles 33 feet or more in length in the
financial district and midtown core. 
         (i)   Financial district.
            (A)   Time period. 11:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.
            (B)   Restrictions. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivisions
(a), (d)(1) and (d)(2) of this section, no operator of a vehicle having an
overall length of 33 feet or more shall enter his/her vehicle upon any of the
streets included within the boundaries designated below.
            (C)   Exceptions. Trucks having an overall length of 33 feet or
more whose operator has in his/her possession a special permit issued by the
Department of Transportation.
            (D)   Boundaries. Bounded by the eastern property line of Whitehall
Street, the eastern property line of Broadway, the eastern property line of
Park Row, the southern property line of Frankfort Street, the western property
line of Pearl Street, and the western property line of Water Street.
         (ii)   Midtown core.
            (A)   Time period. 12:00 noon to 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday.
            (B)   Restrictions. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs
(a) and (d)(1), through (d)(4) of this section, no operator of a vehicle having
an overall length of 33 feet or more shall enter his/her vehicle upon any of
the streets included within the boundaries designated below.
            (C)   Exceptions. Vehicles having an overall length of 33 feet or
more whose operator has in his/her possession a special permit issued by the
Department of Transportation.
            (D)   Boundaries. Bounded by the northern property line of 42nd
Street, the eastern property line of Seventh Avenue, the southern property line
of Central Park South, the southern property line of 59th Street, and the
western property line of Third Avenue. Trucks having an overall length of 33
feet or more passing completely through the designated area are permitted to
traverse 57th Street and Lexington Avenue only.
   (e)   Truck routing rules for the Borough of Brooklyn. 
      (1)   Through trucks. An operator of any truck as defined in paragraph
(a)(1) above, having neither an origin nor a destination within the Borough of
Brooklyn, shall restrict the operation of such vehicle to those street segments
on the following list. These are designated as "Through Truck Routes." All
trucks must adhere to all posted signs indicating locations that limit the
height of vehicles permitted to operate thereon.
Through Truck Route Network
Street Limits 
Street                          Limits 
Atlantic Avenue                 Columbia Street to Queens County Line
Brooklyn-Queens Expressway      Gowanus Expressway to Queens County Line
Brooklyn-Queens Expressway Ramp Williamsburg Bridge to Brooklyn-Queens
                                Expressway
Church Avenue                   McDonald Avenue to Flatbush Avenue
Columbia Street                 Atlantic Avenue to Brooklyn-Queens Expressway
                                Ramps North to Congress Street
Conduit Boulevard               Atlantic Avenue to Queens County Line
Flatbush Avenue                 Fulton Street to Atlantic Avenue and Church
                                Avenue to Marine Parkway Bridge
Flatbush Avenue Extension       Manhattan Bridge to Fulton Street
Gowanus Expressway              Brooklyn Battery Tunnel to Verrazano Narrows
                                Bridge
Jay Street                      Manhattan Bridge Exit Ramp to Sands Street
McDonald Avenue                 10th Avenue to Church Avenue
Prospect Expressway             Gowanus Expressway to Church Avenue
Sands Street                    Jay Street to Brooklyn-Queens Expressway
                                Entrance
Tillary Street                  Flatbush Avenue Extension to Brooklyn-Queens
                                Expressway Ramps
3rd Avenue                      Flatbush Avenue to Atlantic Avenue
10th Avenue                     Prospect Expressway Exit Ramp to McDonald
                                Avenue
 
      (2)   Local trucks. An operator of any truck as defined in paragraph (a)
(1) above, with an origin or destination for the purpose of delivery, loading
or servicing within the Borough of Brooklyn, may only operate such vehicle over
the following listed streets, except that an operator may operate on a street
not designated below for the purpose of arriving at his/her destination. This
shall be accomplished by leaving a designated truck route at the intersection
that is nearest and provides the most direct route to his/her destination,
proceeding by the most direct route while observing existing street directions
and turn restrictions, and then returning to the nearest designated truck route
by the most direct route. If the operator has additional destinations in the
immediate vicinity, he/she may proceed by the most direct route to his/her next
destination without returning to a designated truck route, provided that the
operator's next destination does not require that he/she cross a designated
truck route. All trucks must adhere to all posted signs indicating locations
that limit the height of vehicles permitted to operate thereon.
Local Truck Route Network
Street Limits 
Street                                 Limits 
Adams Street                           Sands Street to Front Street
Ainslie Street                         Rodney Street to Union Avenue
Ash Street                             McGuinness Boulevard to Commercial
                                       Street
Atlantic Avenue                        Furman Street to Queens County Line
Avenue D                               Linden Boulevard to Foster Avenue
Avenue M                               Flatlands Avenue to Kings Highway
Avenue N                               Kings Highway to Flatlands Avenue
Avenue T                               Flatbush Avenue to Ralph Avenue
Avenue U                               86th Street to East 55th Street
Bay Parkway                            Kings Highway to Belt Parkway Eastbound
                                       Service Road
Bay Street                             Columbia Street to Smith Street
Beard Street                           Van Brunt Street to Otsego Street
Bedford Avenue                         Rogers Avenue to Taylor Street
Bergen Street                          3rd Avenue to 5th Avenue
Box Street                             Commercial Street to McGuinness
                                       Boulevard
Bridgewater Street                     Norman Avenue to Varick Street
Broadway                               Kent Avenue to Jamaica Avenue
Brooklyn-Queens Expressway             Gowanus Expressway to Queens County Line
Brooklyn-Queens Expressway Access Ramp Williamsburg Bridge to Brooklyn-Queens
                                       Expressway
Cadman Plaza West                      Furman Street to Court Street
Caton Avenue                           McDonald Avenue to Linden Boulevard
Cherry Street                          Vandervoort Avenue to Varick Avenue
Church Avenue                          Old New Utrecht Road to Linden Boulevard
Classon Avenue                         Kent Avenue to Flushing Avenue
Clinton Street                         Hamilton Avenue to Bay Street
Columbia Street                        Atlantic Avenue to Irving Street; and
                                       Bay Street to Halleck Street
Commercial Street                      Manhattan Avenue to Franklin Street
Concord Street                         Flatbush Avenue Extension to Jay Street
Conduit Boulevard                      Atlantic Avenue to Queens County Line
Coney Island Avenue                    Caton Avenue to Neptune Avenue
Cooper Street                          Broadway to Queens County Line
Court Street                           Hamilton Avenue to Bay Street; and
                                       Cadman Plaza West to Atlantic Avenue
Cropsey Avenue                         18th Avenue to Neptune Avenue
DeKalb Avenue                          Nostrand Avenue to Flatbush Avenue
                                       Extension
Delavan Street                         Columbia Street to Van Brunt Street
Driggs Avenue                          South 4th Street to Broadway
East New York Avenue                   Troy Avenue to Rockaway Avenue
Empire Boulevard                       Flatbush Avenue to Utica Avenue
Flatbush Avenue                        Fulton Street to Marine Parkway Bridge
Flatbush Avenue Extension              Manhattan Bridge to Fulton Street
Flatlands Avenue                       Avenue N to Pennsylvania Avenue
Flushing Avenue                        Navy Street to Queens County Line
Fort Hamilton Parkway                  82nd Street to 92nd Street
Foster Avenue                          Kings Highway to Remsen Avenue
Fountain Avenue                        Linden Boulevard to Spring Creek
                                       Landfill Site
Franklin Street                        Commercial Street to Kent Avenue
Freeman Street                         Provost Street to McGuinness Boulevard
Front Street                           Cadman Plaza West to Hudson Avenue
Fulton Street                          Jewell Square to Pennsylvania Avenue
Furman Street                          Cadman Plaza West to Atlantic Avenue
Gardner Avenue                         Grand Street to Meadow Street
Gowanus Expressway                     Brooklyn Battery Tunnel to Verrazano
                                       Narrows Bridge
Grand Street                           Grand Street Extension to Queens County
                                       Line
Grand Street Extension                 Havemeyer Street to Grand Street
Green Street                           McGuinness Boulevard to Provost Street
Greenpoint Avenue                      Van Dam Street to Queens Boulevard
Halleck Street                         Otsego Street to Columbia Street
Hamilton Avenue                        Van Brunt Street to 3rd Avenue
Harrison Avenue                        Union Avenue to Flushing Avenue
Havemeyer Street                       Broadway to South 4th Street
Herkimer Street                        Van Sinderen Avenue to Jewell Square
Hicks Street                           Hamilton Avenue to Nelson Street
Hudson Avenue                          Front Street to Navy Street
Irving Street                          Van Brunt Street to Columbia Street
Jamaica Avenue                         Broadway to Pennsylvania Avenue
Jay Street                             Prospect Street to Fulton Street
Johnson Avenue                         Flushing Avenue to Morgan Avenue
Kane Street                            Columbia Street to Van Brunt Street
Kent Avenue                            Franklin Street to Myrtle Avenue
Kings Highway                          Foster Avenue to Bay Parkway
Kingsland Avenue                       Greenpoint Avenue to Norman Street
Knickerbocker Avenue                   Flushing Avenue to Morgan Avenue
Lafayette Avenue                       Flatbush Avenue to Nostrand Avenue
Lee Avenue                             Taylor Street to Flushing Avenue
Linden Boulevard                       Caton Avenue to Queens County Line
Lombardy Street                        Vandervoort Avenue to Varick Avenue
Louisiana Street                       Vandalia Avenue to Seaview Avenue
Manhattan Avenue                       Commercial Street to Greenpoint Avenue
Marcy Avenue                           Metropolitan Avenue to Division Avenue
McDonald Avenue                        20th Street to Shell Road
McGunness Boulevard                    Ash Avenue to Meeker Avenue
Meadow Street                          Gardner Avenue to Varick Avenue
Meeker Avenue                          Metropolitan Avenue to Varick Avenue
Metropolitan Avenue                    Kent Avenue to Queens County Line
Morgan Avenue                          Meeker Avenue to Flushing Avenue
Myrtle Avenue                          Jay Street to Queens County Line
Nassau Street                          Flatbush Avenue Extension to Flushing
                                       Avenue
Navy Street                            Hudson Avenue to Tillary Street
Nelson Street                          Hicks Street to Columbia Street
Neptune Avenue                         Cropsey Avenue to Coney Island Avenue
Norman Avenue                          North Henry Street to Bridgewater Street
North Henry Street                     Greenpoint Avenue to Norman Street
North 10th Street                      Union Avenue to Kent Avenue
North 11th Street                      Kent Avenue to Union Avenue
Nostrand Avenue                        Flushing Avenue to Flatbush Avenue
Old New Utrecht Road                   Church Avenue to 14th Avenue
Paidge Avenue                          McGuinness Boulevard to Provost Street
                                       Jamaica Avenue to Vandalia Avenue; and
Pennsylvania Avenue                    Seaview Avenue to Spring Creek Landfill
                                       Site
Prospect Avenue                        3rd Avenue to Prospect Expressway 4th
                                       Avenue Exit
Prospect Expressway                    Gowanus Expressway to Church Avenue
Prospect Street                        Cadman Plaza West to Jay Street
Provost Street                         Paidge Avenue to Greenpoint Avenue
Ralph Avenue                           Foster Avenue to Avenue T
Remsen Avenue                          Empire Boulevard to Flatlands Avenue
Rockaway Avenue                        Broadway to East New York Avenue
Rodney Street                          Division Avenue to Metropolitan Avenue
Roebling Street                        Metropolitan Avenue to South 5th Street;
                                       and Broadway to Lee Avenue
Rogers Avenue                          Flatbush Avenue to Bedford Avenue
Sands Street                           Adams Street to Navy Street
Schermerhorn Street                    Smith Street to Flatbush Avenue
Seaview Avenue                         Louisiana Avenue to Pennsylvania Avenue
Shell Road                             McDonald Avenue to Neptune Avenue
Smith Street                           Fulton Street to Atlantic Avenue; and
                                       Bay Street to 9th Street
South 3rd Street                       Roebling Street to Grand Street
                                       Extension
South 4th Street                       Rodney Street to Driggs Avenue
Taylor Street                          Bedford Avenue to Lee Avenue
Terrace Place                          McDonald Avenue to 11th Avenue
Tillary Street                         Cadman Plaza West to Navy Street
Troy Avenue                            East New York Avenue to Empire Boulevard
Union Avenue                           Harrison Avenue to Flushing Avenue
Union Avenue                           North 11th Street to Lorimer Street
Utica Avenue                           Atlantic Avenue to Flatbush Avenue
Van Brunt Street                       Kane Street to Beard Street
Vandalia Avenue                        Louisiana Avenue to Pennsylvania Avenue
Van Dam Street                         Meeker Avenue to Bridgewater Street
Vandervoort Avenue                     Meeker Avenue to Grand Street
Van Sinderen Avenue                    Broadway to Herkimer Street
Varick Avenue                          Lombardy Street to Meeker Avenue
Varick Avenue                          Metropolitan Avenue to Flushing Avenue
Varick Street                          Meeker Avenue to Bridgewater Street
Williamsburg Street East               Kent Avenue to Division Avenue
Williamsburg Street West               Park Avenue to Division Avenue
Woodhull Street                        Hamilton Avenue Westbound to Hamilton
                                       Avenue Eastbound
York Street                            Navy Street to Front Street
1st Avenue                             39th Street to 58th Street
2nd Avenue                             58th Street to 60th Street
3rd Avenue                             Flatbush Avenue to 65th Street
4th Avenue                             Flatbush Avenue to 39th Street
5th Avenue                             Atlantic Avenue to Bergen Street
6th Avenue                             60th Street to 65th Street/Gowanus
                                       Expressway
7th Avenue                             Prospect Expressway to 20th Street; and
                                       65th Street to 92nd Street
9th Street                             Clinton Street to 4th Avenue
10th Avenue                            Prospect Expressway to 20th Street
11th Avenue                            18th Street to Terrace Place
14th Avenue                            Church Avenue to 39th Street
18th Avenue                            86th Street to Cropsey Avenue
20th Avenue                            3rd Avenue to 10th Avenue
25th Street                            Cropsey Avenue to 86th Street
39th Street                            1st Avenue to 14th Avenue
43rd Street                            3rd Avenue to 1st Avenue
58th Street                            1st Avenue to 3rd Avenue
60th Street                            2nd Avenue to 6th Avenue
65th Street                            3rd Avenue to McDonald Avenue
86th Street                            Fort Hamilton Parkway to 18th Avenue;
                                       and 25th Avenue to Avenue U
92nd Street                            Fort Hamilton Parkway to 7th Avenue
 
   (f)   Truck routing rules for the Borough of the Bronx. (1) Through trucks.
An operator of any truck as defined in paragraph (a)(1) above, having neither
an origin nor a destination within the Borough of the Bronx, will restrict the
operation of such vehicle to those street segments on the following list. These
are designated as "Through Truck Routes." All trucks must adhere to all posted
signs indicating locations that limit the height of vehicles permitted to
operate thereon.
Through Truck Route Network
Street Limits
Street     Limits
Bruckner   Willis Avenue Bridge to Bruckner Expressway Approach
Boulevard
Bruckner   New England Thruway to Triborough Bridge
Expressway
Cross
Bronx      Alexander Hamilton Bridge to Cross Bronx Expressway
Expressway
Cross
Bronx      Cross Bronx Expressway to Extension Throgs Neck Expressway
Expressway
East 135th Major Deegan Expressway Westbound – Willis Avenue Exit to Third Avenue Bridge
Street     Approach
Exterior   Major Deegan Expressway Southbound – East 138th Street Exit to Third Avenue
Street     Bridge
Hutchinson
River      Bruckner Expressway to Bronx-Whitestone Bridge
Parkway
Major
Deegan     City Line to Triborough Bridge
Expressway
New
England    City Line to Bruckner Expressway
Thruway
Sheridan   Cross Bronx Expressway to Bruckner Expressway
Expressway
Throgs
Neck       Bruckner Expressway to Throgs Neck Bridge
Expressway
Willis     Willis Ave. Bridge to East 135th Street
Avenue
 
      (2)   Local trucks. An operator of any truck as defined in paragraph (a)
(1) above, with an origin or destination for the purpose of delivery, loading
or servicing within the Borough of the Bronx, will only operate such vehicle
over the following listed streets, except that an operator may operate on a
street not designated below for the purpose of arriving at his/her destination.
This shall be accomplished by leaving a designated truck route at the
intersection that is nearest and provides the most direct route to his/her
destination, proceeding by the most direct route while observing existing
street directions and turn restrictions, and then returning to the nearest
designated truck route by the most direct route. If the operator has additional
destinations in the immediate vicinity, he/she may proceed by the most direct
route to his/her next destination without returning to a designated truck
route, provided that the operator's next destination does not require that he/
she cross a designated truck route. All trucks must adhere to all posted signs
indicating locations that limit the height of vehicles permitted to operate
thereon.
Local Truck Route Network
Street Limits
Street         Limits
Allerton       White Plains Road to Williamsbridge Road
Avenue
Bailey Avenue  Van Cortlandt Park South to Sedgwick Ave.
Barry Street   Leggett Avenue to Oak Point Avenue
Bartow Avenue  East Gun Hill Road to Baychester Avenue
Baychester     East 241st Street to Edson Avenue, New England Thruway (Northbound) Bartow
Avenue         Avenue Exit to Co-op City Boulevard
Bergen Avenue  Willis Avenue to Westchester Avenue
Boone Avenue   West Farms Road to Whitlock Avenue
Boston Road    City Line to Bronx Park East, East Tremont Avenue to Third Avenue
Broadway       City Line to New York County Line
Bronx Park     Boston Road to White Plains Road
East
Brook Avenue   Webster Avenue to Elton Avenue
Bruckner       Third Avenue Bridge to Kearney Avenue, Kearney Avenue to MacDonough Place,
Boulevard      MacDonough Place to Shore Road
(Northbound)
Bruckner
Boulevard      Shore Road to Third Avenue Bridge
(Southbound)
Bruckner       New England Thruway to Triborough Bridge
Expressway
Bryant Avenue  Bruckner Boulevard to Garrison Avenue
Castle Hill    East Tremont Avenue to Lacombe Avenue
Avenue
City Island    City Island Road to Belden Street
Avenue
City Island    Shore Road to City Island Avenue
Road
Commerce       Westchester Avenue to Zerega Avenue
Avenue
Conner Street  Provost Avenue to Tillotson Avenue
Cross Bronx    Alexander Hamilton Bridge to Cross Bronx Expressway Extension
Expressway
Cross Bronx
Expressway     Park Avenue to Cross Bronx Expressway Eastbound Entrance Ramp, Harrod Avenue to
Eastbound      Bruckner Interchange
Service Road
Cross Bronx
Expressway     Cross Bronx Expressway to Throgs Neck Expressway
Extension
Cross Bronx
Expressway     Bruckner Interchange to Westchester Avenue, Hugh J. Grant Circle to East 177th
Westbound      Street
Service Road
Depot Place    Sedgwick Avenue to Exterior Street
Dickinson      West Gun Hill Road to Sedgwick Avenue
Avenue
Dupont Street  Leggett Avenue to Oak Point Avenue
East Bay       Tiffany Street to Halleck Street
Avenue
East Burnside  Jerome Avenue to Valentine Avenue
Avenue
Eastchester    Boston Road to Williamsbridge Road
Road
East Fordham   Jerome Avenue to Pelham Parkway
Road
East Gun Hill  Jerome Avenue to New England Thruway
Road
East Tremont   Valentine Avenue to Dewey Avenue
Avenue
East 135th     Major Deegan Expressway Westbound – Willis Avenue Exit to Third Avenue Bridge
Street         Approach
East 138th     Madison Avenue Bridge to East River
Street
East 148th     Third Avenue to Bergen Avenue
Street
East 149th     145th Street Bridge to East River
Street
East 150th     Third Avenue to Melrose Avenue
Street
East 161st     Jerome Avenue to Elton Avenue
Street
East 163rd     Elton Avenue to Stebbins Avenue, Stebbins Avenue to Hunts Point Avenue
Street
East 167th     Jerome Avenue to River Avenue
Street
East 174th     Webster Avenue to Park Avenue
Street
East 175th     Cross Bronx Expressway (Westbound) – Webster Avenue Exit to Webster Avenue
Street
East 177th     East Tremont Avenue to Cross Bronx Expressway Service Roads
Street
East 233rd     Jerome Avenue to Boston Road
Street
East 241st     White Plains Road to Baychester Avenue
Street
Edgewater Road Halleck Street to Bruckner Boulevard
Edson Avenue   Baychester Avenue to East Gun Hill Road
Edward L.      Washington Bridge to Jerome Avenue
Grant Highway
Elton Avenue   East 163rd Street to East 161st Street
Exterior       Jerome Avenue to Third Avenue Bridge
Street
Garrison       Leggett Avenue to Tiffany Street, Bryant Avenue to Edgewater Road
Avenue
Givan Avenue   New England Thruway Southbound Service Road to Baychester Avenue
Halleck Street Edgewater Road to Ryawa Avenue
Hollers Avenue New England Thruway (Southbound) – Conner Street Exit to Conner Street
Hunts Point    Southern Boulevard to Bruckner Boulevard, Randall Avenue to Halleck Street,
Avenue         Ryawa Avenue to New Market Road
Hutchinson
River Parkway  Bruckner Interchange to Bronx-Whitestone Bridge
and Southbound
Service Road
Jerome Avenue  City Line to Major Deegan Expressway Approaches at the Macombs Dam Bridge
Kearney Avenue Bruckner Boulevard (Northbound) to Bruckner Boulevard (Northbound)
Lacombe Avenue Soundview Avenue to Castle Hill Avenue
Lane Avenue
(Westchester   East Tremont Avenue to Westchester Avenue
Square)
Legget Avenue  Southern Boulevard to Randall Avenue
Macombs Dam
Bridge         Macombs Dam Bridge to Jerome Avenue
Approach
Major Deegan   City Line to Triborough Bridge
Expressway
MacDonough     Bruckner Boulevard (Northbound) to Bruckner Boulevard (Northbound)
Place
Melrose Avenue Webster Avenue to Willis Avenue
Morris Park    Eastchester Road to East Tremont Avenue
Avenue
Nereid Avenue  Webster Avenue to White Plains Road
New England    City Line to Bruckner Expressway
Thruway
New England
Thruway        Coroner Street to Givan Avenue
Southbound
Service Road
New Market     East Bay Avenue to Hunts Point Avenue
Road
Oak Point      Barry Street to Halleck Street
Avenue
Park Avenue    East 174th Street to Cross Bronx Expressway Eastbound Service Road
Pelham Parkway East Fordham Road to White Plains Road
Pelham Parkway Eastchester Road to Boston Road
North
Pelham Parkway Boston Road to Eastchester Road
South
Provost Avenue City Line to Conner Street
Randall Avenue Leggett Avenue to Halleck Street, Cross Bronx Expressway Extension to East
               Tremont Avenue
River Avenue   Jerome Avenue to East 149th Street
Ryawa Avenue   Halleck Avenue to New Market Road
Sedgwick       Bailey Avenue to West Fordham Road – Jerome Avenue to Depot Place, Van
Avenue         Cortlandt Avenue West to Dickinson Avenue
Sheridan       East Tremont Avenue to Bruckner Expressway
Expressway
Shore Road     Bruckner Expressway to City Island Road
Silver Street  Williamsbridge Road to East Tremont Avenue
Soundview      Bruckner Boulevard to Lacomb Avenue
Avenue
Southern       East Fordham Road to East 163rd Street, Leggert Avenue to East 149th Street
Boulevard
Stebbins       East 163rd Street to East 163rd Street
Avenue
Third Avenue   Bruckner Boulevard to East Fordham Road
Throgs Neck    Bruckner Expressway to Throgs Neck Bridge
Expressway
Tiffany Street Bruckner Boulevard to Viele Avenue
Tillotson      Conner Street to Co-op City Boulevard
Avenue
Truxton Street Leggett Avenue to Oak Point Avenue
University     West Fordham Road to Washington Bridge
Avenue
Valentine      East Burnside Avenue to East Tremont Ave.
Avenue
Van Cortlandt  Bailey Avenue to Sedgwick Avenue
Avenue West
Van Cortlandt  Broadway to Bailey Avenue
Park South
Viele Avenue   Tiffany Street to Halleck Street
Webster Avenue City Line to Melrose Avenue
West Burnside  University Avenue to Jerome Avenue
Avenue
West Farms     East Tremont Avenue to Boone Avenue
Road
West Fordham   University Heights Bridge to Jerome Avenue
Road
West 230th     Broadway to Bailey Avenue
Street
West Gun Hill  Dickinson Avenue to Jerome Avenue
Road
Westchester    Third Avenue to Bruckner Boulevard
Avenue
White Plains   City Line to Bruckner Boulevard
Road
Whitlock       Boone Avenue to Bruckner Boulevard
Avenue
Whittier       Bruckner Boulevard to Garrison Avenue
Street
Williamsbridge Boston Road to East Tremont Avenue
Willis Avenue  Willis Avenue Bridge to East 149th Street
Zerega Avenue  Westchester Avenue to Homer Avenue
 
§ 4-14 Parkways and Parks.
   (a)   Parkways. The following provisions shall govern the use of all
parkways:
      (1)   Peddlers, vendors, hawkers and hucksters. No peddler, vendor,
hawker or huckster shall stop or remain on any part of the right-of-way or
service roads or entrances.
      (2)   Use of parkways restricted. Commercial vehicles, pedestrians,
horses, limited use vehicles and bicycles are prohibited on parkways.
      (3)   Flat tires. No operator shall stop his/her vehicle on the improved
or paved roadway of a park or parkway for the purpose of removing or replacing
a flat tire. No person shall remove or replace a flat tire unless the vehicle
is completely off the improved or paved roadway so that no portion of the
vehicle or the person is exposed to passing vehicles.
   (b)   Restrictions on vehicles.
      (1)   Commercial vehicles. Commercial vehicles are prohibited from using
any park, except under permit where necessary to make deliveries in such park.
Wherever service roads adjoin the main roadway to a park such vehicles are
required to use the service roads set apart for such use. In all cases such
vehicles must enter the park from the nearest street intersection or entrance,
in the direction of traffic, and leave by the nearest intersecting street or
exit in the direction of traffic.
      (2)   Business or advertising purposes. Vehicles having any name,
insignia, or sign painted or displayed thereon for business or advertising
purposes are prohibited in parks or parkways except as provided in paragraph
(b)(1), above.
      (3)   Carriers of offensive refuse or heavy materials. No garbage, ashes,
manure, or other offensive material shall be carried through any park. When
such refuse is to be removed from premises fronting on any park or improved or
paved roadway in a park, the vehicle collecting it must leave the park or
improved or paved roadway as soon as the collection has been accomplished, and
within the time prescribed by the Commissioner of Parks.
      (4)   Buses. No persons shall, except under a permit, drive or operate a
bus within any park or on a parkway. Charter buses will be permitted to operate
between the shortest possible routes from outside a park to deliver or to pick
up their passengers from a picnic, bathing or other recreation area only if a
permit to enter the park has been issued to the person sponsoring the outing,
picnic, etc. Buses must proceed over the route and to the parking space
designated in the permit. Parking in the designated parking space will be
limited to the time prescribed in the permit.
      (5)   Hearses. No hearse or other vehicles carrying or used for carrying
the body of a dead person shall enter or be allowed in any park except by
permit.
   (c)   Restricted areas of parks. No person shall, in any park, drive or
operate a vehicle within or upon a safety zone, walk, bridle path or any part
of any park designated or customarily used for such purposes. No person shall
ride a bicycle, limited use vehicle, or scooter in any park, except in places
designated for such riding; but persons may push such machines in single file
to and from such places, except on beaches and boardwalks. No person shall ride
a limited use vehicle upon any bicycle, pedestrian or bridle path or upon any
street or walkway that has been set aside for bicycling while such designation
is in effect. No wheelchairs shall be operated in any part of any park unless
licensed by the Commissioner of Parks, except that invalids' wheelchairs may be
pushed along the boardwalk and pedestrian walks. No person shall ride or lead a
horse or other beast of burden in a park, except on a bridle path or along
routes customarily used for access to and from bridle paths.
   (d)   Projecting articles. No person shall operate or drive in any park or
parkway a vehicle containing any person or object projecting or hanging outside
or on the top thereof; except that outdoor sports and recreation equipment such
as skis, ski poles, fishing rods, beach chairs, beach umbrellas, tent poles,
toboggans, and sleds may be carried on the rear of such vehicles or on a rack
designed for the purpose and attached to the top thereof, provided that in all
cases fastenings shall be secure and substantial, and provided that such
equipment so carried shall in no case project more than 12 inches above the top
or to the rear of such vehicle.
   (e)   Driving off pavement.
      (1)   No vehicle shall be operated or driven off the improved or paved
roadways of any park or parkway unless it is disabled.
      (2)   All stalled or disabled vehicles must be removed from paved
roadways in parks and parkways so as to prevent obstruction of traffic. If not
so removed by the owners then they may be removed by Department of
Transportation forces or licensed tow operators at the expense of the owners
and in such event neither the City nor such licensed tow operators shall be
liable for damages caused to such vehicles during removal.
      (3)   No disabled vehicle shall be permitted to remain in a park for a
longer period than two hours.
   (f)   Parking. No person shall, in any park area designated as a parking
space,
      (1)   fail to comply with an order of a law enforcement officer or any
park employee or disobey or disregard the notices, prohibitions, instructions
or directions on any park sign or parking meter including the Rules of Museums
or Zoological or Botanical Gardens, posted on the grounds or buildings of said
institutions.
      (2)   between one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before
sunrise, stop or park in a vehicle, except at places designated or maintained
therefor.
§ 4-15 Limitations Upon Dimensions and Weights of Vehicles.
   (a)   Definitions.
      (1)   Highway. When used in this section, a highway shall mean the entire
width between the boundary lines of every public way publicly maintained when
any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular
travel and includes any street, avenue, road, square, place, alley, lane,
highway, boulevard, concourse, parkway, driveway, culvert, sidewalk, crosswalk,
boardwalk, viaduct, underpass and any private street open to public motor
vehicle traffic.
      (2)   Exception. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any
vehicle authorized by the Federal Surface Transportation Assistance Act of
1982, as amended, when such vehicle is operating pursuant to the provisions of
such act.
   (b)   Dimensions and weights of vehicles. No person shall operate or move,
or cause or knowingly permit to be operated or moved on any highway or bridge
any vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or weight exceeding the
limitations provided for in this subdivision (b).
      (1)   Width of vehicle. The width of a vehicle, inclusive of load, shall
not be more than eight feet except that the width of school buses and fire
vehicles shall not exceed 98 inches and the width of buses having a carrying
capacity of more than seven passengers shall not exceed 102 inches.
      (2)   Height of vehicle. The height of a vehicle from underside of tire
to top of vehicle, including its load, shall not be more than 13 1/2 feet;
provided, however, that air cargo carried in containers and pallets loaded onto
flatbed trucks that thereby exceed such height may travel between any airport
under the jurisdiction of the port of New York authority and off-airport
facilities involved in the handling of air cargo located within one mile of
such airport on local routes to be designated by the Commissioner. Any such
vehicle on such route shall not be required to obtain a permit for such travel.
      (3)   Length of single vehicles. The length of a single vehicle,
inclusive of load and bumpers shall not be more than 35 feet. The provisions of
this paragraph (3) shall not apply to semitrailers, fire vehicles, single unit
buses having a capacity of more than fifteen passengers, provided the length of
such buses does not exceed 45 feet; or articulated buses provided the length of
such bus does not exceed 65 feet. Operators of buses longer than 45 feet in
length may be required to demonstrate that on-street stops and terminal areas
used by such buses are of sufficient length to accommodate them. In no case
shall any bus that has a turning radius greater than 50 feet operate without a
permit for such operation issued by the Commissioner;
      (4)   Length of combinations of vehicles. The total length of a
combination of vehicles, inclusive of load and bumpers, shall not be more than
55 feet, except that the combination of vehicle, load and bumper of vehicles
hauling poles, girders, columns or other similar objects of great length which
are indivisible, shall not be more than 60 feet. The provisions of this
paragraph (4) shall not apply to any fire vehicle or to a vehicle or
combination of vehicles that is disabled and unable to proceed under its own
power and is being towed for a distance of not more than ten miles for the
purpose of repair or removal from the highway. The provisions of this paragraph
(4) shall not apply to a combination of vehicles that are operating pursuant to
subdivision (j) of this section.
      (5)   Number of wheels and axles. In determining the number of wheels and
axles on any vehicle or combination of vehicles within the meaning of this
subdivision (b), only 2 wheels shall be counted for each axle, and axles that
are fewer than 46 inches apart from center to center shall be counted as 1
axle. However, in the case of multiple tires or multiple wheels, the sum of the
widths of all tires on a wheel or combination of wheels shall be taken in
determining tire width.
      (6)   Weight per inch of tire. The weight per inch width of tire of any
one wheel of a single vehicle or a combination of vehicles, equipped with
pneumatic tires, when loaded, shall not be more than 800 pounds.
      (7)   Weight on one wheel. The weight on any one wheel of a single
vehicle or a combination of vehicles, equipped with pneumatic tires, when
loaded, shall not be more than 11,200 pounds.
      (8)   Weight on one axle. The weight on any one axle of a single vehicle
or combination of vehicles, equipped with pneumatic tires, when loaded, shall
not be more than 22,400 pounds.
      (9)   Weight on two axles. The weight on any two consecutive axles of a
single vehicle or a combination of vehicles, equipped with pneumatic tires,
when loaded, and when such axles are spaced fewer than 10 feet from center to
center, shall not be more than 36,000 pounds. Axles shall be counted as
provided in paragraph (5) of this subdivision (b).
      (10)   Weight on three axles. A single vehicle or a combination of
vehicles having 3 axles or more and equipped with pneumatic tires, when loaded,
may have a total weight on all axles not to exceed 34,000 pounds, plus 1,000
pounds for each foot and major fraction of a foot of the distance from the
center of the foremost axle to the center of the rearmost axle. Axles shall be
counted as provided in paragraph (5) of this subdivision (b). In no case,
however, shall the total weight exceed 80,000 pounds, except for a combination
of vehicles that are operating, pursuant to Subdivision (j)(3) of this section
where the total weight shall not exceed 90,000 pounds, without any tolerance
for enforcement purposes.
      (11)   Weight on solid rubber tires. A vehicle or combination of vehicles
equipped with any solid rubber tires shall not have a load weighing more than
80% of the total weight permitted in this subdivision (b) for pneumatic tires.
      (12)   Width of tires. For the purpose of this subdivision (b), the width
of pneumatic tires shall be ascertained by measuring the greatest width of the
tire casing when the tire is inflated. The width of solid rubber tires shall be
ascertained by measuring the width of the tire base channel or between the
flanges of the metal rim. No vehicle equipped with solid rubber tires, which
has at any point less than 1 inch of rubber above the top or beyond the flange
or rim, shall be operated upon a public highway. The width of metal tires shall
be ascertained by measuring the width of contact of the tire with the road
surface.
      (13)   Weight and height restrictions on bridges, viaducts and other
structures. No person shall operate or move a vehicle or combination of
vehicles over, on or through any bridge, viaduct or other structures on any
highway if the weight of such vehicle or combination of vehicles and load is
greater than the posted capacity of the structure or exceeds the height of the
posted clearance as shown by an official sign or other marking or device.
      (14)   Other limits also in effect. Nothing m this subdivision (b) shall
be construed as preventing the enforcement of rules now in effect or hereafter
promulgated by the Department of Transportation further limiting the size and
weight of vehicles in designated areas.
      (15)   Permits. Upon application in writing showing good cause, the
Commissioner may issue a permit to operate or move a vehicle or a combination
of vehicles, the weights and dimensions of which exceed the limitations
provided for in this subdivision (b), upon any highway under his/her
jurisdiction. Every such permit may designate the route to be traversed and may
contain any other restrictions or conditions deemed necessary by the
Commissioner. Every such permit shall be carried on the vehicle to which it
refers and shall be open to the inspection of any law enforcement officer or
any inspector of the Bureau of Weights and Measures of the Department of
Consumer Affairs of the City of New York. All permits issued shall be revocable
by the Commissioner at his/her discretion without a hearing or the necessity of
showing cause.
         (i)   If an operator of a vehicle with a gross weight of 300,000
pounds or more seeks to cross a bridge under the jurisdiction of the Department
of Transportation of the City of New York, the operator must comply with the
following:
            (A)   A load rating determined by a New York State licensed
Professional Engineer with at least three years experience in the design,
inspection and load rating of bridges must be submitted with the permit
application. The information contained within such load rating shall include,
but is not limited to: (1) the ratings for the inventory and operating level
for all structural elements of the bridge so that the critical element of the
bridge is identified; (2) the actual weight of the vehicle per axle and the
actual axle spacing; and (3) the method used for establishing the capacity of
the bridge(s). Load ratings shall be submitted for each bridge on the travel
route. Load ratings should conform to "Level 1" load ratings pursuant to New
York State Department of Transportation Engineering Instructions for Load
Ratings and the latest edition of the American Association of State Highway and
Transportation Officials (AASHTO) Condition Evaluation of Bridges. Each load
rating must be stamped and certified by the licensed Professional Engineer who
prepared it.
            (B)   Within one week from the vehicle's crossover of the bridge
(s), the permittee must file a post inspection report of the bridge(s) with the
Department. The post inspection report should analyze the structural integrity
of the bridge(s), to the Department's satisfaction, as a result of the
vehicle's crossover. If the post inspection report indicates any type of
distress to the bridge(s), the permittee must rectify the distress and/or
damage to the Department's satisfaction. The permittee may submit a pre-
inspection report of the bridge's structural integrity for comparison purposes;
otherwise the Department will use its latest biennial inspection reports for
such purposes. Any pre or post inspection report must comply with the
requirements set forth in the latest edition of the New York State Department
of Transportation Bridge Inspection Manual. Any distress that is not identified
in the pre-inspection report or the biennial inspection reports will be deemed
to have been caused by the move.
            (C)   Should the permittee fail to comply with any of the
requirements contained in this subparagraph, the Commissioner may refuse to
issue future overweight and/or overdimensional vehicle permits to the
permittee.
         (ii)   [Reserved.]
      (16)   Permits for vehicles operating pursuant to governmental
regulation. 
         (i)   Where compliance with the requirements of a governmental
regulatory agency necessitates exceeding the weight limitations provided
herein, a permit may be issued by the Commissioner on application therefor, for
a vehicle to exceed such prescribed weight limitations to the extent necessary
to meet the governmental regulatory requirements, but in no event shall the
allowable total vehicle weight provided herein be exceeded.
         (ii)   The application shall include the type of vehicle, the manner
and extent to which the weight limitations are to be exceeded, the design
details causing such excess and a copy of the governmental regulatory agency
requirements.
      (17)   Fees. An administrative fee of $35.00 shall be charged for each
and every permit issued under this subdivision (b) unless otherwise provided by
law. This fee shall not be refundable and is payable in addition to any other
fees or charges provided for under the rules of the Department of
Transportation.
      (18)   Exemptions.
         (i)   Fire Department vehicles. The provisions of this subdivision (b)
with respect to the limitations of the weight on axles shall not apply to
vehicles of the Fire Department, but in no event shall the allowable total
vehicle weight provided hereby be exceeded.
         (ii)   Department of Sanitation vehicles. The provisions of this
subdivision (b) with respect to the width of a vehicle shall not apply to the
sweepers of the Department of Sanitation, provided they do not exceed 11 feet
in width.
         (iii)   Vehicles working on highways. The provisions of this
subdivision (b) with respect to the width of a vehicle shall not apply to
vehicles engaged in work on a highway.
   (c)   Enforcement; measurement and weight of vehicles. Any law enforcement
officer or any inspector of the Department of Consumer Affairs of the City of
New York having reason to believe that any vehicle or load is in violation of
the restrictions in subdivision (b), above, is authorized to stop the vehicle
on any public highway or private street open to public motor vehicle traffic
and measure and weigh it by means of portable or stationary measures and
scales. Any law enforcement officer or such inspector may require that the
vehicle be driven to the nearest scales, if they are within 3 miles.
   (d)   Responsibility for damages. The owner and operator of any vehicle used
in the business of a motor carrier, and the carrier, if the vehicle is actually
engaged in the conduct of the business, shall be jointly and severally
responsible for all damages, to any highway, bridge or culvert resulting from
the movement over or under them of any such vehicle that violates any of the
weight or size provisions of subdivision (b) above.
   (e)   Special concrete plant. Upon application in writing and for cause
shown, the Commissioner may issue permits to exceed the maximum weight limits
provided for in these rules for two- or three-axle vehicles operated in
connection with the manufacture or supply of concrete for construction projects
located in New York City, provided that such vehicles are registered to or
leased by the owner of a manufacturing facility constructed subsequent to
January 1, 1986 on land provided by the City for such purposes.
   (f)   Annual overweight load permit.
      (1)   Permits generally. Except where inconsistent with any federal law,
rule or regulation, the Commissioner may issue an annual overweight load
permit, as provided in subdivision fifteen of section three hundred eighty-five
of the Vehicle and Traffic Law, to expire on the date of expiration of the
registration of the vehicle, for any vehicle designed and constructed to carry
loads that are not of one piece or item, which vehicle currently is registered
in this State and operational on public highways in this State and which was
registered in this State and operational on public highways in this State
immediately prior to January first, nineteen hundred eight-six, in accordance
with the following subparagraphs. The Commissioner also may issue an annual
permit to a vehicle or combination of vehicles which replaces a vehicle, which
vehicle or combination of vehicles was registered in this State and operational
on public highways in this State immediately prior to January first, nineteen
hundred eighty-six, provided the manufacturer's recommended maximum gross
weight of the replacement vehicle or combination of vehicles does not exceed
the weight for which a permit may be issued and the maximum load to be carried
on the replacement vehicle or combination of vehicles does not exceed the
maximum load which could have been carried on the vehicle being replaced or the
registered weight of such vehicle, whichever is lower, in accordance with the
following subparagraphs. Motor carriers having apportioned vehicles registered
under the international registration plan either must have a currently valid
permit as of January first, nineteen hundred ninety-four or shall have
designated New York as their base state under the international registration
plan in order to be eligible to receive such permit. If a permit holder
operates a vehicle or combination of vehicles in violation of any posted weight
restriction, the permit issued to such vehicle or combination of vehicles shall
be deemed void as of the next day and shall not be reissued for a period of
twelve calendar months; provided, however, that if such violation is
adjudicated in favor of the permittee by the New York State Traffic Violations
Bureau, the permit shall be reinstated immediately upon presentation of a copy
of such judgment to the Commissioner.
         (i)   A permit may be issued for a vehicle having at least three axles
and a wheelbase not exceeding forty-four feet nor less than seventeen feet or
for a vehicle with a trailer not exceeding forty feet. A permit may only be
issued for such a vehicle having a maximum gross weight not exceeding seventy-
nine thousand pounds and any tandem axle group weight shall not exceed fifty-
nine thousand pounds, and any tridem shall not exceed sixty-four thousand
pounds.
         (ii)   A permit may be issued only until December thirty-first,
nineteen hundred ninety-nine for a vehicle or combination of vehicles that has
been permitted within the past four years having five axles and a wheelbase of
at least thirty-six and one-half feet. The maximum gross weight of such a
vehicle or combination of vehicles shall not exceed one hundred five thousand
pounds and any tandem axle group weight shall not exceed fifty-one thousand
pounds. A permit may be issued for a vehicle or combination of vehicles having
at least five axles and a wheelbase of at least thirty feet. The maximum gross
weight of such vehicle or combination of vehicles shall not exceed ninety-three
thousand pounds and any tandem axle group weight shall not exceed forty-five
thousand pounds and any tridem axle group weight shall not exceed fifty-seven
thousand pounds.
         (iii)   A permit may be issued for a vehicle or combination of
vehicles having at least five axles or more and a wheelbase of at least thirty-
six and one-half feet, provided such permit contains routing restrictions.
Until December thirty-first, nineteen hundred ninety-four, the maximum gross
weight of a vehicle or combination of vehicles permitted under this
subparagraph shall not exceed one hundred twenty thousand pounds and any tandem
or tridem axle group weight shall not exceed sixty-nine thousand pounds,
provided, however, that any replacement vehicle or combination of vehicles
permitted after January first, nineteen hundred ninety-five, shall have at
least six axles, any tandem axle group shall not exceed fifty thousand pounds
and any tridem axle group shall not exceed sixty-nine thousand pounds. After
December thirty-first, nineteen hundred ninety-four, the tridem axle group
weight of any vehicle or combination of vehicles issued a permit under this
subparagraph shall not exceed sixty-seven thousand pounds, any tandem axle
group weight shall not exceed fifty thousand pounds and any single axle weight
shall not exceed twenty-five thousand seven hundred fifty pounds. After
December thirty-first, nineteen hundred ninety-nine, all vehicles issued a
permit under this subparagraph must have at least six axles.
         (iv)   A permit may be issued for a vehicle having two axles and a
wheelbase not less than ten feet, with the maximum gross weight not in excess
of one hundred twenty-five percent of the total weight limitation as set forth
in subdivision ten of section three hundred eighty-five of the New York State
Vehicle and Traffic Law. Furthermore, any axle weight shall not exceed twenty-
seven thousand pounds.
      (2)   Combination permits. 
         (i)   Each power unit of a combination of vehicles must have its own
annual overweight load permit. A power unit may be used to obtain any number of
permits for different combinations of vehicles as long as each permit has a
maximum of five trailers per power unit. Only the first permit issued to a
power unit pursuant to this paragraph is transferable pursuant to subparagraph
(ii) of paragraph three of this subdivision.
         (ii)   A permit issued to a power unit for a combination of vehicles
under subparagraph (i) of this paragraph may not be used for trailers other
than those specifically listed on each permit.
         (iii)   All trailers must be listed on the corresponding permit by
vehicle identification number (VIN), license plate number or trailer
certificate of title number.
         (iv)   For each permit issued to a power unit for a combination of
vehicles, up to five trailers will be listed with the payment of a $25.00 fee
for each trailer other than the first trailer in addition to the permit fee set
forth in subparagraph (ii) of paragraph six of this subdivision.
      (3)   Replacement vehicle permits. A "replacement vehicle" is a vehicle
or combination of vehicles that replaces a vehicle with a current annual
overweight load permit. A replacement vehicle may be eligible for an annual
overweight load permit, subject to the following:
         (i)   A replacement vehicle or combination of vehicles may be eligible
for an annual overweight load permit, provided the manufacturer's recommended
maximum gross weight of the replacement vehicle or combination of vehicles does
not exceed the weight for which a permit may be issued pursuant to this section
and the maximum load to be carried on the replacement vehicle or combination of
vehicles does not exceed the maximum load which could have been carried on the
vehicle being replaced or the registered weight of such vehicle, whichever is
lower.
         (ii)   Effective October 1, 1995, an annual overweight load permit may
only be transferred to a replacement vehicle with the same registrant or
transferred with the permitted vehicle as part of the sale or transfer of the
permit holder's business. Acceptable forms of proof of the sale or transfer of
the permit holder's business shall include, but not be limited to, a notarized
statement, a statement attested to by at least two independent witnesses, a
certified copy of the document of sale or transfer, a will or other official
document disposing of the business. Only one permit issued to a power unit
pursuant to paragraph two above is eligible for transfer.
         (iii)   Banking. 
            (A)   For purposes of this section, "banked weight" shall mean the
New York State highest registered gross legal weight of a vehicle or
combination of vehicles prior to April first, nineteen hundred eighty-seven;
such vehicle or combination of vehicles must have been registered in New York
State and operational on public highways in this State immediately prior to
January first, nineteen hundred eighty-six in order to be part of the banked
weight system.
            (B)   Excess weight capacity that can be banked arises from the
following situations: (a) a replacement vehicle has a gross vehicle weight less
than the banked weight capacity of the replaced vehicle; or (b) the statutory
reduction in allowable maximum weights under the permit results in a
permissible maximum weight less than the banked weight capacity; or (c) there
is a voluntary surrender of a permit or permits in order to obtain one or more
replacement permits, and there is excess weight after the issuance of the new
permit or permits; or (d) there is a voluntary surrender of a permit without
obtaining a new permit.
            (C)   Any vehicle whose permit has been surrendered voluntarily,
and its weight banked, cannot obtain another annual overweight load permit.
            (D)   Banked weight can be used only to justify the acquisition of
additional vehicles or combinations of vehicles pursuant to this subdivision.
(a) Claims of replacement vehicle rights based on banked weight capacity must
indicate the source of the banked weight capacity. (b) The banked weight
capacity for any replacement vehicle or combination of vehicles shall not
exceed the allowable permitted weight for such replacement vehicle or
combination of vehicles, and shall not exceed the gross weight capacity of the
replaced vehicle or combination of vehicles. (c) Unused banked weight capacity
cannot justify a replacement vehicle or combination of vehicles that has a
gross weight capacity greater than the replaced vehicle or combination of
vehicles. (d) Any replacement vehicle may be replaced pursuant to the
provisions of this section; when a replacement vehicle; has been replaced it
becomes ineligible for further annual overweight load permits pursuant to this
section.
            (E)   If a permit is revoked pursuant to the provisions of this
subdivision, the permitted weight cannot be banked.
      (4)   Leasing.
         (i)   The lessor of a leased vehicle may obtain a permit for the
vehicle pursuant to this subdivision (f).
         (ii)   The lessee of a leased vehicle who has an exclusive leasing
arrangement that exceeds thirty days will be presumed to be the registrant for
purposes of obtaining a permit, unless shown otherwise.
         (iii)   Where a leasing agreement is for thirty days or less, and the
lessor has not obtained a permit for the leased vehicle, the lessee must obtain
a single use permit for each day of operation of the leased vehicle pursuant to
paragraph fifteen of subdivision (b) of this section.
      (5)   Permit application.
         (i)   General.
            (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this section for daily
permits, eligible vehicles or combinations of vehicles exceeding allowable
weights pursuant to law are required to obtain an annual overweight load permit
from the Commissioner pursuant to this subdivision in order to operate on those
highways under the jurisdiction of the Commissioner. An annual overweight load
permit is not valid unless the vehicle or combination of vehicles is operated
and maintained in accordance with the provisions of these Rules and with any
other special requirements indicated on the permit.
            (B)   All applications must be on the forms prescribed by and
available from the Commissioner.
            (C)   The permit application and procedures for granting permits
shall be made available to a registrant upon request at the Department of
Transportation, Authorized Permits and Parking Division, by mail or in person,
and must be completed in all respects by the registrant or his legal
representative. The applicant must be the registrant of the vehicle, except
where there is a leased vehicle as provided in this subdivision.
         (ii)   Proof of registration.
            (A)   All vehicles, including vehicles to be replaced, must have
been registered in this State and operational on public highways in the State
of New York immediately prior to January first, nineteen hundred eighty-six. To
obtain a permit, the registrant must show proof of valid New York State
registration for the vehicle or combination of vehicles and must maintain such
New York State registration for the duration of the permit.
            (B)   The applicant must submit with his application a copy of the
registration of each vehicle or replacement vehicle.
            (C)   The burden of proof in establishing the validity and
existence of the New York State registration is upon the applicant.
         (iii)   Identification of vehicle and load. 
            (A)   The power unit shall be identified by make, year of
manufacture, model number, vehicle identification number (VIN), and license
plate number.
            (B)   The manufacturer's recommended gross weight rating and the
registered gross vehicle weight shall be indicated on an annual overweight load
permit application for replacement vehicles.
            (C)   Manufacturer's maximum axle weight(s), axle spacing, number
of tires, and maximum tire load spacing shall be indicated on an annual
overweight load permit application for all vehicles.
         (iv)   Procedure. The applicant must complete the required application
information and submit the required number of copies of such application,
together with the required permit fee(s), as well as any required
documentation, to the Commissioner by mail or in person. All applications must
be signed by the registrant or his legal representative.
         (v)   Reapplication fee. When a reapplication is made for a permit for
the same vehicle or combination of vehicles that have been denied a permit, the
initial annual vehicle fee shall be increased by $25.00.
         (vi)   No refund after granting of permit. No refund shall be made
once an application for a permit has been filed and a permit granted by the
Commissioner.
         (vii)   False information voids permit. Permits which have been issued
on the basis of falsely stated information shall be null and void.
         (viii)   New owners must obtain new permits. If the registrant of the
vehicle has been changed after a permit has been issued, the new owner(s) must
obtain a modified permit.
         (ix)   Permit application information. 
            (A)   Registrants of vehicles eligible for permits pursuant to this
section must furnish to the Commissioner a certified copy of the vehicle's
current New York State registration or registration pursuant to the
international registration plan with New York State designated as the base
state. The registrant also must provide a certified copy of the vehicle's
registration, or other verifiable proof acceptable to the Commissioner,
demonstrating that the vehicle was registered in New York State immediately
prior to January first, nineteen hundred eighty-six; once such fact has been
established with the Commissioner, subsequent permit applications do not
require such proof, provided the most recent permit number for the vehicle is
provided in the new permit application.
            (B)   The registrant must furnish to the Commissioner, vehicle
measurements consisting of:
               (a)   Trailer length; and
               (b)   Number of axles; and
               (c)   Axle spacing; and
               (d)   Manufacturer's recommended gross vehicle weight; and
               (e)   Total wheelbase measurement (including tractor/steering
axle); and
               (f)   Tire size and number of tires of each axle; and
               (g)   Manufacturer's maximum axle weight rating.
      (6)   Fees. 
         (i)   The following fees shall be charged and collected by the
Commissioner for obtaining an annual overweight load permit. Fees shall be paid
by money order, certified check, bank check, check drawn on a New York State
bank, or a negotiable instrument acceptable to and made payable to the "New
York City Department of Transportation." Fees must accompany each permit
application. Improperly filed permit applications shall be subject to an
administrative fee of $25.00.
         (ii)   The fee for an annual overweight load permit shall be $600 if
for a period of six months or more. The fee for an annual overweight load
permit shall be $300 if for a period of less than six months.
         (iii)   If a check delivered to the Commissioner or his agent as
payment of any fee for the registration of any vehicle or combination of
vehicles is dishonored for insufficient funds, all permits issued in the name
of that registrant shall be suspended and no other permit shall be issued to
such person until full satisfaction of the fee is made and an additional fee of
$25.00 is paid to the Commissioner. No such suspension shall be issued until
thirty days after notification is mailed to the registrant at the address given
on the application for the permit. If satisfaction is made within thirty days
from the date of mailing of such notification, no suspension shall be issued
and no additional fee shall be charged.
   (g)   Crane Permits. 
      (1)   Upon application in writing, the Commissioner may issue a special
hauling permit to move certain mobile hoisting machines, also known as self-
propelled cranes, the weight and dimensions of which exceed the limitations
provided herein, upon any highway under his/her jurisdiction. Such hoisting
machines shall be considered to constitute a nondivisible load.
      (2)   The special hauling permit, which shall expire on the 31st day of
December next succeeding the date of issuance, may designate the route to be
traversed and contain any other restrictions deemed appropriate by the
Commissioner.
      (3)   The permittee shall be required to secure and maintain owners'
protective liability and property damage insurance coverage in such amounts and
upon such terms as deemed appropriate by the Commissioner.
      (4)   The fee for the issuance of such annual special hauling permit or
renewal thereof shall be $100.00.
   (h)   Vehicular weights on F.D.R. Drive. No person shall operate or cause to
be operated any vehicle in excess of 8,000 lbs. (4 tons), including the weight
of passengers and cargo, on the F.D.R. Drive northbound from 23rd Street to
63rd Street and the F.D.R. Drive southbound from 63rd Street to 23rd Street.
These vehicles include, but shall not be limited to trucks, vans, government-
owned vehicles, stretch limousines and buses. For the purposes of enforcement,
signs need not be posted for this rule to be in effect.
   (i)   Overdimensional and/or Overweight Vehicle Bulk Milk Permit.
      (1)   Permits Generally.
         (i)   Except where inconsistent with any federal or state law, rule or
regulation, the Commissioner may issue a permit, as provided for in paragraph
(c) of subdivision fifteen of section three hundred eighty-five of the Vehicle
and Traffic Law, to operate or move a combination of vehicles, which for the
purpose of this rule shall be limited to one power unit and one trailer except
as provided in subparagraph (viii) of paragraph (3) of this subdivision,
designed and constructed to carry milk in bulk, the lengths and/or weights of
which exceed the limitations provided in subdivision b of this section.
         (ii)   The permit shall authorize only the transportation of bulk milk
within the City of New York to a milk processing facility located within the
City of New York or the transportation by such a combination of vehicles out of
the City of New York empty or carrying bulk cream, at weights not to exceed the
limitations provided in subdivision b of this section, from the milk processing
facility.
         (iii)   A permit issued pursuant to this subdivision shall designate a
route approved by the Commissioner. A combination of vehicles operating under a
permit issued pursuant to this subdivision may only travel along the route
designated on the permit. There shall be one permit per combination of vehicles
allowing the combination of vehicles to enter the City of New York and a
separate permit allowing the combination of vehicles to leave the City of New
York.
         (iv)   Combinations of vehicles designed and constructed to carry milk
in bulk that exceed allowable lengths and/or weights pursuant to law are
required to obtain a permit from the Commissioner pursuant to this subdivision
in order to operate on those highways under the jurisdiction of the
Commissioner.
         (v)   No permit shall be issued for a combination of vehicles that
exceeds 99,000 pounds.
         (vi)   Permits shall be issued on a quarterly basis.
      (2)   Permit Application.
         (i)   Generally.
            (A)   A permit issued pursuant to this subdivision is not valid
unless the combination of vehicles is operated and maintained in accordance
with the provisions of this subdivision and with any other special requirements
indicated on the permit.
            (B)   The applicant shall be the registrant of the combination of
vehicles except, in the case of a combination of vehicles leased pursuant to an
exclusive leasing arrangement that exceeds thirty days, the applicant shall be
the lessee. The applicant shall supply his/her Federal Tax ID number.
            (C)   The permit application and the procedures for granting
permits shall be made available to an applicant upon request at the Department
of Transportation, Division of Bridges, Truck Permit Unit, by mail, email or in
person, and shall be completed in all respects by the applicant or his/her
legal representative.
            (D)   All applications shall be on the forms prescribed by and
available from the Commissioner.
         (ii)   Identification of vehicle and load. The power unit and trailer
(s) shall be identified on the application by make, year of manufacture and
license plate numbers and State.
         (iii)   Vehicle Measurements. Applicants shall furnish to the
Commissioner all of the following vehicle measurements:
            (A)   Trailer length;
            (B)   Number of axles, including axle spacing and axle weights;
            (C)   Total wheelbase measurement (including tractor/steering
axle);
            (D)   Overall width;
            (E)   Overall length;
            (F)   Overall height; and
            (G)   Total gross vehicle weight including load (tractor, trailer
and load).
         (iv)   Attestation. Applicants shall furnish to the Commissioner a
sworn and notarized statement attesting that the vehicles for which a permit
application has been submitted will be used solely for the transport of bulk
milk or cream.
         (v)   Procedure. The applicant shall complete the required application
information and submit the required number of copies of such application,
together with the required permit fee(s), as well as any required
documentation, to the Commissioner by mail or in person. All applications shall
be signed by the applicant or his/her legal representative.
         (vi)   Reapplication Fee. When a reapplication is made for a permit
under this subdivision for the same combination of vehicles that has been
denied a permit, the initial permit fee shall be increased by an administrative
fee of $25 in accordance with subparagraph (vii) of paragraph (3) of this
subdivision.
         (vii)   No refund after granting of permit. No refund shall be made
once an application for a permit under this subdivision has been filed and a
permit granted by the Commissioner.
         (viii)   False information voids permit. Permits that have been issued
on the basis of falsely-stated information shall be null and void.
         (ix)   New owners shall obtain new permits. If the ownership of a
combination of vehicles, or the identity of the lessee in the case of a
combination of vehicles leased pursuant to an exclusive leasing arrangement
that exceeds thirty days, changes after a permit under this subdivision has
been issued, the new owner(s) or lessee(s) shall obtain a modified permit and
shall pay the applicable quarterly fee specified in paragraph (3) of this
subdivision.
      (3)   Permit Fees.
         (i)   The following fees shall be charged and collected by the
Commissioner for obtaining a permit or modified permit, issued on a quarterly
basis, pursuant to this subdivision. Fees shall be paid by money order,
certified check, bank check, check drawn on a New York State bank, or a
negotiable instrument acceptable to and made payable to the "New York City
Department of Transportation." Fees shall accompany each permit application.
The fee for a permit issued pursuant to this subdivision shall be $650 per
combination of vehicles, except as otherwise provided in this subparagraph (3).
         (ii)   For all permits issued from July 18, 2015 through July 17,
2016:
            (a)   If the total number of permits pursuant to this subdivision
issued to the applicant from July 18, 2014 through July 17, 2015 was at least
25 percent less than the total number of permits issued to the applicant from
July 17, 2009 through July 16, 2010 (the "baseline year amount"), the fee for a
permit shall be $650 per combination of vehicles.
            (b)   Otherwise, the fee for a permit shall be $877.50 per
combination of vehicles.
         (iii)   For all permits issued from July 18, 2016 through July 17,
2017:
            (a)   If the total number of permits pursuant to this subdivision
issued to the applicant from July 18, 2015 through July 17, 2016 was at least
50 percent less than the baseline year amount, the fee for a permit shall be
$650 per combination of vehicles.
            (b)   Otherwise, the fee for a permit shall be $910 per combination
of vehicles.
         (iv)   For all permits issued from July 18, 2017 through July 17, 2018
            (a)   If the total number of permits pursuant to this subdivision
issued to the applicant from July 18, 2016 through July 17, 2017 was at least
50 percent less than the baseline year amount, the fee for a permit shall be
$650 per combination of vehicles.
            (b)   Otherwise, the fee for a permit shall be $942.50 per
combination of vehicles.
         (v)   For all permits issued from July 18, 2018 through July 17, 2019:
            (a)   If the total number of permits pursuant to this subdivision
issued to the applicant from July 18, 2017 through July 17, 2018 was at least
75 percent less than the baseline year amount, the fee for a permit shall be
$650 per combination of vehicles.
            (b)   Otherwise, the fee for a permit shall be $975 per combination
of vehicles.
         (vi)   For all permits issued from July 18, 2019 through July 17,
2020:
            (a)   If the total number of permits pursuant to this subdivision
issued to the applicant from July 18, 2018 through July 17, 2019 was 100
percent less than the baseline year amount, the fee for a permit shall be $650
per combination of vehicles.
            (b)   Otherwise, the fee for a permit shall be $975 per combination
of vehicles.
         (vii)   For all permits issued from July 18, 2020 through July 17,
2021:
            (a)   If the total number of permits pursuant to this subdivision
issued to the applicant from July 18, 2019 through July 17, 2020 was 100
percent less than the baseline year amount, the fee for a permit shall be $650
per combination of vehicles.
            (b)   Otherwise, the fee for a permit shall be $1,007.50 per
combination of vehicles.
         (viii)   Permit fees specified in this paragraph shall apply
separately to permits to enter the City of New York and permits to leave the
City of New York.
         (ix)   Reapplication for a permit that has been denied shall be
subject to an administrative fee of $25.
         (x)   The permit fees provided in subparagraphs (i) through (v) of
this paragraph shall apply to permits for one specific power unit and one
specific trailer. Applicants may apply for a quarterly permit under this
subdivision to attach up to four additional specific trailers to one specific
power unit, provided that only one trailer may be used with such power unit at
any given time. The fee for a multiple trailer-single power unit combination
permit shall be $100 per quarter more than the permits fees provided in
subparagraphs (i) through (v) of this paragraph.
         (xi)   If a check delivered to the Commissioner or his/her agent as
payment of any fee for the permitting of any combination of vehicles is
dishonored for insufficient funds, all permits issued in the name of that
applicant shall be suspended and no other permit shall be issued to such person
until full satisfaction of the fee is made and an additional fee of $25 is paid
to the Commissioner. No such suspension shall be issued until thirty days after
notification is mailed to the applicant at the address given on the application
for the permit. If satisfaction is made within thirty days of mailing such
notification, no suspension shall be issued and no additional fee shall be
charged.
      (4)   Expiration of Permit Program. No permit shall be issued on or after
July 18, 2021.
   (j)   Routes for Trailers in Excess of Forty-eight Feet. 
      (1)   Any semitrailer with a length in excess of forty-eight feet, but
not exceeding fifty-three feet, if the distance between the kingpin of the
semitrailer and the centerline of the rear axle does not exceed forty-three
feet and if the semitrailer is equipped with a rear-end protective device of
substantial construction consisting of a continuous lateral beam extending to
within four inches of the lateral extremities of the semitrailer and located
not more than twenty-two inches from the surface as measured with the vehicle
empty and on a level surface, may be operated on:
         i.   that portion of interstate 95 between the Bronx-Westchester
county line and interstate 295;
         ii.   that portion of interstate 295 which connects interstate 95 with
interstate 495;
         iii.   that portion of interstate 495 between interstate 295 and the
Nassau-Queens county line;
         iv.   that portion of interstate 678 between interstate 95 and John F.
Kennedy International Airport;
         v.   that portion of interstate 95 between interstate 695 and the New
Jersey State Line on the upper level of the George Washington Bridge;
         vi.   that portion of interstate 695 between interstate 95 and
interstate 295;
         vii.   that portion of Interstate 278 between the Goethals Bridge and
Gulf Avenue;
         viii.   that portion of Interstate 278 between Goethals Road North and
Goethals Bridge;
         ix.   that portion of Gulf Avenue between Western Avenue and Edward
Curry Avenue;
         x.   that portion of Edward Curry Avenue between Gulf Avenue and South
Avenue;
         xi.   that portion of South Avenue between Edward Curry Avenue and
Goethals Road North;
         xii.   that portion of Forest Avenue between Gulf Avenue and Goethals
Road North;
         xiii.   that portion of Goethals Road North between South Avenue and
Forest Avenue;
         xiv.   that portion of Goethals Road North between Forest Avenue and
Western Avenue; and
         xv.   that portion of Western Avenue between Gulf Avenue and Richmond
Terrace.
      (2)   The total length of a combination of vehicles operating pursuant to
this subdivision, inclusive of load and bumpers, shall not be more than seventy
three and one half feet.
      (3)   A combination of vehicles operating, pursuant to Subparagraphs
(vii) through (xv) of Paragraph 1 of this subdivision must not exceed a total
weight of 90,000 pounds, over or on any bridge or other structure when the
total weight is over 80,000 pounds, and must be on a trip that involves only
the pickup or drop off of sealed shipping containers used for the transfer of
freight transported in ocean-going commerce, bearing the seal of the United
States Customs and Border Protection, the seal of another governmental agency,
or seal of the shipper.
(Amended City Record 7/17/2015, eff. 7/17/2015; amended City Record 1/8/2016,
eff. 2/7/2016; amended City Record 12/21/2017, eff. 1/20/2018)
§ 4-16 Pedestrian Plazas.
   (a)   Proposals and Applications to Designate Pedestrian Plazas. In addition
to areas selected by the Department to be designated as pedestrian plazas
pursuant to § 19-157(b)(1) of the Administrative Code, the Department shall
accept proposals and applications for areas under its jurisdiction to be
designated as pedestrian plazas.
      (1)   Proposals. A proposal for the designation of an area as a
pedestrian plaza may be submitted by mail or electronic mail to the Department
by a community board, council member, borough president, or not-for-profit
organization. Electronic mail submissions are preferred and may be sent to
plazas@dot.nyc.gov. Post submissions may be mailed to: Pedestrian Plaza
Proposal, New York City Department of Transportation, 55 Water Street, New
York, NY 10041.
         (i)   All proposals must include:
            (A)   A map or description of the area requested for designation;
            (B)   A suggested pedestrian plaza partner;
            (C)   A statement explaining the need for such plaza, including how
it would promote safety and contribute to the community; and
            (D)   The proposer's contact information.
            (E)   At least five (5) letters of support from community
stakeholders including, but not limited to, adjacent property owners and
businesses, nearby institutions, such as churches and schools, elected
officials, other not-for-profit groups, neighborhood and block associations,
and neighborhood residents.
         (ii)   Within 90 days of receipt of such proposal, the Department
shall issue a response as to whether or not the proposal as described is
viable. A proposal is viable if it does not adversely impact the transportation
network to a significant degree, if the surrounding land uses are appropriate
to support a pedestrian plaza, and if the size and shape of the proposal will
support the full range of activities that take place in pedestrian plazas. If
the Department determines that the proposal is viable, the Department will
recommend that the proposer submit an application with a pedestrian plaza
partner during the next period during which applications are accepted.
         (iii)   The submission of a proposal shall not be deemed an
application for purposes of this section.
      (2)   Applications. 
         (i)   Applicant. Only an organization operating within the City that
wants to become a pedestrian plaza partner may submit an application. An
applicant must be incorporated in New York State and must have a mission that
serves or relates to the geographical area of the proposed pedestrian plaza.
The submission of a proposal is not required prior to the submission of an
application.
         (ii)   Submission. For the year 2016, pedestrian plaza applications
may be submitted by mail or electronically from June 20th through August 31st.
For the year 2017 and annually thereafter, pedestrian plaza applications may be
submitted by mail or electronically from the first business day in April
through the last business day in June. The application form prescribed by the
Department shall provide specified dates and addresses each year. Electronic
submissions are preferred.
         (iii)   Required Documentation. Applicants must submit the following
documents in accordance with subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph:
            (A)   A completed application in a form prescribed by the
Department, which will be posted each year on the Department's website, and
which may require applicants to submit information including, but not limited
to, the mission of the pedestrian plaza partner, the context surrounding the
site of the proposed pedestrian plaza, potential uses and programming for the
proposed pedestrian plaza, and a projected operating budget for the proposed
pedestrian plaza;
            (B)   A list of names and titles of the applicant's employees who
work in community development, including the duration that each has been
employed with the applicant;
            (C)   A list of names and titles of the members of the applicant's
Board of Directors, or similar governing members, including the date each
member began serving with the applicant;
            (D)   Financial information based on the applicant's operating
budget;
               (a)   If the applicant's operating budget is less than $25,000,
its most current financial statement signed by its treasurer must be submitted.
               (b)   If the applicant's operating budget is $25,000 or more,
its most current IRS 990 Form must be submitted.
               (c)   If the applicant's operating budget is $100,000 or more
but less than $250,000, its most current IRS 990 Form and an independent
accountant's review report must be submitted.
               (d)   If the applicant's operating budget is $250,000 or more,
its most current IRS 990 Form and audited financial statements must be
submitted,
            (E)   At least eight (8) letters of support from community
stakeholders including, but not limited to, adjacent property owners and
businesses, nearby institutions, such as churches and schools, elected
officials, other not-for-profit groups, neighborhood and block associations,
and neighborhood residents;
            (F)   Three (3) photographs of the site of the proposed pedestrian
plaza.
         (iv)   Review. Applications will be reviewed and evaluated according
to the following criteria:
            (A)   Open Space: The Department will prioritize proposed
pedestrian plazas that are in neighborhoods with an insufficient amount of open
space;
            (B)   Community Initiative: Applicants must demonstrate the ability
to develop and execute a community outreach plan, build consensus around the
proposal, and solidify local stakeholder support;
            (C)   Site Context: The Department will evaluate the
appropriateness of the adjacent land uses, population density, proximity to
transit, safety, and other nearby open space;
            (D)   Organizational and Maintenance Capacity: Applicants must
demonstrate that they are willing and able to manage, operate, maintain, and
program the proposed pedestrian plaza, including having an active Board of
Directors or similar governing members and established staff; and
            (E)   Income Eligibility: The Department will prioritize proposed
pedestrian plazas that are located in low- or moderate-income neighborhoods as
designated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development as
eligible for Community Development Block Grants.
         (v)   The application and guidelines regarding the management of
pedestrian plazas can be found on the Department's website.
         (vi)   Selection. 
            (A)   Within 120 days of the deadline to submit an application, the
Department shall issue a response as to whether the proposed pedestrian plaza
has been accepted or rejected. Such responses shall be sent to applicants by
electronic mail or mail, as applicable.
            (B)   If the Department accepts an application, it shall notify any
affected council members, community boards, and borough presidents no less than
60 days before designating the proposed pedestrian plaza. Within 45 days of
receipt of such notice, such council members, community boards, and borough
presidents may submit comments regarding such proposed pedestrian plaza, which
shall be considered by the Department.
      (3)   List of Designated Plazas. A list of all pedestrian plazas shall be
posted on the Department's website.
      (4)   Rescinding Pedestrian Plaza Designations. The Department may, at
its own discretion, rescind the designation of any pedestrian plaza.
         (i)   At least 90 days before the Department's proposed date of
rescission of the designation of a pedestrian plaza, the Department shall
notify the affected council members, community boards, borough presidents, and
any pedestrian plaza partners who may request a public hearing within ten (10)
days of such notification.
         (ii)   If such public hearing is so requested, the Department shall
hold a public hearing no more than 45 days after sending such notice of
proposed designation rescission.
         (iii)   he Department shall consider any comments from such public
hearing or any comments submitted to the Department before rescinding such
designation.
   (b)   General Uses. 
      (1)   Pedestrian plazas are closed to vehicular traffic, unless
authorized by a police officer or designated Department employee.
      (2)   Any person may enter and use a pedestrian plaza at any time, unless
other open hours are posted for maintenance, events, or construction, or
exigent circumstances exist.
      (3)   Any person in or on a pedestrian plaza must comply with the lawful
direction or command of any police officer or designated Department employee,
regardless of whether such direction or command is indicated verbally, by
gesture, or otherwise. Any person in or on a pedestrian plaza must comply with
or obey any instruction, direction, regulation, warning or prohibition, written
or printed, displayed or appearing on any Department sign, except such sign may
be disregarded upon order by a police officer or designated Department
employee.
      (4)   Any person holding an event, where such activity is subject to the
permit requirements of the Mayor's Office of Citywide Event Coordination and
Management, may engage in such activity only upon obtaining such permit from
that office.
      (5)   Any person engaged in filming or photography, where such activity
is subject to the permit requirements of the Mayor's Office of Film Theatre &
Broadcasting, may engage in such activity only upon obtaining such permit from
that office.
      (6)   Any person using or operating any sound device or apparatus, where
such use or operation is subject to the permit requirements of the New York
City Police Department, may engage in such activity only upon obtaining such
permit from that department.
      (7)   Any person holding a parade, procession, or demonstration, where
such activity is subject to the permit requirements of the New York City Police
Department, may engage in such activity only upon obtaining such permit from
that department.
      (8)   Where exigent circumstances exist and a police officer or a
designated Department employee gives notice to a person to move temporarily
from any location in or on a pedestrian plaza, such person shall immediately
move from such location until further notice. For the purposes of this section,
exigent circumstances shall include, but not be limited to, unusually heavy
pedestrian traffic, the existence of any obstruction in or on the pedestrian
plaza, an accident, fire, or other emergency situation.
      (9)   Concession Seating. 
         (i)   Subject to the Department’s prior written approval, a pedestrian
plaza partner may permit a subconcessionaire to designate a portion of the
total square footage of such pedestrian plaza for concession seating, provided
that the total square footage of all such subconcessionaires’ concession
seating shall not exceed 33% of the total square footage of the pedestrian
plaza. Notwithstanding the previous sentence, if a major concession is approved
pursuant to sections 197-c and 197-d of the New York City Charter, the total
square footage of all such subconcessionaires’ concession seating shall not
exceed 50% of the total square footage of the pedestrian plaza.
         (ii)   If the Department approves concession seating at a pedestrian
plaza pursuant to this paragraph, the Department or its pedestrian plaza
partner must maintain seating for public use at such pedestrian plaza. The
amount of seating for public use shall be determined by the Department, in
consultation with the pedestrian plaza partner, upon consideration of factors
such as pedestrian demand for seating for public use, adjacent land uses,
public programming areas, permanent seating for public use including but not
limited to fixed benches, and the approved pedestrian plaza site plan that is
posted on the Department’s website.
         (iii)   A pedestrian plaza partner may only permit a subconcessionaire
to operate concession seating, inclusive of setting up and breaking down,
packing up, or otherwise clearing such concession seating, during the hours of
7 a.m. to 11 p.m.
         (iv)   In the absence of a pedestrian plaza partner, this paragraph
does not preclude the Department from designating concession seating at a
pedestrian plaza.
         (v)   Such concession seating does not require a license and revocable
consent nor is it considered a “sidewalk cafe” or “roadway cafe” as defined in
subchapter 1 of chapter 1 of Title 19 of the New York City Administrative Code.
         (vi)   Definitions. For purposes of this paragraph, the following
terms have the following meanings:
            Concession seating. The term “concession seating” means an area in
a pedestrian plaza designated for exclusive use by a concessionaires’ or
subconcessionaires’ customers or patrons.
            Subconcessionaire. The term “subconcessionaire” means an entity
that has entered into an agreement with a pedestrian plaza partner that is
authorized by the Department and subject to
Title 12 of the Rules of the City of New York.
   (c)   Prohibited Uses. 
      (1)   No person shall engage in disorderly behavior in or on any
pedestrian plaza, such as the following:
         (i)   Endangering the safety of oneself and/or others;
         (ii)   Obstructing pedestrian traffic;
         (iii)   Engaging in conduct or committing acts that disturb the peace,
comfort or repose of a reasonable person of normal sensitivities; or
         (iv)   Climbing upon any wall, artwork, fence, shelter or any
structure not specifically intended for climbing purposes.
      (2)   No person shall use a Pedestrian Flow Zone for any purpose other
than the safe and continuous movement of pedestrian traffic.
      (3)   No person shall litter in or on any pedestrian plaza. All persons
shall use receptacles provided for the disposal of refuse. No person shall
deposit household or commercial refuse in any receptacle in a pedestrian plaza.
      (4)   No person shall spit, urinate, or defecate in or on any pedestrian
plaza, except in a facility which is specifically designed for such purpose.
      (5)   No person shall bathe, shower or shave.
      (6)   No person shall occupy more than one seat with oneself or one's
belongings when to do so would interfere or tend to interfere with the use of
such seats by others.
      (7)   Smoking and using electronic cigarettes are prohibited.
      (8)   No person shall leave any property unattended or place property in
or on any pedestrian plaza in a manner that interferes with pedestrian traffic.
      (9)   No person shall injure, deface, alter, write upon, destroy, remove
or tamper with in any way, any real or personal property or equipment owned by
or under the jurisdiction or control of the Department or a pedestrian plaza
partner.
      (10)   No person shall gamble or conduct or engage in any game of chance,
unless such game of chance is permitted by law.
      (11)   No person shall appear in such a manner that the person's
genitalia are unclothed or exposed, except as otherwise permitted by law.
      (12)   No person shall engage in camping, or erect or maintain a tent,
structure, shelter or camp.
      (13)   No person shall allow any dog in the person's custody or control
to be unrestrained or to discharge any fecal matter in or on any pedestrian
plaza, unless such person promptly removes or disposes of same. This provision
shall not apply to a guide or service animal accompanying a person with a
disability.
      (14)   No person shall operate an aircraft, kite or other aerial device
in, on, or above the surface of any pedestrian plaza for any purpose
whatsoever.
      (15)   No person shall feed any undomesticated animal, including
unconfined squirrels and birds, in or on any pedestrian plaza.
   (d)   Regulated Uses. 
      (1)   Posting of notices and signs. 
         (i)   No person shall post, display, affix, construct or carry any
placard, flag, banner, sign or model in or on any pedestrian plaza or display
any such item by means of aircraft, kite, or other aerial device in, on, or
above the surface of any pedestrian plaza for any purpose whatsoever, without
permission from the Department. Each separate item placed in violation of this
paragraph shall constitute a separate violation.
         (ii)   Notwithstanding subparagraph (i) above, any person may carry
any item described in subparagraph (i) above, without the aid of any aircraft,
kite, or other aerial device, where the space on which the message of such item
is contained has a height no greater than two feet and a length no longer than
three feet, and that such item takes up a total area of no more than six square
feet.
         (iii)   Any person who posts or displays a sign in, on, or above the
surface of any pedestrian plaza, shall be responsible for removal of such sign.
Failure to remove any sign that is posted or displayed in, on, or above the
surface of any pedestrian plaza or that remains on such property shall
constitute a violation of these rules.
         (iv)   In the event that a notice or sign, in violation of paragraph
(i) above, is posted or displayed in, on, or above the surface of any
pedestrian plaza, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that any person whose
name, telephone number, or other identifying information appears on such notice
or sign has violated paragraph (i) by either:
            (A)   Pasting, posting, painting, printing or nailing such notice
or sign, or
            (B)   Directing or permitting a servant, agent, employee or other
individual under such person's control to engage in such activity; provided,
however, that such rebuttable presumption shall not apply with respect to
criminal prosecutions brought pursuant to this subparagraph (iv).
      (2)   Except as otherwise permitted, no person shall skateboard, inline
skate, roller skate, or ride a bicycle, scooter, or any other vehicle or device
on or through any part of a pedestrian plaza, except a wheelchair or scooter
used for transit by disabled persons.
      (3)   Except as otherwise permitted, no person shall make, continue,
cause, or permit to be made or continued unreasonable noise in violation of the
Noise Code pursuant to Subchapter 2 of Title 24 of the Administrative Code.
      (4)   Except as otherwise permitted, no person shall consume alcoholic
beverages.
      (5)   Except as otherwise permitted, no person shall kindle, build,
maintain, or use a fire.
      (6)   Except as otherwise permitted, no person shall bring or place
tables, carts, chairs or furniture in or on any pedestrian plaza.
      (7)   Except as otherwise permitted, no person shall use or interfere
with any authorized use of utilities, including, but not limited to,
electricity and water, that supply pedestrian plazas.
      (8)   Except as otherwise permitted, no person shall interfere with the
use of a plaza by a person or group using the plaza pursuant to the terms of a
permit issued by any City agency.
      (9)   Except as otherwise permitted, no person shall use or block any
person from using any amenity while selling or offering to sell any goods,
services, tickets, or entertainment or while providing any goods, services,
tickets, or entertainment in exchange for a donation. For purposes of this
paragraph, the term "amenity" shall include, but not be limited to, chairs,
tables, planters, benches, kiosks, utilities or canopies, installed in or on
any pedestrian plaza.
   (e)   Times Square Pedestrian Plaza. 
      (1)   For purposes of this subdivision, the term "Times Square Pedestrian
Plaza" shall mean the areas along Broadway from 41st Street to 53rd Street in
Manhattan that are designated by the Department for pedestrian circulation, use
and enjoyment.
      (2)   For purposes of this subdivision, the sidewalks directly adjacent
to the Times Square Pedestrian Plaza are along:
         (i)   7th Avenue between 42nd Street and 47th Street;
         (ii)   Broadway between 41st Street and 42nd Street;
         (iii)   Broadway between 47th Street and 53rd Street; and
         (iv)   42nd, 43rd, 44th, 45th, 46th, and 47th Streets between 7th
Avenue and Broadway.
      (3)   Pedestrian Flow Zones. Where the Department has designated by
markings and/or signage Pedestrian Flow Zones in or on the Times Square
Pedestrian Plaza or the sidewalks directly adjacent to such plaza, no person
shall use such zones for any purpose other than the safe and continuous
movement of pedestrian traffic.
      (4)   Designated Activity Zones. 
         (i)   Where and when the Department has indicated by markings and/or
signage Designated Activity Zone(s) on any block within the Times Square
Pedestrian Plaza, no person on such block shall engage in Designated Activities
outside such zone(s), except where otherwise authorized by a concession
agreement entered into by the Department or an event permit issued by the
Mayor's Office of Citywide Event Coordination and Management.
         (ii)   Where and when the Department has indicated by markings and/or
signage Designated Activity Zone(s) on any block within the Times Square
Pedestrian Plaza, no person on the sidewalks directly adjacent to such block
within the Times Square Pedestrian Plaza shall engage in Designated Activities,
except at days and times when vendors licensed pursuant to §§ 17-307 and 20-453
of the Administrative Code may vend on such sidewalks. This subparagraph shall
not apply to operators of newsstands authorized by § 20-241.1 of the
Administrative Code.
         (iii)   Notwithstanding subparagraphs (i) and (ii) of this paragraph,
where and when the Department has indicated by markings and/or signage
Designated Activity Zone(s) on any block within the Times Square Pedestrian
Plaza, no person shall engage in Designated Activities:
            (A)   on Broadway between 43rd and 44th Streets, except within a
Designated Activity Zone if one has been indicated by markings and/or signage
by the Department on such block or where otherwise authorized by a concession
agreement entered into by the Department or an event permit issued by the
Mayor's Office of Citywide Event Coordination and Management; or
            (B)   on the sidewalks along 7th Avenue and Broadway between 43rd
and 44th Streets and along 43rd and 44th Streets between 7th Avenue and
Broadway, except at days and times when vendors licensed pursuant to §§ 17-307
and 20-453 of the Administrative Code may vend on such sidewalks. This clause
shall not apply to operators of newsstands authorized by § 20-241.1 of the
Administrative Code.
(Added City Record 6/2/2016, eff. 6/2/2016; amended City Record 3/16/2020, eff.
4/15/2020; amended City Record 7/28/2025, eff. 8/27/2025)
§ 4-17 Autonomous Vehicles.
   (a)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms
have the following meanings:
      Autonomous vehicle technology. The term "autonomous vehicle technology"
means the hardware and software that are collectively capable of performing
part or all of the dynamic driving task on a sustained basis.
      Dynamic driving task. The term "dynamic driving task" means all of the
real-time operational and tactical functions required to operate a vehicle in
on-road traffic, excluding the strategic functions such as trip scheduling and
selection of destinations and waypoints.
   (b)   Permit required. Any entity who has already received approval by the
New York State Department of Motor Vehicles to demonstrate or test a motor
vehicle with autonomous vehicle technology and wants to demonstrate or test
such motor vehicle on any public highway (as defined in 34 RCNY §
4-01) in the city of New York must obtain a permit from the Department, prior
to such demonstration or testing.
   (c)   Permit fees. In order to demonstrate or test a motor vehicle with
autonomous vehicle technology on a public highway in the city of New York, the
applicant must pay to the Department an autonomous vehicle technology permit
fee of $5,000 annually.
   (d)   Applications. A permit application to demonstrate or test a motor
vehicle with autonomous vehicle technology must be submitted on forms
prescribed by the Department which will consist of the following information:
      (1)   Legal name of the entity which has already received approval by the
New York State Department of Motor Vehicles to demonstrate or test a motor
vehicle with autonomous vehicle technology; address; contact name; contact
telephone number; contact e-mail address;
      (2)   Proof of New York State Department of Motor Vehicles approval for
each motor vehicle with autonomous vehicle technology intended for
demonstration or testing on any public highway in the city of New York,
including a copy of the law enforcement interaction plan and any other
information or documentation submitted to the New York State Department of
Motor Vehicles as part of its application for approval;
      (3)   Certification by the developer of the autonomous vehicle technology
that, based on previous evaluations of the autonomous vehicle technology, the
test vehicle(s) will operate in New York City more safely than a human driver,
including documentation of previous demonstration or testing experience on
public roadways; information on any crash involving the autonomous vehicle(s)
that resulted in death, injury, or property damage; and documentation of
performance in environments similar to the New York City geographic zones
approved for testing;
      (4)   Certification by the applicant that a test vehicle operator with a
valid driver license, recruited and trained in accordance with most recent
version of the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) AVSC 00001201911: "Best
Practice for In-Vehicle Fallback Test Driver Selection, Training, and Oversight
Procedures for Automated Vehicles Under Test," and J3018: "Safety-Relevant
Guidance for On-Road Testing of Prototype Automated Driving Systems (ADS)-
Operated Vehicles," will be in the driver's seat of each autonomous vehicle
while it is in operation on any public highway in the city of New York and that
the test vehicle operator will be able to safely assume control of the vehicle
in the event of a failure of the autonomous vehicle technology or other
incident during which the autonomous vehicle technology cannot function;
      (5)   Safety plan for demonstration or testing in New York City,
including documentation of the test vehicle operator training to ensure both
legal and safe operation, documentation of the ability of test vehicle
operators to assume control of the vehicle(s) in the event of a failure of the
autonomous vehicle technology, and proof of completion of the training by all
test vehicle operators;
      (6)   Operating plan for demonstration or testing in New York City,
including the purpose and parameters of the demonstration or test; proposed
date(s), hour(s), and location(s) within geographic areas of New York City
approved by the Department for demonstration or testing of motor vehicles with
autonomous vehicle technology;
      (7)   Certification that vehicle meets appropriate and applicable
industry standards to help defend against, detect, and respond to cyber
attacks, unauthorized intrusions, or false vehicle control commands;
      (8)   Certification of compliance with or exemption from all federal
standards and applicable New York State inspection standards for any motor
vehicle with autonomous vehicle technology intended for demonstration or
testing on any public highway in the city of New York;
      (9)   Make and model of each motor vehicle with autonomous vehicle
technology intended for demonstration or testing on any public highway in the
city of New York; and
      (10)   Proof of at least $5 million automobile insurance for any motor
vehicle with autonomous vehicle technology intended for demonstration or
testing on any public highway in the city of New York, a minimum of $3 million
in personal liability insurance, and a minimum of $2 million in property damage
insurance.
   (e)   Review of applications for and issuance of permits. 
      (1)   The Department may decline to issue a permit to an applicant that:
         (i)   Has a demonstrated unsafe record in the city of New York or any
other city where it has demonstrated or tested;
         (ii)   Does not submit the certifications required under subdivision
(d);
         (iii)   Does not provide adequate proof of insurance;
         (iv)   Does not adhere to the conditions of any previously issued
permit; or
         (v)   Does not adhere to the submitted safety plan or law enforcement
interaction plan.
      (2)   If the Department declines to issue such a permit because of any of
the conditions described in paragraph (1) of this section or if the application
is incomplete, the applicant will have fifteen days from receipt of the denial
to appeal the determination to the Commissioner. The Department will make a
final determination on the appeal within thirty days.
   (f)   Conditions of permit. The permit holder must:
      (1)   Indemnify the city of New York against legal liabilities associated
with the demonstration or testing of motor vehicles with autonomous vehicle
technology on any public highway in the city of New York;
      (2)   Adhere to the permit holder's safety and operating plans;
      (3)   Operate only during the date(s) and hour(s) of operation approved
by the Department;
      (4)   Operate only within the geographic area(s) of New York City
approved by the Department on the basis of traffic safety;
      (5)   Safely complete a demonstration of the autonomous vehicle
technology under the supervision of the Department within each geographic area
in which the proposed demonstration or testing will occur prior to the
commencement of the proposed demonstration or testing in such area;
      (6)   Submit for approval by the Department any proposed changes to the
number of vehicles, geographic zones approved for testing, testing date(s), or
time of day of operation specified in the application;
      (7)   Comply with all applicable traffic laws;
      (8)   Provide the Department with written notice if the permit holder
decides to discontinue the demonstration or testing of motor vehicles with
autonomous vehicle technology;
      (9)   Report to the Department the data specified in subdivision (h) of
this section at the frequency specified in the permit;
      (10)   Notify the Department of any crashes involving fatalities,
injuries and/or property damage within four hours of such occurrence; and
      (11)   Promptly notify the Department of any changes to the information
provided in its application.
   (g)   Suspension and revocation of permits. 
      (1)   The Department may suspend or revoke a permit for failure to comply
with any of the terms and conditions of the permit, these rules, or other
applicable laws or rules.
      (2)   Prior to suspending or revoking a permit, the permit holder will be
provided with an opportunity to be heard within five business days. However, if
the suspension or revocation of a permit is based on the permit holder's
failure to comply with any law, rule, or permit condition related to safety,
the Department may suspend or revoke the permit immediately, and the permit
holder will be provided with an opportunity to be heard within two business
days.
      (3)   If the Department suspends or revokes a permit, the permit holder
must cease any demonstration or test of motor vehicles with autonomous vehicle
technology on any public highway in the city of New York within 24 hours of
suspension or revocation.
   (h)   Data reporting requirements. 
      (1)   Each permit holder must provide to the Department, at the frequency
and in the format specified by the Department, the following datasets:
         (i)   make, model, and license plate number of each vehicle engaged in
demonstration or testing;
         (ii)   miles driven in total and with autonomous vehicle technology
engaged;
         (iii)   location(s), date(s), and hour(s) of operation and number of
test vehicle operators or other staff in each vehicle;
         (iv)   median and maximum test vehicle operator driving shift length;
         (v)   information on crashes involving the autonomous vehicle;
         (vi)   information on safety-related traffic violations;
         (vii)   information on instances in which the test vehicle operator
assumed control of the vehicle while the autonomous vehicle technology was
engaged;
         (viii)   the permit holder's most recent Voluntary Safety Self-
Assessment transmitted to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration;
and
         (ix)   any information transmitted to the National Highway Traffic
Safety Administration under its General Order 2021-01, "Incident Reporting for
Automated Driving Systems (ADS) and Level 2 Advanced Driver Assistance Systems
(ADAS)" regarding incidents that occurred within the city of New York.
   (i)   Term and renewal of permits. Each permit will be issued for a term of
one year and may be renewed. The permit renewal process will include a review
of safety performance, compliance with permit provisions over the previous
permit period, and any changes to the application materials.
(Added City Record 9/7/2021, eff. 9/7/2021)
§ 4-18 Dangerous Vehicle Abatement Law.
   (a)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have
the following meanings:
      Covered vehicle. The term "covered vehicle" means any motor vehicle that,
in accordance with the records of the department of finance, has accumulated
five or more finally adjudicated red light camera violations as determined by
the department, or 15 or more finally adjudicated school speed camera
violations as determined by the department, within any 12-month period. Such
term shall not include any vehicle owned or leased by the United States
government or any state or local government.
      Person. The term "person" means a natural person, co-partnership, firm,
company, association, joint stock association, corporation or other like
organization.
      Predicate violation. The term "predicate violation" means a red light
camera violation or school speed camera violation.
      Red light camera violation. The term "red light camera violation" means
the notice of liability issued for failure of a vehicle operator to comply with
section 1111-a of the Vehicle and Traffic Law or § 19-210 of the Administrative
Code of the City of New York.
      School speed camera violation. The term "school speed camera violation"
means the notice of liability issued for failure of a vehicle operator to
comply with section 1180-b of the vehicle and traffic law.
      Safe vehicle operation course. The term "safe vehicle operation course"
means a course approved by the Department that educates vehicle owners about
the dangers resulting from vehicle operators exceeding posted speed limits and
failing to comply with traffic signals, including the potential to cause injury
or death, by utilizing a skilled facilitator to actively engage participants in
self-reflection and discussion to identify and commit to specific safe driving
practices. The goal of such course is to prevent vehicles from becoming
dangerous instruments by educating owners about responsible vehicle ownership.
   (b)   Notice to vehicle owners. The Department will send by first-class
mail, to all persons receiving a red light camera violation or a school speed
camera violation, a notice that pursuant to Subchapter 4 of Title 19 of the New
York City Administrative Code, a vehicle that incurs five or more red light
camera violations or 15 or more school speed camera violations within any 12-
month period may be determined to be a covered vehicle, and that such vehicle's
registered owner may be required to enroll in and complete a safe vehicle
operation course pursuant to the aforementioned subchapter and this section.
Such notice shall also contain a warning that failure to enroll in and complete
such course may result in the seizure and impoundment of such vehicle, pending
completion of such course.
   (c)   Safe vehicle operation course. 
      (1)   The Department will serve a safe vehicle operation course notice on
the registered owner of a vehicle determined by the Department to be a covered
vehicle. Such notice must be served by first-class mail.
      (2)   The registered owner of a vehicle who receives the safe vehicle
operation course notice, or other person designated by the owner in accordance
with paragraph (6) of this subdivision, must enroll in and complete an approved
safe vehicle operation course within forty-five days from the date of such
notice unless within such time such owner requests review of such notice by the
Department in accordance with paragraph (3) or commences a proceeding to
contest the notice before the Office of Administrative Trials and Hearings in
the manner set forth in such notice. The method of enrollment in such course
will be set forth in such notice or as indicated on the website of the
Department. The registered owner must certify completion of the safe vehicle
operation course to the Department within ten days from the date of the
completion of such course in the manner set forth in such notice.
      (3)   Where the registered owner believes there was a mistake in the
issuance of the notice including, but not limited to, the claimed number of
predicate violations or the identification of the ownership of the vehicle,
they may request a review of the notice's issuance by the Department within
forty-five days after the issuance of the safe vehicle operation course notice,
in the manner set forth in such notice. The Department will review and respond
in writing to such owner's request within forty-five days. If the Department
finds that such notice was issued properly and denies the registered owner's
request, the registered owner or person designated pursuant to paragraph (6) of
this subdivision must take the course within forty-five days after such denial
unless within such time such owner chooses to contest the safe vehicle
operation course notice before the Office of Administrative Trials and
Hearings, in the manner set forth in the denial letter. If after such review
the Department agrees with the registered owner's request, it will notify such
owner in writing within forty-five days that they are not required to take the
safe vehicle operation course.
      (4)   The registered owner who timely enrolls in a safe vehicle operation
course may request the Department to reschedule such course upon showing a good
cause as determined by the Department.
      (5)   If the Office of Administrative Trials and Hearings finds that such
registered owner must complete the safe vehicle operation course, such
registered owner must complete such course within forty-five days from such
determination or as otherwise provided in such determination. The determination
of the Office of Administrative Trials and Hearings shall be a final
determination for purposes of review, pursuant to article 78 of the Civil
Practice Law and Rules.
      (6)   A registered owner may designate the person that operated the
vehicle when the predicate violations were committed and who has agreed to take
the safe vehicle operation course on behalf of the owner or, with respect to a
registered owner that is not a natural person, the person who operated or was
in charge of the vehicle when the predicate violations were committed, by
submitting a form in the manner set forth in the safe vehicle operation course
notice or as indicated on the Department's website. Such form must be submitted
prior to the date that a respondent is required to complete the safe vehicle
operation course in accordance with paragraphs (2), (3) and (5) of this
subdivision.
   (d)   Seizure and impoundment. Where a registered owner or a person
designated by such registered owner fails to complete the safe vehicle
operation course in accordance with this section, the covered vehicle may be
subject to impoundment.
      (1)   The Department shall serve an order by first-class mail upon the
registered owner of such covered vehicle. Such order shall require the owner to
complete the safe vehicle operation course and certify to the Department
completion of such course within a period of time to be set forth in such
order, or appear at a hearing before the Office of Administrative Trials and
Hearings at a time and place set forth in such order, at which such registered
owner may present reasons why their covered vehicle should not be seized and
impounded until such registered owner completes the safe vehicle operation
course. The determination of the Office of Administrative Trials and Hearings
shall be a final determination for purposes of review, pursuant to article 78
of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
      (2)   If the Office of Administrative Trials and Hearings sustains the
order of seizure and impoundment, the Department shall issue a warrant of
seizure directing the City Sheriff, after twenty days have passed from the date
of such final determination, to seize and impound the covered vehicle. The
procedure for such seizure and impoundment by the Sheriff shall be the same
procedure as that provided by law for seizure and impoundment pursuant to an
execution under a judgment of a court. Such covered vehicle shall not be
released until the owner provides certification of completion of the safe
vehicle operation course and pays the amount of the City's expenses for the
seizure and impoundment of such covered vehicle in accordance with the schedule
of fees set forth in 34 RCNY §
4-07(i)(3).
      (3)   If the vehicle is not claimed within thirty days it will be
considered abandoned and may be disposed of by the Sheriff in the manner
provided pursuant to section 1224 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law.
      (4)   If within six months after completing a safe vehicle operation
course a vehicle does not accumulate any additional predicate violations, any
red light camera or school speed camera violations accrued prior to the
completion of such course will not be counted as predicate violations for
purposes of this section.
(Added City Record 10/29/2021, eff. 10/29/2021)
§ 4-19 Permit for Moped Share Systems.
   (a)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms
have the following meanings:
      Moped. The term "moped" means any limited use motorcycle as defined in
section 121-b of the Vehicle and Traffic Law.
      Moped share system. The term "moped share system" means a network of
self-service and publicly available class B or class C limited use motorcycles
that are registered in accordance with the New York State Vehicle and Traffic
Law, and any related infrastructure, in which a trip begins and/or ends on any
public highway in the City of New York. All mopeds in such a share system must
be electric powered.
   (b)   Permit required. Any operator of a moped share system must first
obtain a permit from the Department for the use of or operation on any public
highway (as defined in 34 RCNY §
4-01). This permit establishes the operator as a qualified moped share system
operator and it also specifies the particular mopeds in the qualified
operator's fleet that it is authorized to operate under this share system. Such
permit constitutes the moped share system permit authorized by the Department.
However, such permit will expire, by operation of law, if the Department
exercises its option, pursuant to subdivision h of § 19-176.3 of the
Administrative Code, to establish a moped share system through a procurement
and contracting process.
   (c)   Permit term, renewal, and fees. Each moped share system permit will be
issued for a term of six (6) months and may be renewed. Each permit applicant
must pay a permit fee of $1,050 . If the moped share system permit is renewed,
the permit holder must pay to the Department a moped share system permit
renewal fee of $4,100 every six (6) months.
   (d)   Application. An application for a moped share system permit must be
submitted on a form prescribed by the Department which will include, but not be
limited to, the following information:
      (1)   Legal name of the operator; its "Doing Business As" (DBA)
certificate; certified copy of the Certificate of Incorporation and proof of
registration with the New York State Department of State; company address;
contact name; contact telephone number; contact e-mail address;
      (2)   Proof that all mopeds intended for use in the moped share system
are registered with the New York State Department of Motor Vehicles and have a
maximum speed of thirty miles per hour;
      (3)   Proof of automobile insurance for all mopeds intended for use in
the moped share system;
      (4)   Make, model, length, weight, and battery range of all mopeds
intended for use in the moped share system;
      (5)   Operating plan including proposed fleet size, rate structure,
parking policies, and service area;
      (6)   Safety plan;
      (7)   Vehicle maintenance and inspection plan;
      (8)   Rider accountability and compliance plan;
      (9)   Community outreach plan;
      (10)   Equity plan;
      (11)   User terms and conditions; and
      (12)   Any other information as specified in the application.
   (e)   Review of applications for and issuance of moped share system
permits. 
      (1)   The Department may decline to issue a moped share system permit to
an applicant that:
         i.   Is in arrears to the City of New York for an amount totaling more
than one thousand dollars; or
         ii.   Does not provide proof of insurance; or
         iii.   Uses mopeds that are not owned or leased by the moped share
system operator or rents mopeds to customers utilizing an application that is
not owned by, or leased for the exclusive use of, the moped share system
operator; or
         iv.   Has a demonstrated an unsafe record in the City of New York or
any other city where it operates a moped share system, including but not
limited to a record of inadequate user safety requirements or vehicle
maintenance practices; or
         v.   Does not adhere to the conditions of any previously issued
permit.
      (2)   If the Department declines to issue such a permit because the
application or any of the conditions described in paragraph (3) of this
subdivision are incomplete or insufficient, the applicant will have fifteen
days from receipt of the denial to appeal the determination to the
Commissioner. The Department will make a final determination on the appeal
within thirty days.
      (3)   Conditions of moped share system permit. The permit holder must:
         i.   Provide to the Department an operating plan outlining moped share
system's service area, fee structure, parking policies, moped model
specifications, and fleet size.
         ii.   Provide to the Department a safety plan outlining user safety
and operating training, user helmet compliance measures, and other safety
measures, which may include but not be limited to:
            A.   providing to users the option of in-person safety and
operating training classes;
            B.   providing to users in-app safety and operating training;
            C.   submitting to the Department for review and approval its
safety curricula and related materials; and
            D.   instituting a probationary period for new users with
additional riding restrictions, unless the user takes an in-person safety and
operating training class.
         iii.   Provide to the Department a user accountability and compliance
plan outlining user monitoring measures which may include but not be limited
to:
            A.   a community reporting tool enabling members of the public to
report violations of traffic rules by users of the moped share system through
the system's mobile application, website and e-mail;
            B.   a user sanctioning policy that does not include user monetary
penalties for safety violations; however, the permit holder may recoup
municipal parking fines from the user (although ultimately the permit holder is
responsible for any monies due to the City) or use monetary penalties for
violations of non-safety provisions of its user agreements; and
            C.   account sharing prevention measures.
         iv.   Provide to the Department a maintenance and inspection plan
outlining the applicant's moped inspection, preventative maintenance, and
repair program.
         v.   Provide to the Department a community outreach plan that will
guide the permit holder's engagement of stakeholders within the proposed area
of operation.
         vi.   Provide to the Department an equity plan outlining measures to
provide access to the moped share system to low- and moderate-income residents.
         vii.   Ensure that all mopeds in the permit holder's fleet are
equipped with a helmet, including a helmet for any passengers (if applicable).
         viii.   Include no binding arbitration clause and no waiver of class
action rights relating to personal injury claims in its customer terms of
service, liability waiver, or any equivalent user agreement.
         ix.   Protect the data of users, including but not limited to not
sharing or selling of personal data with third parties, and providing data
privacy when accessing any moped share system application.
         x.   Operate only during the hours of operation approved by the
Department;
         xi.   Operate only within area(s) approved by the Department.
         xii.   Operate only a Department-approved number of mopeds in the
moped share system.
         xiii.   Not operate in areas where mopeds are proscribed by law from
being operated. This includes parks, bridges or any limited access highways
where such usage is prohibited by the Department by rule.
         xiv.   Indemnify the City against legal liabilities associated with
the use, operation, and occupancy of the public highway in its operations.
         xv.   Track all crashes involving its moped share system.
         xvi.   Notify the Department of any crashes involving property damage
and injuries and issues which could affect public safety, including but not
limited to reports of criminal activity involving the moped share system, and
incidents involving responses from the Police and Fire Departments.
         xvii.   Provide the Department with a thirty-day notice if a permit
holder decides to discontinue its operations.
         xviii.   Clearly display the permit holder's name or logo and contact
information prominently on each of its mopeds; however, no other logo or any
kind of advertisement shall be allowed.
         xix.   Promptly notify the Department of any changes to the
information provided in its application.
         xx.   Share and regularly report to the Department the data specified
in subdivision (g) of this section.
         xxi.   Provide a performance bond to cover all costs and expenses that
may be incurred by the City as a result of the authorized activity for which
the permit is issued or for the purpose of otherwise safeguarding the interests
of the City. The bond must be in the form prescribed by the Department. Such
performance bond described above must cover all permitted activities described
herein.
         xxii.   Comply with any terms and conditions of the permit issued by
the Department, including but not limited to levels of service.
         xxiii.   Comply with all applicable laws, rules and regulations
related to the operation of the moped share system.
   (f)   Suspension, revocation, refusal to renew share system permits. 
      (1)   The Department may suspend or revoke a moped share system permit,
refuse to renew such a permit, or reduce the authorized fleet size of the moped
share system for failure to comply with any of the terms and conditions of the
share system permit, these rules, or other applicable law or rule.
      (2)   Prior to suspending or revoking a moped share system permit, the
permit holder will be provided with an opportunity to be heard. The Department
will serve the moped share system permit holder with a notice specifying the
nature of the violation prior to conducting the suspension or revocation
hearing.
      (3)   Prior to refusing to renew such a permit or ordering a reduction in
the authorized fleet size of a moped share system, the permit holder will be
provided with an opportunity to be heard upon request.
      (4)   In the event that the Department revokes a moped share system
permit, the permit holder must remove all of its mopeds within 24 hours of
revocation.
      (5)   In the event that the Department refuses to renew a moped share
system permit or reduces the authorized fleet size of the moped share system,
the permit holder must remove its mopeds or the required number of mopeds, as
applicable, within five business days of notification.
      (6)   The Department may immediately suspend or revoke a moped share
system permit if the Department believes such continued authorization would
constitute a direct and substantial threat to public health or safety, pending
a suspension or revocation hearing. However, the department must schedule such
hearing no later than 15 business days from the date of such immediate
suspension or revocation and notify the moped share system permit holder of the
hearing date 5 business days in advance.
      (7)   The Department's decision regarding suspension or revocation will
be the Department's final determination.
   (g)   Data sharing requirements. 
      (1)   Each permit holder must provide to the Department datasets that may
include but not be limited to the following:
         i.   Vehicle data;
         ii.   Trip summary data;
         iii.   Trip telematics data;
         iv.   Membership and user data;
         v.   Crash and injury data;
         vi.   Rebalancing actions data;
         vii.   Vehicle/battery recharging/swapping data;
         viii.   Safety and training data;
         ix.   Vehicle maintenance and repair data;
         x.   User compliance data;
         xi.   Company Enforcement Actions data;
         xii.   Community reporting data;
         xiii.   Customer service data;
         xiv.   Vehicle and battery vandalism/damage/theft data;
         xv.   Any other dataset included in the terms and conditions of the
permit or requested by the Department.
      (2)   Data specified in paragraph (1) of this subdivision must be
transmitted to the Department in real time, through a live application
programming interface (API) such as those described in the Mobility Data
Specification v1.0.0 or later, or comparable platforms. Other data is expected
on at minimum a weekly basis. Crash and safety data should be relayed earlier,
whenever possible.
      (3)   Each permit holder must provide a public-facing Generalized
Bikeshare Feed Specification (GBFS) API endpoint. An additional private GBFS
endpoint will be provided for use by the Department, which does not rotate
vehicle IDs, but rather employs static ones consistent with data described in
paragraph (1) of this subdivision.
      (4)   Each permit holder must conduct an annual user survey in a form
prescribed by the Department.
(Added City Record 12/14/2021, eff. 12/14/2021)
§ 4-20 Theatre District Zone.
   (a)   For purposes of this subdivision, the term "Theatre District Zone" has
the same meaning as "theatre district zone" in § 19-157.1 of the Administrative
Code.
   (b)   Pedestrian flow zones. Where the Department has designated by markings
and/or signage Pedestrian Flow Zones in or on the Theatre District Zone, no
person shall use such zones for any purpose other than the safe and continuous
movement of pedestrian traffic.
   (c)   Designated activity zones. 
      (1)   Where and when the Department has indicated by markings and/or
signage one or more Designated Activity Zones on any block within the Theatre
District Zone, no person on such block shall engage in Designated Activities
outside Designated Activity Zones, except:
         (i)   where otherwise authorized by a concession agreement entered
into by the Department; or
         (ii)   where otherwise authorized by an event permit issued by the
Mayor's Office of Citywide Event Coordination and Management; or
         (iii)   where otherwise authorized by a permit issued by the Mayor's
Office of Media and Entertainment; or
         (iv)   at days and times when vendors licensed pursuant to §§ 17-307
and 20-453 of the Administrative Code may vend.
      (2)   A person may engage in Designated Activities on a block in the
Theatre District Zone if such person is not within a Pedestrian Flow Zone and
if such block does not contain any Designated Activity Zones.
      (3)   This subdivision shall not apply to operators of newsstands
authorized by § 20-241.1 of the Administrative Code.
(Added City Record 12/9/2021, eff. 12/9/2021)
§ 4-21 Open Streets.
   (a)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the terms below are defined
as follows:
      Community organization or open streets partner. The term “community
organization” or “open streets partner” means any formal or informal group of
people or businesses with ties to the community who collaborate to manage or
participate in the operations of an open street, including but not limited to
schools, business improvement districts, civic associations, houses of worship,
block associations, and merchant groups.
      Open street. The term “open street” means a street or segment of a street
within the jurisdiction of the Commissioner, designated by the Department as
such, on which motor vehicle access is controlled by barriers and signage or
other traffic calming measures, and on which priority is given to pedestrians,
individuals using bicycles, and other non-vehicular street users. Open streets
may be designated on a variety of street types, including shared streets. Open
streets may be described as one of the following:
         (i)   Limited Local Access. The term “limited local access” means
signage and traffic calming measures are used to discourage the use of vehicles
except the following: (1) vehicles parking on the open street (all parking
regulations apply); (2) vehicles collecting or dropping passengers on the open
street; (3) vehicles making deliveries to residents, businesses, and
institutions on the open street; (4) emergency vehicles; (5) Access-A-Ride
vehicles; (6) public utility vehicles; and (7) City government service
vehicles. Drivers are encouraged to drive five (5) miles per hour or slower
while traversing the open street.
         (ii)   Full Closure. The term “full closure” means temporary closure
of an open street to motor vehicle traffic, including motor vehicles intending
to park, subject to § 19-107 of the Administrative Code, to allow for a range
of car-free activities that support local businesses, community organizations,
and schools, to create a space for the public to gather. Emergency access and
an emergency lane must be clear at all times for emergency vehicle access.
   (b)   Applications to Designate Open Streets. In addition to streets or
segments of streets selected by the Department to be designated as open streets
pursuant to § 19-107.1 of the Administrative Code, the Department will accept
applications to become an open streets partner for the purpose of managing and
participating in the operation of open streets designated in areas under the
Department’s jurisdiction.
      (1)   Applications. 
         (i)   Applicant. Only an entity operating within the City may apply
to. become an open streets partner. An applicant must have strong ties to the
community where the open street is being proposed. Groups of three or more
eligible organizations may submit a joint application, but any such group must
identify one organization to apply for and represent the group. Applications
submitted on behalf of a school, including but not limited to daycares, Pre-K,
primary and secondary schools, colleges, and universities, must be submitted by
the administration of such school.
         (ii)   Submission. Open streets applications may be submitted by mail
or electronically. Electronic submissions are preferred.
         (iii)   Required Documentation. Applicants must submit the following
documents in accordance with subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph:
            (A)   A completed application in a form prescribed by the
Department, which will be posted each year on the Department’s website, and
which may require applicants to submit information including, but not limited
to, the mission of the applicant; the geographic bounds of the proposed open
street; proposed duration and daily hours of operation; potential uses and
programming for the proposed open street; and a description of measures to
facilitate use of the proposed open street by people with disabilities;
            (B)   The applicant’s contact information, including a contact for
emergencies;
            (C)   A site plan as provided in the application that clearly
indicates all expanded business footprints; all areas of the proposed open
streets corridor designated for programming; operational elements; any spaces
on the roadway designated for use in the management of such proposed open
street; unobstructed emergency access and an unobstructed emergency access lane
throughout the proposed open streets corridor; and barrier placement;
            (D)   A management, staffing and operations plan that details how
barricades and any other traffic control devices, as applicable, will be
managed and monitored, including the moving of barricades in the event of an
emergency; how the applicant will ensure that the proposed open street is clear
and roadway reopened at the conclusion of open street hours, as applicable; how
the applicant will ensure programming providers and businesses will comply with
the site plan; and, for full closure open streets, the proposed cleaning and
trash disposal procedures;
            (E)   A community outreach plan detailing how the applicant will
regularly notify businesses, residents, and other relevant stakeholders about
the proposed open street and its operation and programming;
            (F)   At least three (3) letters of support from community
stakeholders including, but not limited to, property owners and businesses on
the proposed open street; nearby institutions, such as churches and schools;
elected officials; other not-for-profit groups, neighborhood and block
associations; and neighborhood residents; and
            (G)   Proposed operational resources needed to manage the proposed
open street, including but not limited to a projected operating budget for the
management of the proposed open street (if any), financial materials,
maintenance and operation services and programming.
         (iv)   The application form and guidelines regarding the management
and operation of open streets are available on the Department’s website.
         (v)   Selection. 
            (A)   The Department will consider the following factors when
reviewing an application to designate an open street:
               1.   Safety of all street users;
               2.   Equitable distribution of open streets throughout the city;
               3.   Site context, including but not limited to:
                  a.   Existing parks, open streets or other open spaces and
their current utilization;
                  b.   Existing access to public transportation and bicycle and
pedestrian infrastructure; and
                  c.   Integration with existing pedestrian and bicycle
infrastructure.
               4.   Presence of bus routes, truck routes or medical facilities;
and
               5.   Access for commercial deliveries and emergency vehicles.
            (B)   If the Department approves an application, it will notify the
selected community organization and any affected City Council members,
Community Boards, and Borough Presidents, and will notify the public by posting
on its website, at least 45 days before designating the proposed open street.
            (C)   Limited local access open streets cannot be designated along
a bus route or truck route.
      (2)   Management Agreement. A management agreement between the Department
and the selected community organization may be required where the Department
does not provide for the management of the open street. A community
organization that does not enter into such a management agreement may
nonetheless partner with the Department for purposes of providing programming
or volunteers at an open street.
      (3)   List of Designated Open Streets. A list of all open streets shall
be posted on the Department’s website.
      (4)   Renewal. An open streets partner may renew its application for the
management of its previously approved open street on a short-form application
prescribed by the Department annually and posted on the Department’s website.
Such short-form renewal application will include an opportunity for the open
streets partner to request any of the following:
         (i)   Additional resources;
         (ii)   Traffic control devices and/or calming measures;
         (iii)   Street furniture;
         (iv)   Accessibility improvements;
         (v)   Consideration of conversion of such open street to a shared
street;
         (vi)   Adjusted operating hours; and
         (vii)   Adjusted boundaries.
      (5)   Rescinding Open Streets Designations. The Department may, at its
discretion, rescind the designation of any open street if such rescission is
necessary to facilitate construction or emergency services, or if the
Department determines that public safety requires it or that such rescission
would benefit the community.
         (i)   At least 30 days before the Department’s proposed date of
rescission of the designation of an open street, the Department will notify the
affected open streets partner, which may submit a written statement to the
Department within ten (10) days of such notification.
         (ii)   The Department will consider any comments set forth in a timely
delivered written statement before rescinding such designation.
         (iii)   Upon such rescission, the Department will notify any affected
City Council members or Community Boards.
   (c)   Operation and Management of Open Streets. An open streets partner must
operate and manage all aspects of an open street, including but not limited to
the following:
      (1)   Open streets must be maintained in a manner that allows for
emergency vehicle access at all times, including:
         (i)   the management of barricades and any other traffic control
devices and/or calming measures as required by the Department;
         (ii)   monitoring the open street throughout the hours of operation
and reporting issues and/or incidents to the Department;
         (iii)   reporting any emergency to the local police precinct;
         (iv)   adhering to the Department’s siting criteria; and
         (v)   setting up and breaking down any movable tables and chairs for
public seating.
      (2)   An open street may be maintained for up to 24 hours per day and up
to 366 days per year, subject to the Department’s discretion.
      (3)   The Department may, subject to § 19-107 of the Administrative Code,
close an open street to all motor vehicle traffic except as required for
emergency access where the Department determines that such closure would
benefit the community.
      (4)   An open streets partner may operate a full closure open street, in
addition to the hours of operation approved by the Department, on the following
holidays upon written consent from the Department: New Year’s Day (observed),
Martin Luther King Jr.’s Day, President’s Day, Memorial Day, Juneteenth
(observed), Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veteran’s Day,
Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day (observed).
      (5)   The Department may temporarily suspend an open street as necessary,
including for safety, special events, severe weather events, construction, or
any other purpose for which the Department determines a suspension will benefit
the community. The Department will provide the open streets partner with
reasonable notice to the extent practicable and post on its social media
accounts that such open street is temporarily suspended. The open streets
partner may be required to secure all barricades, signage, and other furniture
and materials associated with the open street.
      (6)   Open streets are subject to inspections by the Department and/or
its contractor(s).
      (7)   The management and operations plan for the open street, including
cleaning and removing trash and other debris, how to maintain emergency vehicle
access and any other staffing plans, must be filed with the Department and
updated as necessary by the open streets partner.
      (8)   The Department will post on its website guidelines for the
following:
         (i)   staffing of open streets, including whether the Department will
require staffing on certain open streets that are provided with sufficient
traffic control devices and/or calming measures;
         (ii)   how open streets partners may create their own barriers,
signage and street furniture that encourage sustainability and welcoming
design; and
         (iii)   how open streets partners may expeditiously obtain permits
from the Mayor’s Office of Citywide Event Coordination and Management related
to programming on open streets.
      (9)   The following siting criteria must be complied with:
         (i)   Barriers must be designed and placed only with the approval of
the Department;
         (ii)   Emergency access and lanes must be maintained at all times
throughout the open streets corridor;
         (iii)   New York City Fire Department Connections, if any, must be
visible from the street and otherwise unobscured, free of obstructions, and
readily accessible as required by the Fire Code;
         (iv)   Sidewalks, including pedestrian ramps and curb cuts, must be
free of obstruction and readily accessible at all times;
         (v)   For limited local access open streets, no permanent or fixed (A)
structures; (B) furnishings; or (C) seating are permitted; and
         (vi)   For full closure open streets:
            (A)   Fixed structures, furnishings, seating must be sited at least
15 feet from a hydrant;
            (B)   No permanent structures may be built or placed in the
roadway;
            (C)   Collapsible tents and umbrellas must have a weighted base and
be installed per manufacturer’s instructions; a single area, or area of
combined or tied together tents or umbrellas, must not exceed 400 square feet
in size; and
            (D)   Tents and umbrellas must not be used during severe weather.
      (10)   Accessibility for limited local access streets. 
         (i)   For limited local access open streets, any person, may
temporarily move the barriers to facilitate local vehicle access, including,
but not limited to, Access-A-Ride vehicles and vehicles collecting or dropping
passengers on the open street.
         (ii)   The Department may, on certain limited local access open
streets, provide services to assist individuals who (i) are eligible for
Access-A-Ride services; (ii) hold a New York City parking permit for people
with disabilities; or (iii) hold a New York State permanent parking permit for
people with severe disabilities, or another state’s equivalent, to temporarily
move the barriers to facilitate local vehicle access.
         (iii)   When the Department offers such services, the Department will
inform the public by posting on its website and placing signage along such open
street(s) that indicates the process by which a person may request assistance.
      (11)   Concession Seating. 
         (i)   Subject to the Department’s prior written approval, an open
streets partner may permit a subconcessionaire at a full closure open street,
as defined in paragraph (ii) of subdivision (a) of this section, to designate a
portion of the full closure open street for concession seating, provided that
the total sum of the square footage of all such subconcessionaires’ concession
seating shall not exceed 33% of the total square footage of the full closure
open street. Notwithstanding the previous sentence, if a major concession is
approved pursuant to sections 197-c and 197-d of the New York City Charter, the
total square footage of all such subconcessionaires’ concession seating shall
not exceed 50% of the total square footage of the full closure open street.
         (ii)   If the Department approves concession seating at a full closure
open street pursuant to this paragraph, the Department or its open streets
partner must maintain seating for public use at such full closure open street.
The amount of seating for public use shall be determined by the Department, in
consultation with the open streets partner, upon consideration of factors such
as pedestrian demand for seating for public use, adjacent land uses, public
programming areas, and existing seating for public use including but not
limited to fixed benches. Nothing in this paragraph shall permit any seating to
be permanently affixed in the roadway.
         (iii)   An open streets partner may only permit a subconcessionaire to
operate concession seating, inclusive of setting up and breaking down, packing
up, or otherwise clearing such concession seating, during the hours of 7 a.m.
to 11 p.m. Notwithstanding the previous sentence, an open streets partner shall
not permit a subconcessionaire to operate concession seating at any time when
street cleaning rules are in effect.
         (iv)   In the absence of an open streets partner, this paragraph does
not preclude the Department from designating such concession seating at a full
closure open street.
         (v)   Such concession seating does not require a license and revocable
consent nor is it considered a “sidewalk cafe” or “roadway cafe” as defined in
subchapter 1 of chapter 1 of Title 19 of the New York City Administrative Code.
         (vi)   Definitions. For purposes of this paragraph, the following
terms have the following meanings:
            Concession seating. The term “concession seating” means an area in
a full closure open street designated for exclusive use by a concessionaires’
or subconcessionaires’ customers or patrons.
            Subconcessionaire. The term “subconcessionaire” means an entity
that has entered into an agreement with an open streets partner that is
authorized by the Department and subject to
Title 12 of the Rules of the City of New York.
   (d)   Conduct of the Public on Open Streets. Any person may enter and use an
open street at any time, unless restricted hours are posted for maintenance or
construction, or exigent circumstances exist. Authorized officers and employees
of city agencies are responsible for the enforcement of this subdivision.
      (1)   Any person in or on an open street must comply with the lawful
direction or command of any police officer or designated Department employee,
regardless of whether such direction or command is indicated verbally, by
gesture, or otherwise. Any person in or on an open street must comply with or
obey any instruction, direction, rule, warning or prohibition, written or
printed, displayed or appearing on any Department sign, except such sign may be
disregarded upon order by a police officer or designated Department employee.
      (2)   Any person holding an event in an open street, where such event is
subject to the permit requirements of the Mayor’s Office of Citywide Event
Coordination and Management, must have an applicable permit from that office.
      (3)   Any person engaged in filming or photography in an open street,
where such activity is subject to the permit requirements of the Mayor’s Office
of Film, Theatre & Broadcasting, must have an applicable permit from that
office.
      (4)   Any person using or operating any sound device or apparatus in an
open street, where such use or operation is subject to the permit requirements
of the New York City Police Department, must have an applicable permit from
such department.
      (5)   Any person holding a parade, procession, or demonstration in an
open street, where such activity is subject to the permit requirements of the
New York City Police Department, must have an applicable permit from such
department.
      (6)   Any person subject to the permit requirements of the New York City
Fire Code for a material or operation on an open street must have an applicable
permit from the Fire Department in accordance with Fire Code Section 105.6.
      (7)   Where exigent circumstances exist and a police officer or a
designated Department employee gives notice to a person to move temporarily
from any location in or on an open street, such person must immediately move
from such location until further notice. For the purposes of this section,
exigent circumstances include, but are not limited to, unusually heavy
pedestrian traffic, the existence of any obstruction in or on the open street,
an accident, a fire, or another emergency situation.
      (8)   No person shall engage in disorderly behavior in or on any open
street, such as the following:
         (i)   Endangering the safety of oneself and/or others;
         (ii)   Obstructing pedestrian or cyclist traffic, or, on limited local
access streets, vehicular traffic;
         (iii)   Engaging in conduct or committing acts that disturb the peace,
comfort or repose of a reasonable person of normal sensitivities; or
         (iv)   Climbing upon any wall, artwork, fence, shelter or any
structure not specifically intended for climbing purposes.
      (9)   No person shall remove any signage, barriers or other safety
elements placed for the operation of the open street except to access or exit
such open street, after which such signage, barriers or other safety elements
must be replaced promptly at their original location.
      (10)   Unless explicitly permitted by the Department, no operator of a
vehicle or combination of vehicles shall operate, stop, stand or park any such
vehicle on any open street categorized for full closure.
      (11)   No person shall litter in or on any open street. All persons shall
use receptacles provided for the disposal of refuse. No person shall deposit
household or commercial refuse in any receptacle in an open street.
      (12)   No person shall spit, urinate, or defecate in or on any open
street, except in a facility which is specifically designed for such purpose.
      (13)   No person shall bathe, shower or shave on an open street.
      (14)   No person shall occupy more than one seat with oneself or one’s
belongings on an open street when to do so would interfere or tend to interfere
with the use of such seats by others.
      (15)   No person shall leave any property unattended in an open street or
place property in or on any open street in a manner that interferes with
pedestrian and cyclist traffic, or, on limited local access streets, vehicular
traffic.
      (16)   No person shall injure, deface, alter, write upon, destroy, remove
or tamper with in any way, any real or personal property or equipment owned by
or under the jurisdiction or control of the Department or an open streets
partner.
      (17)   No person shall gamble or conduct or engage in any game of chance
in an open street, unless such game of chance is permitted by law.
      (18)   No person shall appear in an open street in such a manner that the
person’s genitalia are unclothed or exposed, except as otherwise permitted by
law.
      (19)   No person shall engage in camping, or erect or maintain a shelter
or camp in an open street.
      (20)*   No person shall allow any dog in the person’s custody or control
to be unrestrained or to discharge any fecal matter in or on any open street,
unless such person promptly removes or disposes of same. This provision shall
not apply to a guide or service animal accompanying a person with a disability.
      (20)*   No person shall operate an aircraft, kite, or other aerial device
in, on, or above the surface of any open street for any purpose whatsoever.
* Editor's note: The adopting rule contained two subsections designated as
(20).
      (21)   No person shall feed any undomesticated animal, including
unconfined squirrels and birds, in or on any open street.
      (22)   Posting of notices and signs. 
         (i)   No person shall post, display, affix, construct or carry any
placard, flag, banner, sign or model in or on any open street or display any
such item by means of aircraft, kite, or other aerial device in, on, or above
the surface of any open street for any purpose whatsoever, except as authorized
by subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph. Notwithstanding this prohibition, in
relation to the operation of an open street, an open streets partner may post,
display, affix, construct or carry such item with permission from the
Department. Each separate item placed or displayed in violation of this
subparagraph shall constitute a separate violation.
         (ii)   Any person may carry any item described in subparagraph (i)
above, without the aid of any aircraft, kite, or other aerial device, where the
space on which the message of such item is contained has a height no greater
than two feet and a length no longer than three feet, and that such item takes
up a total area of no more than six square feet.
         (iii)   Any person who posts or displays a placard, flag, sign, or
model in, on, or above the surface of any open street, with permission from the
Department pursuant to subparagraph (i) above, shall be responsible for removal
of such placard,flag, sign, or model. Failure to remove any placard, flag,
sign, or model that is posted or displayed in, on, or above the surface of any
open street within 24 hours for limited local access open streets, or within 72
hours for full closure open streets, of commencing display of the item shall
constitute a violation of these rules.
         (iv)   In the event that a notice or sign is posted or displayed in,
on, or above the surface of any open street in violation of paragraph (i)
above, there will be a rebuttable presumption that any person whose name,
telephone number, or other identifying information appears on such notice or
sign has violated paragraph (i) by either:
            (A)   Posting, displaying, affixing, constructing or carrying such
notice or sign, or
            (B)   Directing or permitting a servant, agent, employee or other
individual under such person’s control to engage the activity identified in
clause (A) of this subparagraph; provided, however, that such rebuttable
presumption shall not apply with respect to criminal prosecutions brought
pursuant to this subparagraph (iv).
      (23)   No person shall ride a motorized device on or through any part of
an open street, except electric personal assistive mobility devices as defined
in section 114-d of the Vehicle and Traffic Law, electric scooters as defined
in section 114-e of the Vehicle and Traffic Law, and bicycles with electric
assist as defined in section 102-c of the Vehicle and Traffic Law.
      (24)   No person in an open street shall make, continue, cause, or permit
to be made or continued unreasonable noise in violation of the Noise Code
pursuant to Subchapter 2 of Title 24 of the Administrative Code.
      (25)   Except as otherwise permitted by law, no person shall consume
alcoholic beverages in an open street.
      (26)   No person shall kindle, build, maintain, or use a fire in an open
street.
      (27)   Any person may bring or place chairs in or on any pedestrian area
of an open street unless otherwise restricted by the Department.
      (28)   Except as otherwise permitted by the Department, no person shall
bring or place tables or carts in or on any open street.
      (29)   No person shall use or interfere with any authorized use of
utilities, including, but not limited to, electricity and water, that supply
open streets.
      (30)   No person shall interfere with the use of an open street by a
person or group using the open street pursuant to the terms of a permit issued
by any City agency.
      (31)   No person shall use or obstruct the use of any amenity while
selling or offering to sell any goods, services, tickets, or entertainment or
while providing any goods, services, tickets, or entertainment in exchange for
a donation. For purposes of this paragraph, the term “amenity” shall include,
but not be limited to, chairs, tables, planters, benches, kiosks, utilities or
canopies, installed in or on any open street.
      (32)   An open streets partner may solicit sponsorships for the benefit
of an open street and must comply with the following:
         (i)   The name/title of the open street(s) sponsorship must include
the words, “open street.”
         (ii)   The Department must approve any proposed sponsorship agreement
between an open streets partner and one or more sponsors prior to the execution
of such agreement. An open streets partner must allow at least 15 business days
for the Department to review and approve any proposed agreement.
         (iii)   Any sponsorship item, such as umbrellas, tables, or chairs,
shall be restricted in size, quantity and location as deemed appropriate by
DOT, but in any event, no sponsorship recognition, including trade names and/or
logos, shall occupy more than 10% of the visible area of a sponsorship item
unless the Department provides prior written approval.
         (iv)   Titles and names of people, except trade names, are not
permitted as part of sponsorship recognition.
         (v)   An open streets partner shall not solicit or permit any tobacco
sponsorship or alcohol sponsorship.
         (vi)   An open streets partner may not place or cause to be placed any
advertising on any portion of the open street.
   (e)   Except where expressly prohibited by law, the Commissioner may waive
provisions of these rules in the interest of public safety and convenience.
(Added City Record 2/28/2024, eff. 3/29/2024; amended City Record 7/28/2025,
eff. 8/27/2025)
§ 4-22 Trade-in Program for Powered Mobility Devices.
   (a)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms
have the following meanings:
      Administrative Code. The term “Administrative Code” means the
Administrative Code of the City of New York.
      Applicant. The term “applicant” means a natural person applying to
receive a powered mobility device at no cost from the City of New York.
      Eligible device. The term “eligible device” means a powered mobility
device that does not meet the requirements for sale contained in § 20-610 of
the Administrative Code, a motorized scooter as defined in subdivision a of §
19-176.2 of the Administrative Code, or a limited use motorcycle as defined in
§ 121-b of the New York state vehicle and traffic law.
      Food delivery worker. The term “food delivery worker” has the meaning
ascribed to such term by § 20-1501 of the Administrative Code.
      Food service establishment. The term “food service establishment” has the
meaning ascribed to such term by § 20-1501 of the Administrative Code.
      Operable condition. The term “operable condition” means a powered
mobility device, motorized scooter, or limited use motorcycle that performs its
intended function.
      Powered bicycle. The term “powered bicycle” means a class one bicycle
with electric assist or a class two bicycle with electric assist, as such terms
are defined in § 102-c of the New York state vehicle and traffic law.
      Powered mobility device. The term “powered mobility device” means a
powered bicycle or an electric scooter as defined in § 114-e of the New York
state vehicle and traffic law.
      Third-party courier service. The term “third-party courier service” has
the meaning ascribed to such term by § 20-1501 of the Administrative Code.
      Third-party food delivery service. The term “third-party food delivery
service” has the meaning ascribed to such term by § 20-1501 of the
Administrative Code.
      Trade-in device. The term “trade-in device” means a powered mobility
device that meets the requirements for sale contained in § 20-610 of the
Administrative Code.
      Trade-in event. The term “trade-in event” means a specific date, time and
location where an applicant delivers an eligible device in exchange for a
trade-in device.
      Trade-in program. The term “trade-in program” means an initiative whereby
eligible applicants receive up to one trade-in device from the City of New York
at no cost in exchange for an eligible device.
   (b)   Eligibility. An applicant must:
      (1)   Earn at least $1,500, over the 12 months preceding the application
submission period, as a food delivery worker at:
         i.   a food service establishment;
         ii.   a third-party food delivery service; or
         iii.   a third-party courier service.
      (2)   Own an eligible device that is in operable condition;
      (3)   Be at least 18 years of age; and
      (4)   Reside in New York City.
   (c)   Application process. An applicant must submit the following
information on forms prescribed by the Department:
      (1)   Applicant’s name, address, date of birth, telephone number, and
email address;
      (2)   Name(s) of the food service establishment, third-party food
delivery service, or third-party courier service where the applicant currently
works or has activel worked as a food delivery worker within the 12 months
preceding the application submission period;
      (3)   A statement agreeing to abide by the terms and conditions of the
trade-in program; and
      (4)   Any other information as specified in the application.
   (d)   Acceptable forms of proof. An applicant must submit proof of the
following information:
      (1)   Applicant’s name and date of birth, by providing to the Department
a copy of one of the following unexpired documents:
         i.   IDNYC card;
         ii.   Passport;
         iii.   NYS Benefit ID; or
         iv.   U.S. government-issued ID.
      (2)   Residence, by providing to the Department a copy of one of the
following unexpired documents that shows the applicant’s address:
         i.   IDNYC card;
         ii.   U.S. government-issued ID;
         iii.   Utility bill, dated within the past 90 days;
         iv.   Telephone bill, dated within the past 90 days;
         v.   Any invoice mailed directly from billing company, dated within
the past 90 days; or
         vi.   Any other document(s) approved by the Department.
      (3)   Employment and earnings during the 12 months preceding the
application submission period by providing to the Department a copy of one of
the following:
         i.   Tax returns including a W-2, 1099-NEC, or 1040 form from a food
service establishment, a third-party food delivery service, or a third-party
courier service;
         ii.   Bank statements showing direct deposits from a food service
establishment, a third-party food delivery service, or a third-party courier
service;
         iii.   Pay stubs from a food service establishment, a third-party food
delivery service, or a third-party courier service;
         iv.   A letter from the employer confirming employment and earnings;
or
         v.   Any other document(s) approved by the Department.
      (4)   Eligible device by providing to the Department all of the
following:
         i.   Photos showing the front, side/profile, and back of the eligible
device;
         ii.   Photos of the eligible device’s battery; and
         iii.   Photos of the eligible device’s spare or extra battery, if
applicable.
      (5)   Proof of ownership by providing to the Department an attestation of
ownership of the eligible device in a form prescribed by the Department.
   (e)   Conditions of trade-in program participation. In exchange for a trade-
in device, an applicant must:
      (1)   Indemnify the City of New York against legal liabilities associated
with the receipt, operation, or use of the trade-in device;
      (2)   Comply with all applicable laws, rules, and regulations related to
the operation of the trade-in device, including but not limited to § 10-157 of
the Administrative Code;
      (3)   Not resell the trade-in device for a period of one year after
receipt of such device;
      (4)   Complete a semiannual survey about the trade-in device and trade-in
program by the Department;
      (5)   Deliver the eligible device to the Department at a trade-in event
for disposal;
      (6)   If applicable, deliver all batteries used with the eligible device;
      (7)   Demonstrate the eligible device is in operable condition;
      (8)   Not modify the trade-in device in any way;
      (9)   Service the trade-in device safely at a repair shop; and
      (10)   Complete a safety training course.
   (f)   Submission period. An applicant must submit the application within a
time period prescribed by the Department on its website.
   (g)   Assignment of trade-in devices. At the conclusion of the submission
period, the Department will review all applications and notify eligible
applicants of the trade-in events. In the event that there are more eligible
applicants than available trade-in devices, the Department will conduct a
lottery to determine which eligible applicants will receive trade-in devices.
Eligible applicants not selected for trade-in will be placed in a waitlist in
numerical order. If a selected applicant does not attend their trade-in
appointment or becomes ineligible, their trade-in opportunity will be assigned
to the next eligible applicant on the waitlist.
   (h)   Material misrepresentations, misstatements and omissions. The
Department may deny an application if the application is found to contain
material misrepresentations, misstatements, or omissions.
(Added City Record 10/23/2024, eff. 11/22/2024)
Chapter 5: Licenses and Revocable Consents for Sidewalk and Roadway Cafes*
* Editor's note: Former Chapter 5, Paratransit Program (Access-a-Ride), was
repealed by City Record 4/30/2019, eff. 5/30/2019.
§ 5-01 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings:
   Administrative Code. The term “Administrative Code” means the Administrative
Code of the City of New York.
   Barrier. The term “barrier” means an object placed on all sides of a roadway
cafe, other than the side that fronts the restaurant, to protect patrons of a
roadway cafe, that has a fully built interior wall and bottom to hold water or
such other filler approved by the Department and that is removable.
   Clear Path. The term “clear path” means an unobstructed path on a sidewalk
or sidewalk widening for pedestrian circulation.
   Commissioner. The term “Commissioner” means the Commissioner of
Transportation, or their authorized designee.
   Consent. The term “consent” means an authorization, revocable at will, to an
owner of real property or, with permission of the owner, to a tenant of real
property to use the adjacent sidewalk widening to construct and operate a
sidewalk cafe subject to the terms applicable thereto.
   Corrective action request or CAR. The term “corrective action request” or
“CAR” means written notice by the Department that a condition created or
maintained within a sidewalk cafe or roadway cafe is in violation of a
provision of §§ 19-160 through 19-160.6 of the Administrative Code, these
rules, or a term or condition of a license issued pursuant to this chapter,
with a request that action be taken by the person to whom such notice is
addressed to correct such condition.
   Department. The term “Department” means the Department of Transportation.
   Enclosed sidewalk cafe. The term “enclosed sidewalk cafe” means a sidewalk
cafe that is constructed predominantly of light materials such as glass, slow-
burning plastic or lightweight metal pursuant to a permit issued by the
Department of Buildings.
   Fee rate. The term “fee rate” means the compensation to be paid per square
foot to the city during the continuance of a revocable consent or a consent in
an amount equal to the applicable sector rate, reduced, as determined by the
Department, to account for factors including, but not limited to, the impact
historical weather patterns may have on the operation of a sidewalk cafe or
roadway cafe and any area of a roadway cafe occupied by barriers demarcating
such cafe from the curb lane or parking lane.
   Floating parking lane. The term “floating parking lane” means a parking lane
that is separated from the curb by a protected bicycle lane that is adjacent to
the curb.
   Furnishing zone. The term “furnishing zone” means an area of a sidewalk that
is parallel to the curb line and in which streetscape elements, such as street
furniture and trees, are located.
   Ground floor. The term “ground floor” means the portion of a building that
is visible from the street and directly accessible to the public from the
street.
   Ground floor restaurant. The term “ground floor restaurant” means any ground
floor premises that is operated pursuant to a food service establishment permit
issued by the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene.
   Landmarks Preservation Commission or LPC. The term “Landmarks Preservation
Commission” or “LPC” means the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission.
   Overhead covering. The term “overhead covering” means a projection over a
sidewalk cafe, other than an enclosed sidewalk cafe, or roadway cafe that is
comprised of a support structure over which material is attached. Such overhead
covering may provide weather protection or decoration and shall not be affixed
to the building. Materials that may be used for an overhead covering include
but are not limited to tensile fabric, retractable fabric, fabric panels, and
rigid panelized sheet material (e.g., polycarbonate panels, panelized sheet
metal panels, etc.).
   Petitioner. The term “petitioner” means a person or entity who submits a
petition for a revocable consent for a sidewalk cafe or a roadway cafe, or an
authorized representative of such person or entity.
   Revocable consent. The term “revocable consent” means a grant of a right,
revocable at will, to an owner of real property or, with the consent of such
owner, to a tenant of real property to use adjacent inalienable property of the
City of New York to construct and to operate a sidewalk cafe or roadway cafe
subject to the terms and conditions applicable thereto.
   Roadway. The term “roadway” means that portion of a street designed,
improved, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the shoulder
and slope.
   Roadway cafe. The term “roadway cafe” means an open-air portion of a ground
floor restaurant containing readily removable tables, chairs, and other
removable decorative items, located in the curb lane or parking lane of a
roadway fronting the restaurant and designed and operated pursuant to 34 RCNY
§§
5-02 through
5-12.
   Sector. The term “sector” means an area of the city, as determined by the
Department, where the median annual rent charged for a square foot of a ground
floor commercial premises, in accordance with information published by the
Department of Finance pursuant to subdivision h of § 11-3101 of the
Administrative Code, is similar.
   Sector rate. The term “sector rate” means a dollar amount determined by the
Department for each sector, based on the median annual rent for a square foot
of a ground floor commercial premises in such sector, as determined in
accordance with the information published by the Department of Finance pursuant
to subdivision h of § 11-3101 of the Administrative Code, or other similar data
that the Department determines accurately reflects such median annual rent in
such sector.
   Sidewalk. The term “sidewalk” means a portion of a street between curb
lines, or lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, but not
including the curb, intended for the use of pedestrians.
   Sidewalk cafe. The term “sidewalk cafe” means a portion of a ground floor
restaurant that is located on a public sidewalk or sidewalk widening in front
of the restaurant and that is designed and operated pursuant to 34 RCNY §§
5-02 through
5-12.
   Sidewalk widening. The term “sidewalk widening” has the same meaning as in
subdivision (f) of § 37-53, or a successor provision, of the zoning resolution
of the city of New York.
   Street. The term “street” has the meaning ascribed thereto in subdivision 13
of § 1-112 of the Administrative Code.
(Added City Record 2/2/2024, eff. 3/3/2024)
§ 5-02 General Requirements.
   (a)   Requirement for a License and Revocable Consent. Any person owning,
leasing, managing or operating a ground floor restaurant upon property which
abuts upon any street may establish and operate a sidewalk cafe upon the
sidewalk or sidewalk widening of such street in an area immediately adjacent to
its premises, or a roadway cafe upon the roadway adjacent to the curb in front
of such ground floor restaurant, or both, provided that such sidewalk cafe or
roadway cafe must be granted a license and a revocable consent by the
Commissioner, and provided further that a sidewalk cafe located entirely on a
sidewalk widening must be granted a license and consent for the use of such
sidewalk widening as a sidewalk cafe by the Commissioner.
   (b)   Enclosed Sidewalk Cafes. 
      (1)   Notwithstanding subdivision (a), no license shall be granted or
renewed for the operation of an enclosed sidewalk cafe at any location other
than a location where:
         (i)   An enclosed sidewalk cafe had been constructed pursuant to a
permit issued by the Department of Buildings and in accordance with Section
3111 of the New York City Building Code prior to March 16, 2020; and
         (ii)   An enclosed sidewalk cafe was lawfully operated as such on
March 16, 2020 or at any time within four years prior to such date.
      (2)   Granting or renewal of any such license to operate an enclosed
sidewalk cafe at such location shall be in accordance with subdivision (c) of
34 RCNY §
5-03.
   (c)   Landmarks Preservation Commission Review. Approval by the Landmarks
Preservation Commission of a license application is required where the petition
for a revocable consent to operate a sidewalk cafe or roadway cafe includes
work or improvements subject to the jurisdiction of the Commission.
   (d)   Modification. An application to modify a license must be submitted in
accordance with 34 RCNY §
5-03, and a petition to modify a revocable consent, with appropriate drawings,
must be submitted in accordance with paragraph (2) of subdivision (c) of 34
RCNY §
5-04. Such application and petition shall be reviewed pursuant to the process
set forth in subdivision (c) of 34 RCNY §
5-07, except that the Department shall hold a public hearing only when a
licensee seeks approval (i) to increase the area of the sidewalk cafe or
roadway cafe by ten (10) percent or greater, or (ii) to modify the location of
a sidewalk cafe or roadway cafe.
   (e)   Except where expressly prohibited by law, the Commissioner may, in
accordance with §§ 19-160 through 19-160.6 of the Administrative Code, waive
these rules, in the interest of public safety and convenience.
   (f)   Compliance. A licensee must comply with all other applicable laws,
rules, and regulations, including but not limited to the New York City Fire
Code, New York City Building Code, New York City Health Code and the Department
of Health and Mental Hygiene’s rules and regulations, as applicable.
(Added City Record 2/2/2024, eff. 3/3/2024)
§ 5-03 License Requirements.
   (a)   Term. The term of a license granted pursuant to this chapter shall be
four years.
   (b)   Prohibition on Sale, Lease, or Transfer. A license to establish and
operate a sidewalk cafe or a roadway cafe shall be personal to the applicant
and may not be sold, leased or transferred. Such license shall not be deemed
revoked by the sale or transfer of the lease or of title to the building or
structure to which the sidewalk cafe or roadway cafe is related unless such
sale or transfer materially alters the plans submitted for the license
application or revocable consent. For purposes of this subdivision, “materially
alter” shall mean to modify the location or increase the area of a sidewalk
cafe or roadway cafe by ten (10) percent or more.
   (c)   License Applications. An application for the granting of a license, or
for renewal, modification, or assignment of a license, may be submitted
electronically on the Department’s website and must include all materials
required by the Department as set forth in these rules, including a completed
application in a form prescribed by the Department and provided on the
Department’s website.
   (d)   License Application Fees. There shall be separate fees, as provided in
this subdivision, for the granting and renewal of a sidewalk cafe license and a
roadway cafe license. Such fees shall be non-refundable and are set forth in
the chart below. Such license and license renewal fees shall be in addition to
the amount required to be paid as compensation for a revocable consent, or
renewal thereof, to establish and operate a sidewalk cafe or roadway cafe.
 
                   Sidewalk Cafe Roadway Cafe
Granting of license $1,050        $1,050
Renewal of license  $1,050        $1,050
 
(Added City Record 2/2/2024, eff. 3/3/2024)
§ 5-04 Requirements for Revocable Consent for Sidewalk Cafes and Roadway Cafes.
   (a)   Term. The term of a revocable consent to operate a sidewalk cafe or
roadway cafe shall be one license term (i.e., four years) and shall be
concurrent with the term of the license granted pursuant to this chapter for
the sidewalk cafe or roadway cafe.
   (b)   Assignment or Transfer of a Revocable Consent. Revocable consents may
not be assigned, transferred, or otherwise conveyed without the written
permission of the Commissioner.
   (c)   Petition Requirements. A petition for the granting of a revocable
consent, or for a renewal, modification, or assignment of a revocable consent,
may be submitted electronically on the Department’s website and must include:
      (1)   Petition Form. An accurately completed petition form, which will be
made available on the Department’s website, signed by the petitioner, who must
be a person or entity permitted to operate the ground floor restaurant that
occupies the premises immediately adjacent to the sidewalk and roadway areas
for which the revocable consent is sought.
      (2)   Site Plan and Drawings. A site plan comprised of an accurate
drawing depicting required clearances, the space to be occupied, and the
locations of tables, chairs, barriers and vertical elements in the form
provided on the Department’s website. Where a sidewalk cafe or roadway cafe
will be located in part on adjacent private property, the site plan must
delineate the property line. Such drawings may be, but are not required to be,
developed by an architect, engineer, or other professional third party.
      (3)   Photographs. One or more photographs that show the entire area of
or to be occupied by the sidewalk cafe or roadway cafe, and one or more
photographs that show the area adjacent to the sidewalk cafe or roadway cafe,
in the form provided on the Department’s website.
      (4)   Property Owner Consent. Where the petitioner is not the owner of
the property in front of which the sidewalk cafe or roadway cafe is located,
written, signed and notarized consent of such owner or a representative of a
property management company authorized to provide such consent on such owner’s
behalf. Upon commencement of a new lease following a transfer of ownership of
the building, the written, signed and notarized consent of the new owner or a
representative of a property management company authorized to provide such
consent on such owner’s behalf must be secured and filed with the Department.
      (5)   Pest Control Plan. A certification from the petitioner that they
have entered into a contract with a licensed pest control professional that
includes pest control services for the sidewalk cafe or roadway cafe.
      (6)   Additional Information. Any additional supporting materials or
information requested by the Department, including any documents, information
or materials necessary to register the revocable consent agreement with the
Comptroller.
   (d)   Additional Revocable Consent Requirements. Prior to executing the
revocable consent agreement, the petitioner must submit proof of insurance and
a security fee in the amounts and form set forth in the revocable consent
agreement.
   (e)   Renewal. Petitions for renewal of a revocable consent granted pursuant
to this chapter must include all forms and materials required by subdivision
(c) of this section, together with all supporting documents and correspondence,
except that the consent of the owner is not necessary for the issuance of a
renewal during the term of the lease for the premises, including any renewals
of such lease.
   (f)   Order of Priority. When two or more ground floor restaurants share the
same sidewalk and roadway frontage, the ground floor restaurant that first
submits a complete and accurate petition for a revocable consent pursuant to
this chapter has priority for the operation of a sidewalk cafe or a roadway
cafe in such frontage.
(Added City Record 2/2/2024, eff. 3/3/2024)
§ 5-05 Sidewalk Cafe Revocable Consent Review Process.
   (a)   Department Notice. The petition filed with the Department must be
complete and accurate, as determined by the Department. The Department will,
within 5 days of the filing of a complete and accurate petition, forward such
petition by electronic mail to the Borough President of the borough in which
the sidewalk cafe is proposed to be located, the Speaker of the Council and the
Council Member of the district in which the sidewalk cafe is proposed to be
located, for information purposes, and to the Community Board for the community
district in which the sidewalk cafe is proposed to be located, for review
pursuant to subdivision (b).
   (b)   Community Board Review. 
      (1)   No later than 40 days after receipt of such petition, the Board
must either:
         (i)   Notify the public of such petition, conduct a public hearing
thereon, and submit a written recommendation to the Department, provided,
however, the Department may at its discretion accept a written recommendation
submitted, following a public hearing, more than 40 days after receipt of the
petition; or
         (ii)   Waive, by a written statement, its public hearing and
recommendation on such petition in accordance with the requirements set forth
in subdivision (b) of § 19-160.2 of the Administrative Code.
      (2)   If a Community Board does not submit a written recommendation to
the Department within 40 days of receipt of the petition, the public hearing
and recommendation will be considered waived by such Board.
   (c)   Department Review. 
      (1)   If a public hearing is not required to be held by the Department
pursuant to paragraph (3) of this subdivision, within 20 days after the
expiration of the period described in subdivision (b), the Department will:
         (i)   Approve the petition for a revocable consent for a sidewalk
cafe, disapprove it or approve it with modifications; and
         (ii)   File with the Council any decision to approve or approve with
modifications, together with the petition. Such approval or approval with
modifications shall be final approval of the revocable consent unless the
Council and Mayor act pursuant to subdivision (d) of this section.
      (2)   If a public hearing is required to be held by the Department
pursuant to paragraph (3) of this subdivision, within 30 days after the period
described in subdivision (b), or within 45 days after such period if the
Department plans to combine the public hearing on the petition with the public
hearing required for one or more additional petitions, the Department will:
         (i)   Hold a public hearing on the petition;
         (ii)   Approve the petition, disapprove it, or approve it with
modifications; and
         (iii)   File with the Council any decision to approve or approve with
modifications, together with the petition. Such approval or approval with
modifications shall be final approval of the revocable consent unless the
Council and Mayor act pursuant to subdivision (d) of this section.
      (3)   The Department shall hold the public hearing when:
         (i)   A Community Board has submitted a recommendation to deny the
petition;
         (ii)   A Community Board has submitted a recommendation to approve the
petition with substantial modifications or conditions and the petitioner does
not agree to adopt such modifications; or
         (iii)   The Department has determined that such a hearing would be
beneficial to address a concern about the effect of a sidewalk cafe at the
proposed location.
      (4)   During the Department’s review period, the Department will send the
petition to city agencies whose operations may be affected by such petition for
review and comment, including but not limited to the New York City Fire
Department, the Mayor’s Office for People with Disabilities, and the LPC.
      (5)   Upon the Department’s determination to disapprove a petition, the
Department will notify the petitioner, and the petitioner may submit a written
statement to the Department within ten (10) days of such determination. The
Department will consider any comments set forth in a timely delivered written
statement. If the Department affirms its decision to disapprove the petition,
such disapproval shall be a final determination of the Department.
      (6)   The Department may hear one or more petitions at the same public
hearing upon a determination that doing so is in the public interest.
      (7)   Department Notice of Public Hearing. 
         (i)   At least 15 days prior to the date of a hearing required to be
held pursuant to paragraph (3) of this subdivision, the Department will give
notice of such hearing to the petitioner, the Community Board for the district
in which the sidewalk cafe is proposed to be located, the President of the
Borough in which such cafe is proposed to be located and the Council Member of
the Council district in which such cafe is proposed to be located.
         (ii)   Not less than five (5) calendar days prior to the date of any
such hearing, the Department will publish notice of the hearing in the City
Record, and in the print or online edition of one newspaper of local
circulation in the community where such cafe is proposed to be located. The
petitioner shall bear the cost of publication in the print or online edition of
such newspaper.
   (d)   City Council and Mayoral Review. Upon receipt of such petition, the
Council may resolve by majority vote of all the Council Members to review the
petition in accordance with subdivisions (e) and (f) of § 19-160.2 of the
Administrative Code. If the Council does not so resolve, the approval of the
petition by the Department will be forwarded to the Mayor unless the petition,
or the category of such petition, is one for which the Mayor has determined
that separate and additional mayoral approval is not required.
   (e)   Comptroller Registration. Upon approval of a petition, the Department
will notify the petitioner that it petition has been approved and will file the
revocable consent agreement with the Comptroller for registration pursuant to
Section 328 of the City Charter. Upon notification that the revocable consent
agreement has been registered, DOT will issue the license along with a copy of
the executed revocable consent agreement to the petitioner.
(Added City Record 2/2/2024, eff. 3/3/2024)
§ 5-06 Revocable Consent Review Process for Sidewalk Cafe Located Entirely in
Sidewalk Widening.
   (a)   Term. The term of the consent for a sidewalk cafe located entirely in
a sidewalk widening is one license term (i.e., four years) and is concurrent
with such license term.
   (b)   Assignment or Transfer of a Consent. A consent may not be assigned,
transferred, or otherwise conveyed without the permission of the Commissioner.
   (c)   Petition Requirements. A petition for the granting of a consent, or
for a renewal, modification, or assignment thereof, may be submitted
electronically on the Department’s website and must include all materials
required by subdivision (c) of 34 RCNY §
5-04, except that the site plan must also delineate the property line that
separates the sidewalk from the sidewalk widening.
   (d)   Sidewalk Widening Approval Process. Notwithstanding 34 RCNY §
5-05, a petition for a consent to establish a sidewalk cafe located entirely on
a sidewalk widening, as demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Department,
will be reviewed and approved pursuant to 34 RCNY §
5-07, except that a public hearing is not required.
(Added City Record 2/2/2024, eff. 3/3/2024)
§ 5-07 Roadway Cafe Revocable Consent Review Process.
   (a)   Department Notice. The petition for a roadway cafe revocable consent
filed with the Department must be complete and accurate, as determined by the
Department The Department will, within 10 business days of the filing of a
complete and accurate petition to operate a roadway cafe, forward such petition
by electronic mail to the Council Member in whose district the roadway cafe is
proposed to be located, and to the Community Board for the community district
in which the roadway cafe is proposed to be located.
   (b)   Comment Period. The Community Board and the affected Council Member
may submit comments to the Department not later than 30 days after receipt of
such petition.
   (c)   Department Review. 
      (1)   Prior to granting a petition for a revocable consent to operate a
roadway cafe, or for renewal of such a revocable consent, or for modification
to the location of a roadway cafe or to increase the area of a roadway cafe by
ten (10) percent or more, the Department will hold a public hearing. Notice of
such hearing will be published by the Department at the expense of the
petitioner in accordance with Section 371 of the Charter.
      (2)   During the Department’s review, the Department will send the
petition to other agencies whose operations may be impacted by such petition
for review and comment. The Department will approve the petition, disapprove
it, or approve it with modifications.
      (3)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Department may deny a petition
for a revocable consent to operate a roadway cafe without a hearing if, in the
sole judgement of the Commissioner, the granting of such revocable consent
would interfere with the use of inalienable property of the City (including but
not limited to roadways and sidewalks) for public purposes or would otherwise
not be in the best interest of the City.
(Added City Record 2/2/2024, eff. 3/3/2024)
§ 5-08 Temporary Authorization to Operate.
   (a)   Lapsed or Terminated Revocable Consent. Where an applicant for a
license to operate a sidewalk cafe or roadway cafe submits a complete and
accurate petition for a revocable consent to operate a sidewalk cafe or roadway
cafe for which a revocable consent granted to another person has lapsed or was
terminated, such applicant may operate the sidewalk cafe or roadway cafe at
such premises pending the approval such petition, provided all of the following
requirements are satisfied:
      (1)   The plans for the cafe, submitted with the petition as required by
paragraph (2) of subdivision (c) of 34 RCNY §
5-04, are the same as the plans for the cafe for which a revocable consent to
operate was granted previously.
      (2)   Where the petition is for an enclosed sidewalk cafe, the structure
of such enclosed sidewalk cafe is the same as the structure of the enclosed
sidewalk cafe for which a consent had been granted previously.
      (3)   The petitioner makes a good faith effort to be granted a revocable
consent to operate such sidewalk cafe or roadway cafe. The Department may, in
its sole discretion, determine that the applicant has not made a good faith
effort where the petition for a revocable consent has not been approved within
one year from the date of submission due to the petitioner’s failure to submit
information and materials requested by the Department. If such determination is
made by the Department, the application will be deemed to have been withdrawn
and the temporary authorization will be terminated.
      (4)   The previously granted revocable consent has lapsed or was
terminated no more than two years prior to the date of submission of the
petition.
      (5)   Where the previously granted revocable consent was terminated by
the Department, such termination was not a result of non-compliance with the
design requirements set forth in 34 RCNY §
5-11.
   (b)   Comptroller Consent Pending Registration. Where the Department has
approved a petition for a revocable consent to operate a sidewalk cafe or
roadway cafe, the petitioner may operate such cafe pending registration of such
revocable consent by the Comptroller, provided the following requirements are
satisfied:
      (1)   The Comptroller has consented to such operation of the sidewalk
cafe or roadway cafe pending registration; and
      (2)   Where the petition is for a revocable consent to operate a sidewalk
cafe, the time for Council to resolve to review such petition has expired, or
the Council has resolved to review such petition and has either approved such
petition or has approved such petition with modifications and the petitioner
has accepted such modifications.
(Added City Record 2/2/2024, eff. 3/3/2024)
§ 5-09 Annual Fee Rate Schedule.
   (a)   A revocable consent for a sidewalk cafe or a roadway cafe, or a
consent to operate a sidewalk cafe located on a sidewalk widening, granted
pursuant to this chapter shall provide for compensation to be paid annually to
the city during the continuance of the consent. Such annual compensation shall
be equivalent to the product of the fee rate and the square footage of such
sidewalk cafe or roadway cafe.
   (b)   There are 4 sectors, as described on the website of the Department.
The fee rate for each sector shall be as follows:
 
Sector Sidewalk Fee Rate Roadway Fee Rate
       (per square foot) (per square foot)
1      $6                $5
2      $10               $8
3      $18               $14
4      $31               $25
 
   (c)   Enclosed Sidewalk Cafes. 
      (1)   A revocable consent for an enclosed sidewalk cafe shall provide for
compensation to be paid annually to the city during the continuance of the
consent at a rate identical to the rate required to be paid for such cafe as of
March 16, 2020 pursuant to the rules of the Department of Consumer and Worker
Protection in effect prior to the date these rules take effect, as provided in
subparagraphs (i) and (ii) of this paragraph. Such rules establish two zones,
and compensation to be paid annually depends on the zone in which an enclosed
sidewalk cafe is located. Zone One encompasses all of the area of Manhattan
south of, and including both sides of, 96th Street. Zone Two encompasses all of
the areas of the City of New York not included within Zone One. The rates in
effect as of March 16, 2020 are:
         (i)   $5,378.13 for the first seventy (70) square feet plus $42.02 for
every additional square foot of sidewalk space occupied by an enclosed sidewalk
cafe in Zone One; and
         (ii)   $4,033.60 for the first seventy (70) square feet plus $31.51
for every additional square foot of sidewalk space occupied by an enclosed
sidewalk cafe in Zone Two.
      (2)   On January 1, 2028, and every 4 years thereafter, the Department
may increase or decrease such compensation for an enclosed sidewalk cafe in
accordance with increases or decreases in the sector rate.
(Added City Record 2/2/2024, eff. 3/3/2024)
§ 5-10 Operation and Management Requirements.
Upon approval by the Department of a license granted pursuant to this chapter,
a licensee must operate and manage all aspects of a sidewalk cafe or roadway
cafe in accordance with this section.
   (a)   Maintenance. 
      (1)   Sidewalk cafes and roadway cafes must be kept clean, well-
maintained, and clear of trash, debris, graffiti, vermin, food scraps, and
unsanitary conditions. A licensee must also keep clean the area of the roadway
extending one and one-half (1 1/2) feet distance beyond any roadway cafe on all
sides of such roadway cafe.
      (2)   A licensee may not store trash within a sidewalk cafe or roadway
cafe, except that in roadway cafes rigid receptables with tight-fitting lids as
referenced in subdivision (b) of 16 RCNY §
1-02.4 are permitted.
      (3)   If flooring is utilized as part of a roadway cafe, such flooring
shall be lifted for cleaning on a regular basis, but not less than weekly.
   (b)   Hours of Operation. Sidewalk cafes, other than enclosed sidewalk
cafes, and roadway cafes may operate only during the following hours and days:
      Sunday, 10 a.m. to midnight
      Monday, 8 a.m. to midnight
      Tuesday, 8 a.m. to midnight
      Wednesday, 8 a.m. to midnight
      Thursday, 8 a.m. to midnight
      Friday, 8 a.m. to midnight
      Saturday, 8 a.m. to midnight
   (c)   Alcohol Consumption. No beer, alcoholic or spirituous liquors shall be
served at a sidewalk cafe or a roadway cafe, unless permitted by the New York
State Liquor Authority.
   (d)   No Smoking. Smoking or using electronic cigarettes is prohibited
within sidewalk cafes and roadway cafes pursuant to subdivision (c) of § 17-503
of the Administrative Code.
   (e)   Advertising. No advertising sign, picture, flag, banner, side curtain
or other device, including an illuminated or non-illuminated sign, shall be
placed or painted on or affixed to any awning, screen or other appurtenance
used in connection with a sidewalk cafe or roadway cafe, except that the name
of the restaurant, the logo of the restaurant, the menu and information on the
services provided by the restaurant, and the name and logo of any sponsors of
the restaurant’s amenities may be painted, imprinted or otherwise displayed, in
accordance with any applicable requirements of the New York City Zoning
Resolution and the following requirements:
      (1)   Names and logos shall be limited to ten (10) percent of the surface
area of the surface on which they are displayed.
      (2)   Names and logos may be painted onto barriers, or otherwise
physically attached and secured to the barriers, provided that any signs
attached to the barriers shall be no more than one (1) inch in depth. Menus and
hours of operation may not be painted on or physically affixed to the barriers
or any vertical screening.
      (3)   On overhead coverings, umbrellas, and awnings, names and logos must
be physically adhered to the fabric.
      (4)   Any sign, picture, flag, banner, side curtain or other device used
to display a name or logo may not be illuminated, flashing, or moving.
   (f)   Heaters. Heating units utilized in a sidewalk cafe or roadway cafe
must comply with all applicable laws, rules, and regulations and must be
approved for use in such sidewalk cafe or roadway cafe by the New York City
Department of Buildings and New York City Fire Department. Such heating units
may only be located within the area of the sidewalk cafe or roadway cafe for
which the revocable consent and license to operate such cafe has been granted.
   (g)   Good Order. Every licensee shall be held strictly accountable for the
maintenance of good order in the sidewalk cafe or roadway cafe and the proper
conduct of their patrons, including the prevention of excessive congregation of
such patrons within or immediately adjacent to such sidewalk cafe or roadway
cafe. A licensee must provide adequate service to maintain the tables in the
sidewalk cafe or roadway cafe and the adjacent street in a manner that ensures
good order and cleanliness.
   (h)   Accessibility. A sidewalk cafe and roadway cafe must be directly
accessible to persons with physical disabilities. The design of such cafe shall
comply with applicable requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act and
rules promulgated thereunder, and applicable requirements of the New York City
Building Code.
   (i)   Noise. 
      (1)   A licensee must comply with the New York City Noise Control Code,
Chapter 2 of Title 24 of the Administrative Code, as applicable, including all
restrictions and prohibitions relating to unreasonable noise pursuant to
subdivisions (a) and (a-1) of § 24-218 of the Administrative Code.
      (2)   No musical instruments or sound reproduction or amplification
devices shall be operated or used within a sidewalk cafe or roadway cafe,
except where authorized pursuant to a street activity permit issued pursuant to
50 RCNY
Chapter 1.
      (3)   Where practicable, the Department may refer community noise
disputes to alternative dispute resolution through the Mediating Establishment
and Neighbor Disputes NYC program (MEND NYC), or a successor program.
   (j)   Lighting. Lighting shall illuminate only within the sidewalk cafe or
roadway cafe.
   (k)   Secure Cafe. 
      (1)   During hours when a sidewalk cafe or roadway cafe is not operating,
the licensee must secure all furnishing and decorative elements of such
sidewalk cafe or roadway cafe, such as tables and chairs, using a cable or
other locking system. Such secured furnishings or decorative elements may not
impede or block access to utility infrastructure or assets (e.g., utility
access covers, vent poles, control cabinets, etc.).
      (2)   Umbrellas and overhead coverings, if utilized, must be secured
during inclement weather, including high wind conditions or heavy snow events.
   (l)   Furnishing Zone. No portion of a sidewalk cafe or roadway cafe shall
be located in the furnishing zone and no items associated with such sidewalk or
roadway cafe shall be placed or stored in the furnishing zone.
   (m)   Service. A licensee must ensure that employees serve patrons solely
from within the perimeters of such sidewalk cafe or roadway cafe.
   (n)   Roadway Cafe Operating Season. 
      (1)   A roadway cafe shall not operate on any day from November 30 to
March 31, inclusive. All barriers, furnishings and other decorative elements of
a roadway cafe must be removed during such period except as authorized pursuant
to paragraph (2) of this subdivision.
      (2)   Notwithstanding paragraph (1) of this subdivision, a ground floor
restaurant for which a revocable consent and license for a roadway cafe have
been granted pursuant to this chapter may:
         (i)   Occupy the area of the roadway cafe beginning on a date
prescribed by the Department on its website that is earlier than March 31, for
the purpose of setting up the roadway cafe prior to commencement of operation
of the roadway cafe, provided that such date shall be no earlier than March 24
of each year; and
         (ii)   Occupy the area of the roadway cafe until a date prescribed by
the Department on its website that is later than November 30, for the purpose
of disbanding the roadway cafe, provided that such date shall be no later than
December 7 of each year.
   (o)   Abandonment. A sidewalk cafe or roadway cafe must be used and occupied
for outdoor dining. When not used and occupied for outdoor dining for thirty
(30) consecutive days or more, except in accordance with subdivision (n) of
this section, they must be removed from the sidewalk and roadway by the
licensee.
   (p)   License Availability. A licensee shall retain on the premises of a
sidewalk cafe or roadway cafe a copy of the license issued for such cafe, and
upon request by an employee of the Department or other city agency, shall make
available such copy of such license for inspection.
(Added City Record 2/2/2024, eff. 3/3/2024)
§ 5-11 Design Requirements.
   (a)   Sidewalk Cafes. 
      (1)   Siting Requirements for Sidewalk Cafes other than Enclosed Sidewalk
Cafes. 
         (i)   Open-Air. A sidewalk cafe, other than an enclosed sidewalk cafe,
shall be open-air and shall contain only readily removable tables, chairs and
other removable decorative items.
         (ii)   Frontage. A sidewalk cafe, other than an enclosed sidewalk
cafe, shall be limited to the sidewalk or sidewalk widening that is directly in
front of the ground floor restaurant that is operating such sidewalk cafe.
         (iii)   Clear Path. A clear path shall remain on the sidewalk or
sidewalk widening in front of the ground floor restaurant operating a sidewalk
cafe, other than an enclosed sidewalk cafe, after installation of such sidewalk
cafe.
            (A)   The minimum width of the required clear path shall be the
greater of:
               1.   The width provided in the table below for the corridor
category of the street on which the sidewalk cafe is located; or
               2.   Fifty percent (50%) of the width of the sidewalk, including
any sidewalk widening. The corridor categories are set forth in the
Department’s NYC Pedestrian Mobility Plan, which is available on the
Department’s website.
 
Corridor Categories    Required Clear Path
Global Corridors       12 Feet
Regional Corridors     10 Feet
Neighborhood Corridors 8 Feet
Community Connectors   8 Feet
Baseline Streets       8 Feet
 
            (B)   Notwithstanding clause (A), on regional corridors, the
minimum width of the required clear path shall be 8 feet where the following
conditions are satisfied:
               1.   Maintenance of a 10-foot clear path after installation of
such sidewalk cafe is not feasible; and
               2.   Such sidewalk cafe is located within an area where only
small sidewalk cafes were permitted prior to the date these rules take effect,
as shown on the Department’s website.
            (C)   Notwithstanding clause (A), on global corridors, the minimum
width of the required clear path shall be 8 feet for any sidewalk cafe adjacent
to an arcade that provides at least 6 feet of an unobstructed path for the
length of the block in accordance with the New York City Zoning Resolution.
            (D)   The clear path is measured from the outer edge of the
perimeter of the sidewalk cafe to the nearest element or object, including a
pedestrian ramp, installed or affixed to the sidewalk between such perimeter
and the nearest curb line, or if there is no such element or object, to the
nearest curb line.
         (iv)   Clearances. The following minimum distances are required
between a sidewalk cafe, other than an enclosed sidewalk cafe, and the
specified element or object:
Element or Object Minimum Required Distance
Element or Object                                   Minimum Required Distance
Subway Stair: Open End (Entry Side)                 15 Feet
Subway Elevator Entrance                            10 Feet
Exhaust Ducts                                       10 Feet
MTA or FDNY Curb Cuts                               10 Feet
Edges of Street Tree Beds                           8 Feet
Mailboxes                                           8 Feet
LinkNYC Kiosks, Wayfinding Kiosks, E-Charging
Stations, Parking Meters; Select Bus Service Fare   8 Feet
Machines
Newsstands                                          8 Feet
Streetlights                                        8 Feet
Bus Stop Poles                                      8 Feet
Fire Hydrants                                       8 Feet
Bus Stop Shelters                                   8 Feet
Traffic Signals                                     8 Feet
Citi Bike/Bike Share Stations, Bike Corrals,        5 Feet
Micromobility Stations
Primary Building Entrances                          5 Feet
Curb Cuts                                           5 Feet
Emergency Exit Hatches                              5 Feet
Subway Stair: Closed-End (non-entry)                5 Feet
Subway Elevator: Non-Entry                          5 Feet
Siamese Connections and Standpipes                  5 Feet
Elevated Train Infrastructure (e.g., support beams, 3 Feet
etc.)
Transformer Vaults                                  3 Feet
Vent Infrastructure (e.g., utility vent poles,      1 foot 6 inches
ventilator grates, subway grates, etc.)
 
         (v)   Covering Restrictions. A sidewalk cafe, other than an enclosed
sidewalk cafe, shall not be located over or block any of the following: cellar
and basement doors, freight elevators or service entrances, retail and non-
primary building entrances, and building projections (including, but not
limited to, stoops, steps, and stairs), provided that a sidewalk cafe may block
or cover a cellar or basement door that is not a means of egress if such door
is closed and is reinforced, the safety of which closed and reinforced door is
certified by a registered design professional as defined in the New York City
Construction Codes in the form prescribed by the Department on its website.
         (vi)   Utility Infrastructure. Furniture or other decorative items of
a sidewalk cafe, other than an enclosed sidewalk cafe, shall not be located
within 1 foot 6 inches of manhole covers and shall not prevent access to any
other utility infrastructure, including but not limited to control cabinets,
utility poles, telecommunication pull boxes, and ground level boxes.
         (vii)   Service. Furniture or other decorative elements of a sidewalk
cafe, other than an enclosed sidewalk cafe, must be located to allow for
service of patrons solely within the perimeter of such sidewalk cafe.
      (2)   Material Requirements for Sidewalk Cafes other than Enclosed
Sidewalk Cafes. 
         (i)   Perimeter demarcation. The perimeter of a sidewalk cafe, other
than an enclosed sidewalk cafe, shall be clearly and visibly demarcated by a
removable and self-supporting base wall, railing, planter, fence, or stanchion
and rope, which shall be no higher than two (2) feet and six (6) inches,
exclusive of any shrubbery and/or planting. Such perimeter demarcations shall
not be affixed to the sidewalk.
         (ii)   Flooring. A sidewalk cafe, other than an enclosed sidewalk
cafe, shall be level with the sidewalk. No platforms, flooring, or other ground
coverings (e.g., rugs, artificial turfs, etc.) are permitted.
         (iii)   Furnishings. The furnishing of the interior of a sidewalk
cafe, other than an enclosed sidewalk cafe, must consist solely of lightweight
and easily moveable tables, chairs, and decorative accessories. No furnishing
element shall be permanently affixed to the sidewalk.
         (iv)   Awnings, Overhead Coverings, and Umbrellas.
            (A)   An awning, overhead covering, or umbrella utilized in a
sidewalk cafe, other than an enclosed cafe, must be easily removable, comprised
of fire-resistant grade materials, and wind resistant.
            (B)   Such an awning shall be no lower than eight (8) feet from the
ground and must not exceed a maximum height of ten (10) feet. Such an overhead
covering or umbrella shall be no lower than seven (7) feet from the ground and
must not exceed a maximum height of ten (10) feet.
            (C)   Such an awning, that is physically attached to a building,
must comply with the New York City Building Code and the requirements of the
Landmarks Preservation Commission, as applicable.
            (D)   Such an awning or overhead covering may not extend beyond the
perimeter of the sidewalk cafe except for awnings that are in compliance with
the New York City Building Code. Documentation demonstrating compliance with
the New York City Building Code must be made available to Department personnel
upon request.
            (E)   All such umbrellas and overhead coverings must have a
weighted base, and any stand or other structure utilized for the purpose of
providing support for an overhead covering or umbrella shall be of sufficient
size and strength to maintain the umbrella or overhead covering, made of
durable materials, and free of defects.
         (v)   Lighting and Electrical Connections. Lighting of a sidewalk
cafe, other than an enclosed sidewalk cafe, shall be outdoor rated, properly
secured, protected and lightweight. Any lighting shall be directly connected to
the ground floor restaurant’s power source, shall be located within the
perimeter of such sidewalk cafe, and shall not exceed 10 feet in height. No
connections shall be made to any type of City electrical equipment or attached
to any City property, including street trees. All electrical work shall comply
with the applicable requirements set forth in the Department’s rules and the
New York City Electrical Code.
         (vi)   Fire Escape Stairs. No element of a sidewalk cafe, other than
an enclosed sidewalk cafe, including any overhead covering, awning or umbrella,
shall cover, block or be affixed to any fire escape stairs or other components
of a fire escape.
   (b)   Roadway Cafes. 
      (1)   Siting Requirements. 
         (i)   Frontage. A roadway cafe shall be limited to the portion of the
roadway that is directly in front of the ground floor restaurant that is
operating such roadway cafe.
         (ii)   Permitted Locations. 
            (A)   A roadway cafe may only be located within:
               1.   Parking spaces, including metered and non-metered spaces,
commercial parking, alternate side parking spaces, angled parking spaces where
approved by the Department in accordance with clause (C) of this subparagraph,
and spaces with seasonal restrictions, regardless of timing of such
restrictions, including No Standing during posted months; and
               2.   Truck Loading Only, Loading Only, Hotel Loading, and No
Parking zones.
         (B)   Notwithstanding clause (A) of this paragraph, a roadway cafe may
not be located, in whole or in part, within:
               1.   Part-time or full-time travel lanes, including bicycle
lanes, bus lanes and No Standing, No Standing during posted hours, or No
Stopping zones;
               2.   Bus stops;
               3.   Parking spaces reserved for specified vehicles authorized
by permit; or
               4.   Dedicated use parking spaces as described in 34 RCNY §
4-08(a)(3)(i), except as listed in clause (A)(2) of this subparagraph.
            (C)   In accordance with clause (A) of this subparagraph, a roadway
cafe may be located within one or more angled parking spaces subject to
approval by the Department. Where a petition is for a roadway cafe that is
located wholly or partially within an angled parking space, the Department may,
except where expressly prohibited by law, modify the requirements set forth in
this subdivision where necessary to promote vehicular and pedestrian traffic
safety, including but not limited to providing appropriate clearances from the
travel lane and adjacent parking spaces, and preserving sight distance.
         (iii)   Clearances. The following minimum distances shall be
maintained between the roadway cafe and the specified element or object, except
as otherwise specified herein:
Element or Object Minimum Required Distance
Element or Object                                   Minimum Required Distance
Subway Entrance: Open End (Entry Side)              15 Feet
Fire Hydrant                                        15 Feet
Subway Elevator Entrance                            10 Feet
MTA or FDNY Curb Cuts                               10 Feet
Curb Cuts                                           5 Feet
Emergency Exit Hatches                              5 Feet
Subway Stair: Closed-End (non-entry)                5 Feet
Subway Elevator: Non-Entry                          5 Feet
Bus Stop Pole: Non-Approaching Side                 5 Feet
Citi Bike/Bike Share Stations, Bike Corrals,        5 Feet
Micromobility Stations located in the roadway
Drainage Infrastructure (Catch Basins/Rain Gardens) 5 Feet
Elevated Train Infrastructure (e.g., support beams, 3 Feet
etc.)
Transformer Vaults                                  3 Feet
Vent Infrastructure (e.g., utility vent poles,      1 Foot 6 Inches
ventilator grates, subway grates, etc.)
Thermoplastic Markings                              6 inches
 
         (iv)   Dimensions. 
            (A)   The maximum length of a roadway cafe or portion of a roadway
cafe, as described in clause (E) of this subparagraph, shall be 40 feet.
            (B)   The maximum width of a roadway cafe shall be eight (8) feet,
provided that the Department may require a roadway cafe to be less than eight
(8) feet where necessary to address a safety concern based on roadway width,
roadway geometry (e.g., number of traffic lanes, the presence and composition
of bicycle lanes and parking lanes, etc.), or proximity to an intersection, or
to facilitate the traverse of emergency vehicles on such roadway.
            (C)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of this chapter, a 15-
foot emergency travel lane must be maintained on every roadway, provided that
the Department may permit an emergency travel lane width of less than 15 feet
upon the issuance of a letter of no objection from the New York City Fire
Department. The New York City Fire Department will issue such letter to the
Department, or deny the request, within 30 days of receipt of the request from
the Department. However, if such response is submitted later than 30 days, such
response may be accepted by the Department at the sole discretion of the
Department.
            (D)   Minimum distance between roadway cafes. 
               1.   For roadway cafes that are the maximum of 40 feet in
length, there shall be a minimum distance of six (6) feet between the
perimeters of adjacent roadway cafes. A roadway cafe that is a maximum of 40
feet in length shall maintain a minimum of four and a half feet (4’6”) distance
from the boundary of the extension of the perimeter of the ground floor
restaurant.
               2.   For roadway cafes that are less than 40 feet in length,
there shall be a minimum distance of three (3) feet between the perimeters of
adjacent roadway cafes. A roadway cafe adjacent to another roadway cafe shall
maintain a minimum of a one foot, 6-inch (1’ 6”) distance from the boundary of
the extension of the perimeter of the ground floor restaurant.
               3.   If there is no adjacent roadway cafe at the time such
roadway cafe is approved and an adjacent roadway cafe is subsequently
installed, each roadway cafe must maintain the required minimum distance upon
the installation of the new roadway cafe. Such minimum distance shall remain
unobstructed for emergency access and shall not be used for storage, including
containers to store trash.
            (E)   Portions of a roadway cafe. Where the frontage of a
restaurant is greater than 40 feet in length, the restaurant may install
additional portions of a roadway cafe in accordance with this paragraph,
provided that each such portion is no greater than 40 feet in length. Where a
portion of a roadway cafe is the maximum 40 feet in length, there shall be a
minimum distance of six (6) feet between the perimeters of each adjacent
portion. Where adjacent portions of a roadway cafe are both less than 40 feet
in length, there shall be a minimum distance of three (3) feet between the
perimeters of each adjacent portion. Such minimum distances shall remain
unobstructed for emergency access and shall not be used for storage, including
containers to store trash.
         (v)   Street Trees. No element of a roadway cafe shall encroach upon
or attach to a street tree bed or canopy of a street tree. A street tree shall
not be cut, pruned, or removed except as authorized pursuant to a tree work
permit from the New York City Department of Parks and Recreation.
         (vi)   Distance from Marked Crosswalks. The distance between the
perimeter of a roadway cafe and a crosswalk shall be a minimum of:
            (A)   Twenty (20) feet, where the nearest vehicular travel lane
parallel to a roadway cafe provides for the direction of traffic to be
approaching the intersection; and
            (B)   Eight (8) feet, where the nearest vehicular travel lane
parallel to a roadway cafe provides for the direction of traffic to be exiting
the intersection.
         (vii)   Distance from Unmarked Crosswalks. The minimum distance
between the perimeter of a roadway cafe and the curb line of a street
intersecting with the street on which the roadway cafe is located shall be
twenty (20) feet.
         (viii)   Floating Parking Lanes. Roadway cafes located in a floating
parking lane shall be limited to the width of the legal parking area and shall
not be located, in whole or in part, within a bicycle lane. Notwithstanding
subparagraph (ii) of paragraph (1) of subdivision (b) of this section, roadway
cafes may abut but not cover any thermoplastic markings utilized as a buffer.
         (ix)   Signage Visibility. Any element of a roadway cafe, including
decorative plantings, located within fifty (50) feet of any regulatory or
warning signs, including but not limited to signage indicating Stop, Yield,
One-Way, Wrong Way, Do Not Enter, Pedestrian Crossing, School Crossing and
Speed Limit, shall be no greater than 46 inches in height.
         (x)   Utility Infrastructure. Furniture or other decorative items of a
roadway cafe shall not be located within one and half feet (1’ 6”) of manhole
covers and shall not prevent access to any other utility infrastructure,
including but not limited to control cabinets, utility poles, telecommunication
pull boxes, and ground level boxes.
         (xi)   Service. Furniture or other decorative elements of a roadway
cafe must be located to allow for service of patrons solely within the
perimeter of such roadway cafe.
      (2)   Material Requirements. 
         (i)   Barriers. 
            (A)   Barriers shall be maintained on all sides of a roadway cafe
except the side fronting the ground floor restaurant and shall not be affixed
to the roadway.
            (B)   Barriers shall be between thirty (30) inches and forty-two
(42) inches in height, not including the height of any plantings above such
barrier. Barriers shall be at least four (4) inches in width.
            (C)   Only water-filled barriers are permitted, except alternate
fill materials may be used where approved by the Department. Each barrier shall
be filled with a minimum of 150 pounds of fill per linear foot of barrier
length.
            (D)   Barriers must be interconnected.
            (E)   Any cladding on a barrier must be securely fastened or
affixed to the barrier.
            (F)   A reflective strip of a minimum of four (4) inches in width
must be located on each barrier, along the entire length of the outward-facing
side of such barrier.
            (G)   As an alternative to compliance with clauses (B) through (F)
of this subparagraph, a barrier may comply with barrier specifications posted
on the Department’s website which allow for alternate materials that match or
exceed the safety of the requirements set forth in these rules.
         (ii)   Flooring. 
            (A)   If flooring is utilized as part of a roadway cafe, such
flooring shall:
               1.   Be durable, lightweight, easily removable, mold-resistant,
elevated from the ground level to allow for drainage, and removable to allow
for cleaning;
               2.   Be flush with the curb line, except a roadway cafe located
on a slope shall be flush with the curb line to the greatest extent feasible;
               3.   Be compliant with applicable requirements of the Americans
with Disabilities Act and rules promulgated thereunder, and accessibility
requirements of the New York City Building Code, as applicable;
               4.   Maintain a six (6) inch covered channel between the curb
and base of such flooring to allow for drainage and water flow along the
roadway.
            (B)   Where flooring is not utilized as part of a roadway cafe,
such roadway cafe must provide a ramp that complies with the Americans with
Disabilities Act and any rules promulgated thereunder and the New York City
Building Code, as applicable.
            (C)   No other ground coverings (e.g., rugs, artificial turfs,
etc.) are permitted.
         (iii)   Furnishings. The furnishing of the interior of a roadway cafe
shall consist solely of lightweight easily moveable tables, chairs, and
decorative accessories.
         (iv)   Vertical Screenings, Overhead Coverings, and Umbrellas. 
            (A)   If utilized, vertical screenings, overhead coverings, and
umbrellas shall be easily removable, comprised of fire-resistant grade
materials, wind resistant, and shall not extend over the perimeter of the
roadway cafe.
            (B)   An overhead covering or umbrella shall be no lower than seven
(7) feet and shall not exceed a maximum height of ten (10) feet from the base
or floor of the roadway cafe.
            (C)   Vertical screening is permitted only on the roadway-facing
side of the cafe between the barrier and six (6) feet above the base or floor
of the cafe, provided that clear visibility is maintained. Plantings, lattice
panels or clear plexiglass that maintain clear visibility are allowed. Opaque
screening is prohibited. Vertical screening shall not be affixed to the outward
facing side of a barrier.
            (D)   All umbrellas and overhead coverings must have a weighted
base. Any stand or other structure utilized for the purpose of providing
support for an overhead covering or umbrella shall not be affixed to the
outward facing side of a barrier and shall be of sufficient size and strength
to maintain the umbrella or overhead covering, made of durable materials, and
free of defects.
         (v)   Lighting and Electrical Connections. Lighting shall be outdoor
rated, properly secured, protected and lightweight. Wires for electrification
shall be connected above-head, and may not be connected on or near the ground
or within street tree beds. No connections shall be made or attached to any
electrical equipment or other property owned or controlled by the City,
including street trees. Electrical connections shall be at least fourteen (14)
feet above the sidewalk and eighteen (18) feet above the roadway. All
electrical connections shall comply with the applicable requirements set forth
in the Department’s rules and the New York City Electrical Code.
(Added City Record 2/2/2024, eff. 3/3/2024)
§ 5-12 Enforcement.
   (a)   Corrective Action Request (CAR). 
      (1)   If the Commissioner finds that any licensee has, for the first
time, violated (i) any provision of §§ 19-160 through 19-160.6 of the
Administrative Code; (ii) any of these rules; or (iii) any of the terms and
conditions of the license, the Commissioner shall notify such licensee of such
violation and request that action be taken to correct such violation within 30
days and shall afford such licensee an opportunity to protest the
Commissioner’s finding in a manner set forth in these rules.
      (2)   A CAR may be served by mail or by e-mail on the licensee
responsible for the condition which requires correction at the address or e-
mail address for such person contained in the records of the Department.
      (3)   Any corrective action required by the CAR must be performed within
thirty (30) days of the issuance of the CAR unless such issuance is protested
as provided herein. If the corrective action required by the CAR is not
performed within thirty (30) days of the issuance of the CAR and such issuance
is not protested, the Department may issue a summons for an uncorrected
condition upon reinspection.
      (4)   Protest. 
         (i)   Within fourteen (14) days after the date of service of the CAR,
the respondent may protest the issuance of the CAR by submitting such protest
in writing to the Department at the location or address as specified on its
website and on the CAR. If the respondent fails to timely protest the CAR and
the Department issues a summons for an uncorrected condition, the respondent
may be issued a summons for failing to respond to the CAR in a timely manner.
         (ii)   Protests will be reviewed by the Department and a final
determination regarding the protest will be made within a reasonable period of
time.
         (iii)   If a protest is denied, any corrective action required by the
CAR must be performed within thirty (30) days after the date of such denial. If
the corrective action required by the CAR is not performed within thirty (30)
days of such denial, the Department may issue a summons for an uncorrected
condition upon reinspection.
   (b)   Administrative summons. Administrative summons issued by the
Department shall be returnable to the Environmental Control Board. The Office
of Administrative Trials and Hearings, acting pursuant to section 1049-a of the
New York City Charter, has the power to impose the civil penalties prescribed
by § 19-150 of the Administrative Code in accordance with the rules of such
agency.
   (c)   Suspension and Revocation. 
      (1)   In addition to any other authorized enforcement procedures, the
Commissioner may, after providing notice of intent to suspend or revoke a
license and an opportunity to be heard in accordance with paragraph (2),
suspend or revoke a license to operate a sidewalk cafe or roadway cafe and
order the removal of such sidewalk cafe or roadway cafe for 3 or more
violations of the same provision of Subchapter 1 of Chapter 1 of Title 19 of
the Administrative Code or these rules within a 2-year period, or for any 6 or
more violations of any provision of such subchapter or these rules within a 2-
year period. The Department will provide notice to the licensee of the
Department’s intent to suspend or revoke the license of such licensee no later
than 30 days prior to such suspension or revocation.
      (2)   Opportunity to Be Heard. 
         (i)   A licensee noticed by the Department with regard to the
suspension or revocation of such licensee’s license may request in writing an
opportunity to be heard. Such request must be received no later than thirty
(30) days following the date of the Department’s notice to the licensee that
the license may be suspended or revoked. Where the Department does not receive
a written request for an opportunity to be heard within such time, the
Department may revoke or suspend the license.
         (ii)   Process. 
            (A)   Where the licensee submits a timely request for an
opportunity to be heard, the Department will schedule a date and time, no later
than 30 days from the date on which the Department received such request, for
such opportunity to be heard, in person at the Department’s offices, regarding
the suspension or revocation.
            (B)   The licensee may request, in writing, copies of any evidence
relied upon by the Department in determining that the license should be
suspended or revoked. Such request must be received by the Department no later
than 14 days prior to the date of the opportunity to be heard. The Department
will provide a copy of such evidence by mail or electronic mail, as specified
by the licensee in its request, no later than 7 days prior to the date of the
opportunity to be heard.
            (C)   Requests for rescheduling by the licensee of the opportunity
to be heard must be received by the Department no later than 48 hours prior to
the originally scheduled date. If the Department approves the request for
rescheduling, a new date will be scheduled within 14 days of the original date.
            (D)   The licensee may provide affidavits in support of its
position, submitted prior to or at the opportunity to be heard, and may bring
witnesses in support of their position to the opportunity to be heard. The
Department may also supply affidavits or witnesses. Any affidavits or witnesses
will not be subject to cross-examination.
            (E)   The hearing will be conducted by an employee of the
Department designated by the Commissioner and the opportunity to be heard will
be transcribed or recorded by the Department.
            (F)   The Commissioner’s designee will (1) review the Department's
decision to issue the notice of intent to revoke or suspend the license, and
(2) provide an opportunity for the licensee to present reasons and evidence in
support of the challenge to the suspension or revocation. The Commissioner’s
designee will issue findings of fact and a recommendation following the
opportunity to be heard.
            (G)   Within 30 days of the hearing, the Commissioner or the
Commissioner’s designee, who will be an employee of DOT other than the employee
who conducted the hearing and issued the recommendation pursuant to clause (F)
of this subparagraph, will issue a final decision regarding the suspension or
revocation. Such final decision will set forth the findings of fact and
recommendation of the employee who conducted the hearing and will accept,
reject or modify such recommendation. The Department will send such final
decision to the licensee via mail or electronic mail within 5 days of issuance
of such final decision. Such final decision will constitute a final agency
determination that is subject to review by a court of competent jurisdiction
pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
      (3)   Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of this section, the
suspension or revocation of a license shall be waived if, upon the submission
of satisfactory proof, the Department determines that the person or persons who
committed the violations which are the basis for the suspension or revocation
acted against the licensee’s instructions in committing such violations.
   (d)   Removal. 
      (1)   Operating without a License. The Commissioner may order the removal
of any furniture, equipment, structure or other obstruction used in connection
with the operation of an outdoor dining area on the sidewalk or in the roadway
by a person that is not licensed to operate a sidewalk cafe or roadway cafe
pursuant to § 19-160 of the Administrative Code and has no other lawful right
to operate an outdoor dining area on such sidewalk or in such roadway.
      (2)   Noncompliance. The Commissioner may order the removal of any
furniture, equipment, structure or other obstruction placed on the sidewalk or
roadway by a licensee where such furniture, equipment, structure or other
obstruction is inconsistent with any of the requirements set forth in these
rules.
      (3)   Commissioner’s Order. 
         (i)   An order pursuant to this subdivision will be served personally
or by mail to the person and address contained in the records of the
Department. The person to whom such order is directed has an opportunity to be
heard within five (5) business days after a timely request for such opportunity
is received by the Department. A request must be made within the time and in
the manner directed on the order. If, after considering the written objections
of the respondent, the Commissioner affirms the order, the action required by
the order shall be completed within a reasonable period of time, as set forth
in such order, after notice of such determination is mailed to the respondent.
         (ii)   Where such order has not been complied with within a reasonable
period of time as set forth in such order, officers or employees of the
Department or the Police Department may remove such furniture, equipment,
structure or other obstruction from the sidewalk or the roadway and convey them
to a place of safety.
         (iii)   Where the Department has an address for the person to whom
such order was directed, within five (5) days of removal, the Department will
mail to such person notice of such removal and the manner in which such
furniture, equipment, structure or other obstruction may be claimed. In any
notification served personally or mailed pursuant to this section, the
Department will include a statement of the right to sell, dismantle, destroy or
otherwise dispose of such furniture, equipment, structure, or other obstruction
within thirty (30) days after removal if such property is not claimed.
         (iv)   Any furniture, equipment, structure, or other obstructions
removed pursuant to this section will not be released until the removal charge
and storage fee of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500) has been paid or
a bond or other security for such amount has been posted.
         (v)   Any furniture, equipment, structure, or other obstructions that
is not claimed will be sold at public auction after having been advertised in
the City Record for a period of ten (10) days. In the alternative, any such
property may be used or converted to use for the purpose of any city, state, or
federal agency, or for charitable purposes, upon consultation with the
appropriate city agencies.
         (vi)   The procedures outlined in the preceding subdivisions of this
section do not apply to furniture, equipment, structures, or other obstructions
determined by the Department to be without worth or value. The Department may
immediately dispose of such property at disposal points or places designated by
the New York City Department of Sanitation.
      (4)   Nothing in this section is intended to alter or affect the power of
the Commissioner to order the immediate removal of or remove any obstruction
from the sidewalk or roadway or the immediate correction of any violation that
the Commissioner determines is a danger to public welfare, safety, or energy
system reliability, including planned or emergency work, parades, marathons, or
other special events.
   (e)   Liability of Subsequent Licensees. 
      (1)   Any violation for operating an unlicensed sidewalk cafe or
unlicensed roadway cafe will be included in the number of violations by any
subsequent licensee at the same place of business unless such subsequent
licensee provides the Department with adequate documentation in accordance with
subdivisions (a) and (d) of § 19-160.5 of the Administrative Code,
demonstrating that such licensee acquired the premises or business through an
arm’s length transaction and that the sale or lease of such sidewalk cafe or
roadway cafe was not conducted, in whole or in part, to avoid the effect of
violations on such premises or business.
      (2)   A subsequent licensee is liable for violations by a prior licensee
unless such subsequent licensee provides the Department with adequate
documentation in accordance with subdivision (d) of § 19-160.5 of the
Administrative Code.
(Added City Record 2/2/2024, eff. 3/3/2024)
§ 5-13 Temporary Outdoor Dining Structures.*
* Editor's note: Pursuant to § 5 of the adopted rule (City Record 2/2/2024,
eff. 3/3/2024), this section expires and is deemed repealed on November 1,
2025.
   (a)   Definition. The term “temporary outdoor dining setup” means outdoor
dining facilities authorized to continue operating on the sidewalk and in the
roadway pursuant to section 10 of local law number 121 for the year 2023, and
operated pursuant to this section.
   (b)   Applicability. Pursuant to section 11 of local law number 121 for the
year of 2023, temporary outdoor dining setups that do not comply with 34 RCNY §
5-11 relating to design requirements for sidewalk cafes and roadway cafes shall
be removed by the earlier of November 1, 2024 or 30 days after a determination
of the Department to grant or deny a revocable consent for such sidewalk cafe
or roadway cafe. A restaurant operating a temporary outdoor dining setup that
does not submit a petition for a revocable consent pursuant this chapter within
five (5) months of the effective date of these rules shall immediately remove
such temporary outdoor dining setup. Any temporary outdoor dining setup that is
not removed shall be subject to penalties for the operation of a sidewalk cafe
or roadway cafe without a license and revocable consent and may be removed in
accordance with paragraph (1) of subdivision (d) of 34 RCNY §
5-12.
   (c)   Operation and Management. 
      (1)   Maintenance. Temporary outdoor dining setups shall be kept clean,
well-maintained, and clear of trash, debris, graffiti, vermin, food scraps, and
unsanitary conditions. Operators of temporary outdoor dining setups located in
the roadway shall also keep clean the area of the roadway extending one and
one-half (1 1/2) feet distance beyond the temporary outdoor dining setup on all
sides of such temporary outdoor dining setup.
      (2)   Hours of Operation. Temporary outdoor dining setups may operate
only during the following hours and days:
         Sunday, 10 a.m. to midnight
         Monday, 8 a.m. to midnight
         Tuesday, 8 a.m. to midnight
         Wednesday, 8 a.m. to midnight
         Thursday, 8 a.m. to midnight
         Friday, 8 a.m. to midnight
         Saturday, 8 a.m. to midnight
      (3)   Alcohol Consumption. No beer, alcoholic or spirituous liquors shall
be served at a temporary outdoor dining setups, unless permitted by the New
York State Liquor Authority.
      (4)   No Smoking. Smoking or using electronic cigarettes is prohibited
within temporary outdoor dining setups pursuant to subdivision (c) of § 17-503
of the Administrative Code.
      (5)   Heaters. Heating units utilized in a temporary outdoor dining setup
must comply with all applicable laws, rules, and regulations and must be
approved for use in such temporary outdoor dining setup by the New York City
Department of Buildings and New York City Fire Department. Such heating units
shall only be located within the area of the temporary outdoor dining setup.
      (6)   Good Order. Operators of temporary outdoor dining setups shall be
held strictly accountable for the maintenance of good order in the temporary
outdoor dining setup and the proper conduct of their patrons, including the
prevention of excessive congregation of such patrons within or immediately
adjacent to such temporary outdoor dining setup. Operators of temporary outdoor
dining setups must provide adequate service to maintain the tables in the
temporary outdoor dining setup and the adjacent street in a manner that ensures
good order and cleanliness.
      (7)   Accessibility. A temporary outdoor dining setup must be directly
accessible to persons with physical disabilities. The design of such setup
shall comply with applicable requirements of the Americans with Disabilities
Act and rules promulgated thereunder, and applicable requirements of the New
York City Building Code.
      (8)   Noise. 
         (i)   A licensee must comply with the New York City Noise Control
Code, Chapter 2 of Title 24 of the Administrative Code, as applicable,
including all restrictions and prohibitions relating to unreasonable noise
pursuant to subdivisions (a) and (a1) of § 24-218 of the Administrative Code.
         (ii)   No musical instruments or sound reproduction or amplification
devices shall be operated or used within a temporary outdoor dining setup,
except where authorized pursuant to a street activity permit issued pursuant to
50 RCNY
Chapter 1.
         (iii)   Where practicable, the Department may refer community noise
disputes to alternative dispute resolution through the Mediating Establishment
and Neighbor Disputes NYC program (MEND NYC), or a successor program.
      (9)   Lighting. Lighting shall illuminate only within the temporary
outdoor dining setup.
      (10)   Secure Cafe. 
         (i)   During hours when a temporary outdoor dining setup is not
operating, the licensee must secure all furnishing and decorative elements of
such dining setup, such as tables and chairs, using a cable or other locking
system. Such secured furnishings or decorative elements shall not impede or
block access to utility infrastructure or assets (e.g., utility access covers,
vent poles, control cabinets, etc.).
         (ii)   Umbrellas and coverings, if utilized, shall be secured during
inclement weather, such as high wind conditions or heavy snow events.
      (11)   Furnishing Zone. No portion of a temporary outdoor dining setup
shall be located in the furnishing zone and no items associated with such
temporary outdoor dining setup shall be placed or stored in the furnishing
zone.
      (12)   Service. An operator of a temporary outdoor dining setup shall
ensure that employees of the temporary outdoor dining setup serve patrons
solely from within the perimeters of such sidewalk cafe or roadway cafe.
   (d)   Placement. 
      (1)   Temporary outdoor dining setups shall not block or obstruct any of
the following sidewalk and roadway features:
         (i)   a bus lane or bus stop;
         (ii)   a bicycle lane;
         (iii)   a carshare or bikeshare station;
         (iv)   a taxi stand; or
         (v)   a catch basin, utility cover, sewer, rainwater drainage or flow.
      (2)   Temporary outdoor dining setups shall not be located in any of the
following designated zones on a roadway:
         (i)   No Stopping Anytime;
         (ii)   No Standing Anytime;
         (iii)   No Stopping during specific hours; or
         (iv)   No Standing during specific hours.
      (3)   Temporary outdoor dining setups shall be located at least fifteen
(15) feet from a fire hydrant and at least eight (8) feet from a crosswalk.
      (4)   Temporary outdoor dining setups must provide a clear path for
pedestrians on the sidewalk that is no less than eight (8) feet wide.
      (5)   Roadway Barriers. 
         (i)   Barriers must be maintained on all sides of a temporary outdoor
dining setup located on the roadway, except the side fronting the ground floor
restaurant.
         (ii)   All barriers must be completely filled with material (e.g.,
water, sand, etc.). Water-filled barriers are strongly recommended.
         (iii)   Barriers shall be between thirty (30) inches and thirty-six
(36) inches in height, not including the height of any plantings above such
barrier. Barriers shall be at least eighteen (18) inches in width.
         (iv)   A reflective strip must be located on each barrier, along the
entire length of the outward-facing side of such barrier.
   (e)   Temporary outdoor dining setups must be used and occupied by the
restaurant that erected them for outdoor dining. If not used and occupied for
outdoor dining for thirty (30) consecutive days or more, they must be removed
from the sidewalk and roadway by the restaurant. This includes the removal of
outdoor dining setups that are not being used during the winter months. The
Department may send a written notice to the owner to remove an unused setup
from the street or sidewalk. If the owner does not remove the setup or utilize
the setup for outdoor dining purposes within fourteen (14) days after such
notice the Department may remove the setup to a place of safety and send notice
of such removal to the owner of such restaurant if an address for such person
is available. If the property is unclaimed it may be disposed of in accordance
with the provisions of the personal property law relating to lost property. If
the property has slight or no value the Department may provide for its
immediate disposal after removal.
   (f)   The Department may order the removal of or remove any outdoor dining
setup or other obstruction that the Commissioner determines is a danger to
public welfare, safety, or energy system reliability, including for planned or
emergency work.
(Added City Record 2/2/2024, eff. 3/3/2024)
Chapter 6: General Provisions
§ 6-01 Adjudications.
New York City Department of Transportation adjudications regarding the fitness
and discipline of agency employees will be conducted by the Office of
Administrative Trials and Hearings. After conducting an adjudication and
analyzing all testimony and other evidence, the hearing officer shall make
written proposed findings of fact and recommend decisions, which shall be
reviewed and finally determined by the Commissioner.
§ 6-02 Rulemaking Petitions.
   (a)   Scope. These rules govern the procedures by which the public may
submit to the Department petitions for rulemaking pursuant to Section 1043(g)
of the New York City Charter and the procedures for the Department’s
consideration and disposition of such petitions.
   (b)   Definitions. 
      Department. The term “Department” means the New York City Department of
Transportation.
      Person. The term “Person” means an individual, partnership, corporation
or other legal entity, and any individual or entity acting in a fiduciary or
representative capacity.
      Petition. The term “Petition” means a request or application for the
Department to adopt a rule.
      Petitioner. The term “Petitioner” means the person who files a petition.
      Rule. The term “Rule” has the same meaning as in Section 1041(5) of the
New York City Charter.
   (c)   Procedures for submitting petitions. 
      (1)   Any person may submit a petition to the Department to consider the
adoption of a rule. The petition must include:
         (i)   The rule to be considered, with proposed language for adoption;
         (ii)   A statement of the Department’s authority to promulgate the
rule and the rules purpose;
         (iii)   Petitioner’s arguments in support of adoption of the rule;
         (iv)   The period of time the rule should be in effect, if applicable;
         (v)   The name, address, telephone number, and email address of the
petitioner or petitioner’s authorized representative;
         (vi)   The signature of petitioner or petitioner’s authorized
representative.
      (2)   Any change in the name, address or telephone number of petitioner
or the petitioner’s authorized representative must be reported promptly in
writing to the Department.
      (3)   All petitions must be typewritten.
      (4)   Petitions must be mailed or emailed (rules@dot.nyc.gov) to the
Department.
   (d)   Procedures for responses to petitions. 
      (1)   The Department will deny or approve the petition within 60 days
from the date the petition is received.
      (2)   The Department will either deny the petition in writing, stating
the reasons for denial, or will grant the petition by stating in writing the
Department’s intentions to initiate rulemaking by a specified date.
      (3)   In proceeding with rulemaking, the Department may, at its
discretion, amend or modify the language proposed by the petitioner.
   (e)   No appeal. The Department’s decision to deny or grant a petition is
final and not subject to judicial review.
(Added City Record 10/16/2023, eff. 11/15/2023)
Chapter 7: Revocable Consents
§ 7-01 Definitions.
Administrative Code. "Administrative Code" means the Administrative Code of the
City of New York.
Charter. "Charter" means the New York City Charter.
Commissioner. "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of the Department of
Transportation of the City of New York or his or her designee.
Department. "Department" means the Department of Transportation of the City of
New York.
DCP. "DCP" means the Department of City Planning of the City of New York.
DoITT. "DoITT" means the Department of Information Technology and
Telecommunications of the City of New York.
Improvement. "Improvement" means a tangible thing or object which may be
installed on, over or under a street, or any private use of a street.
Public Service Corporation. "Public Service Corporation" means an entity
subject to the jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission under the Public
Service Law.
Revocable Consent. "Revocable Consent" means a grant of a right, revocable at
will, (1) to any person to construct and use for private use pipes, conduits
and tunnels under, railroad tracks upon, and connecting bridges over
inalienable property, (2) to an owner of real property or, with the consent of
the owner, to a tenant of real property to use adjacent inalienable property
for the purposes stated in 34 RCNY §
7-04 or as may be permitted by rules of DoITT, or (3) to a public service
corporation for facilities ancillary to, but not within, a franchise granted
prior to July 1, 1990.
ULURP. "ULURP" means the Uniform Land Use Review Procedure as set out in
Sections 197-c and 197-d of the Charter.
§ 7-02 Requirement to Obtain a Revocable Consent.
With the exception of the city of New York and/or its agents, no person or
entity shall install or maintain any of the improvements listed in 34 RCNY §
7-04 without first obtaining a revocable consent from the Department. The
Department shall not issue a revocable consent for any improvement which, in
the judgment of DCP, has land use impacts or implications, unless such
revocable consent has been reviewed and approved pursuant to ULURP. Revocable
consents may not be assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed without the
prior written approval of the Commissioner.
§ 7-03 DCP Review.
   (a)   The Department shall submit to DCP petitions for those improvements
listed in 34 RCNY §
7-04(a) that do not meet the locational or dimensional standards in such 34
RCNY §
7-04(a). The Department shall also submit to DCP all petitions for the
following improvements: bridge, above-ground cable, guard booth, information
sign/kiosk, parking area for private use, and above-ground pipe/fuel line.
   (b)   DCP shall review each petition submitted by the Department to
determine whether or not a proposed revocable consent has land use impacts or
implications and whether, as a result, ULURP applies, and shall notify the
Department of its determination. The Department shall notify the petitioner of
the determination by DCP regarding the applicability of ULURP and shall stay
its final decision pending ULURP approval.
   (c)   If ULURP is required, the petitioner shall obtain information and
application forms pertaining to ULURP from DCP and file a ULURP application
with DCP in accordance with the rules governing ULURP.
   (d)   No revocable consent shall be granted by the Department if the
application for such consent has been disapproved pursuant to ULURP. A
revocable consent may be granted by the Department if the application for such
consent has been approved pursuant to ULURP or if DCP determines the proposed
improvement has no land use impacts.
   (e)   The Department shall submit to DCP for review any petition for a
renewal or amendment for an improvement listed in 34 RCNY §
7-04(a) where:
      (1)   such renewal or amendment includes a modification that does not
meet a locational or dimensional standard in 34 RCNY §
7-04(a) or increases the degree of non-compliance with such locational or
dimensional standard; or
      (2)   such petition is for a bridge, above-ground cable, guard booth,
information sign/kiosk, parking area for private use, above-ground pipe/fuel
line, and the renewal or amendment includes a modification to the location or
an increase in the dimension of such improvement; or
      (3)   such petition is for a renewal or amendment of a consent that was
approved by the City Planning Commission for a specific term, and the renewal
or amendment would extend the consent beyond the term approved by the
Commission.
§ 7-04 Eligible Improvements; Standards; Annual Rates.
   (a)   The Commissioner may, in his or her discretion, grant, renew, modify,
or rescind revocable consents for any of the improvements listed in this
subdivision to be constructed or maintained on, over, or under City streets, in
accordance with the requirements set forth in Section 364 of the Charter.
Except as otherwise provided, annual compensation for the improvements listed
in this subdivision shall be as set forth herein and, unless otherwise
provided, shall not increase during the term of the revocable consent.
      (1)   Accessibility lift to provide access for people with disabilities.
         (i)   Standard. The lift shall be stored at the building end of its
run and shall include appropriate safety devices. The lift shall not extend
more than five and one half feet in the direction of the curb from the base of
the steps when in use. In no instance shall the lift or any portion thereof
extend beyond the curbline when in use.
         (ii)   Annual rate. $25. The annual fee for an accessibility lift
shall be in addition to the normal fee for a stoop or stairway.
      (2)   Bench.
         (i)   Standard. No bench shall be greater than six feet in length.
Benches greater than four feet in length shall be designed to discourage people
from reclining. Benches adjacent and parallel to the building shall be
installed no more than six inches from the building face and, if multiple
benches are installed, they shall be at least three feet apart. A bench which
is not anchored to the sidewalk shall be placed against the building face
during hours that the benefited property is open to the public and shall be
stored inside the building when the building is closed.
         (ii)   Annual rate. $150.
      (3)   Bridge.
         (i)   To be referred to DCP to determine whether the improvement has
land use impacts.
         (ii)   Annual rate. See 34 RCNY §
7-10. If the structure is not in use, the rate shall be 10% of the rate in
effect pursuant to the formulas described in 34 RCNY §
7-10.
      (4)   Cable, above-ground.
         (i)   To be referred to DCP to determine whether the improvement has
land use impacts.
         (ii)   Annual rate. See 34 RCNY §
7-10.
      (5)   Cellar door, including stair.
         (i)   Standard. All cellar doors required by § 27-292(b)(4) of the
Administrative Code shall be constructed pursuant to the requirements of the
Administrative Code.
         (ii)   Annual rate. See 34 RCNY §
7-10.
      (6)   Clock.
         (i)   Standard. The base shall be no more than 18 inches in diameter.
The lowest portion of the clock face shall be at least eight feet above the
sidewalk. The overall height of the clock shall not exceed 15 feet. The
clockface shall be no more than two feet in diameter. Time shall be maintained
accurately. The name or logo and address of the adjacent premises may be
displayed on the clockface; however, the total display space shall be no
greater than one third of the square footage of the clockface.
         (ii)   Annual rate. $300.
      (7)   Conduit and underground cable.
         (i)   Standard. All conduit shall be underground.
         (ii)   Annual rate. See 34 RCNY §
7-10.
      (8)   Electrical socket.
         (i)   Standard. All electrical sockets shall be installed pursuant to
the requirements of the New York City Department of Buildings.
         (ii)   Annual rate. $25.
      (9)   Enclosure for trash receptacle, adjoining a building, for private
use.
         (i)   Standard. The enclosure shall be of non-flammable construction
and shall be rodent proof. The enclosure shall be between three feet and five
feet high, except in areas in the Bronx, Queens, Brooklyn and Staten Island
zoned for manufacturing, mixed-use (MX), special purpose districts which allow
manufacturing, or for automotive or other heavy commercial uses (C8), where the
enclosure shall be between three feet and ten feet high, and shall be securely
affixed to the sidewalk, fence, building, or other appropriate fixture.
         (ii)   Annual rate. The greater of $5 per square foot of area, as
projected onto a horizontal plane or $25, except in areas zoned for
manufacturing, where the annual rate shall be $1 per square foot of area, as
projected onto a horizontal plane.
      (10)   Fenced or walled-in area, including the enclosing structure, not
used for planting or parking, including a fenced or walled-in area containing a
drainage basin or a shopping cart storage area. An area enclosed by a privately
installed guard rail shall be deemed a fenced-in area and shall be subject to
the standards below. Fences may be approved for no more than one year pursuant
to the provisions 34 RCNY §
2-10, provided the placement of such fences is for temporary security purposes.
         (i)   Standard.
            (A)   The fence shall be no fewer than three and no greater than
four feet high in residential and commercial zoning districts and shall be no
fewer than three and no greater than ten feet high in manufacturing zoning
districts, as such zoning districts are set forth in the Zoning Resolution,
except that athletic play field fences may extend as high as 15 feet. Smooth
edged finials may be attached to fence posts up to a maximum height of four
feet, six inches in residential or commercial zoning districts. No chisel
points or spikes shall be included on fences shorter than eight feet, except as
approved by the Landmarks Preservation Commission.
            (B)   The fence shall be constructed of non-flammable, non-wood
material. The use of opaque material (such as masonry) is limited to the base
of the fence up to 21 inches in height and to vertical columns spaced at least
five feet apart. Solid or opaque materials may comprise no more than 35 percent
of the total vertical area of the fence above any opaque base. For metal
fences, picket interspace shall measure between four and five and three-
quarters inches, and picket width may measure up to one inch wide. Chain-link,
where approved, shall have a two inch mesh and shall not include screening.
Barbed wire is permitted in manufacturing zoning districts only. Razor wire is
prohibited.
            (C)   No sign shall be attached to a fence.
         (ii)   Annual rate.
            (A)   Except as provided in 34 RCNY §
7-04(a)(10)(ii)(B), below, the first year's annual rate shall be the greater of
$1,500 or (C × L × 0.16 × A), as defined in 34 RCNY §
7-10(a), and subsequent years' rates shall be determined in accordance with 34
RCNY §
7-10(c).
            (B)   For non-commercial use connected to a residential building of
six or fewer units, the greater of $100 or (C × L × 0.01 × A), as defined in 34
RCNY §
7-10(a).
      (11)   Flagpole.
         (i)   Standard. The base shall be no larger than 18 inches in diameter
and no fewer than 30 inches in height.
         (ii)   Annual rate. None (pursuant to § 19-125(e) of the
Administrative Code).
      (12)   Guard booth.
         (i)   To be referred to DCP to determine whether the improvement has
land use impacts.
         (ii)   Annual rate. See 34 RCNY §
7-10.
      (13)   Information sign or kiosk.
         (i)   To be referred to DCP to determine whether the improvement has
land use impacts.
         (ii)   Annual rate. See 34 RCNY §
7-10.
      (14)   Litter receptacle for public use.
         (i)   Standard. The litter receptacle shall be constructed of non-
flammable, non-wood material and shall be securely affixed to the sidewalk or
sufficiently heavy to prevent movement without considerable force. The minimum
height of the receptacle shall be two feet, six inches, the maximum height
shall be four feet and the maximum width shall be three feet, with an overall
area not to exceed nine square feet. No side of the receptacle shall exceed
three feet in width. The litter receptacle may include the grantee's logo and/
or building or institution name no greater than one square foot in size, if the
receptacle is adjacent to the named property.
         (ii)   Annual rate. $25.
      (15)   Overhead Building Projection in excess of that allowed by the
Administrative Code.
         (i)   Standard. Overhead building projections shall be permitted over
the street provided the minimum height above the sidewalk is ten feet and the
depth of the projection does not exceed three feet ten inches, inclusive of any
depth permitted by § 27-313(a) of the Administrative Code, to a height 30 feet
above the sidewalk. Above 30 vertical feet the permitted depth shall be four
feet, ten inches, inclusive of any depth permitted by the Administrative Code.
Except for architectural details such as cornices, brackets and belt courses,
which may extend across the full street frontage of a building, projections
shall not have an aggregate width at any level of the building greater than 50
percent of the building frontage. Projections containing floor area shall be
referred to DCP.
         (ii)   Annual rate. See 34 RCNY §
7-10.
      (16)   Parking area for private use for non-residential property (if
there is no charge to vehicle operator).
         (i)   To be referred to DCP to determine whether the improvement has
land use impacts.
         (ii)   Annual rate. The first year's annual rate shall be the greater
of $600 or (C × L × 0.36 × A), as defined in 34 RCNY §
7-10(a) of these rules, and subsequent years' rates shall be determined in
accordance with 34 RCNY §
7-10(c).
      (17)   Pipe or fuel pipeline, above-ground.
         (i)   To be referred to DCP to determine whether the improvement has
land use impacts.
         (ii)   Annual rate. See 34 RCNY §
7-10. If the grantee is not using the structure, the Department may set rates
without reference to the formulas described in 34 RCNY §
7-10.
      (18)   Planted area, including any surrounding fence or wall.
         (i)   Standard. Live vegetation shall occupy 80 percent of the area.
No vegetation may overhang a sidewalk beyond the boundary of the planted area,
including any fence, unless the overhanging vegetation is at least eight feet
above the adjacent sidewalk area. No rocks, timbers, wickets (hoops) or other
trip hazards shall serve as a border. Any surrounding fence or wall shall
conform to the standards provided in item (10), above.
         (ii)   Annual rate. The greater of $2 per square foot of area, as
projected onto a horizontal plane, or $25.
      (19)   Planters.
         (i)   Standard.
            (A)   The planter shall be no fewer than 18 and no greater than 48
inches high. The maximum area, measured at the planter's widest point, shall be
25 square feet, and the maximum dimension of the planter shall be five feet
along the side which is perpendicular to the curb or eight feet along the side
which is parallel to the curb. (Planters installed against the building face
may be continuous.)
            (B)   If a planter is proposed to be placed above a sidewalk vault,
a professional engineer shall certify that the sidewalk can support a 600-pound
per square foot live load.
            (C)   No planter shall be constructed of wood. Wood cladding of
other planter types is permitted if such cladding is fireproof and graffiti
resistant. Concrete tubs, two inches thick, are recommended.
            (D)   The Department recommends the planting of small shrubs and
flowers as they require less maintenance and are hardier than small trees. No
woody growth shall overhang the edge of the planter. Suggested tree species for
planters are: Crab Apples (Florida Snow Drift); Euonymus Pateris (Shrub); Taxus
O. Densifornius (Japanese Yew); Scotch Pine; Austrian Pine; Ilex Meserva;
Cornus Mass (Corneliean Dogwood); Syringia Reticulata (Japanese Tree Lilac);
Prunus Sargentii (Columnaris); Acer Ginnala (Amur Maple); Acer Truncatum;
Viburnum Sieboldii (Tree Form Viburnum).
            (E)   Planters shall be maintained, shall contain live plants at
all times and shall be kept free of debris and graffiti.
         (ii)   Annual rate. The greater of $2 per square foot of area as
projected onto a horizontal plane, or $25 per planter.
      (20)   Post, pole or bollard not otherwise governed by permit procedures
contained in § 19-125 of the Administrative Code.
         (i)   Standard. The post, pole or bollard shall be no fewer than 30
inches high, no greater than 48 inches high, and no greater than 18 inches in
diameter. If more than one post, pole or bollard is to be installed, they shall
be at least four feet apart and shall not be joined with horizontal members. If
a concrete-filled pipe design is used, it shall be capped or smoothed.
         (ii)   Annual rate.
            (A)   $125 each, minimum of $500 per consent.
            (B)   Post, pole or bollard adjacent to a building containing a
marquee pursuant to a permit granted by the Department of Buildings, $25 each,
minimum of $100 per consent.
      (21)   Public service corporation facility ancillary to, but not within,
a franchise granted prior to July 1, 1990.
         (i)   Standard. Refer to standards in this section for individual
structures.
         (ii)   Annual rate. See 34 RCNY §
7-10. When calculating the annual rate pursuant to this paragraph, "E" will be
reduced by 15%. This rate shall not apply to revocable consents approved as
provided in subdivision (b) of this section.
      (22)   Railroad tracks for private use.
         (i)   Standard. Railroad tracks shall be located in an M or C8 zoning
district outside any area improved for vehicular or pedestrian use, except that
tracks may cross an existing or future driveway with the permission of the
property owner served by such driveway.
         (ii)   Annual rate. The first year's annual rate shall be the greater
of $500 or (C × L × 0.04 × A), as defined in 34 RCNY §
7-10(a) of these rules, and subsequent years' rates shall be determined in
accordance with 34 RCNY §
7-10(c).
      (23)   Ramp intended to provide access for people with disabilities.
         (i)   Standard.
            (A)   The Department may grant a revocable consent for a ramp which
extends more than 44 inches from the building line for buildings erected prior
to December 6, 1969, including any additional steps attached or ancillary to
the ramp structure made necessary by the creation of the ramp. (§ 27-308 of the
Administrative Code permits ramps to extend up to 44 inches from the building
line for such buildings.) (Buildings erected after December 6, 1969 must
contain ramps within the property line.)
            (B)   In the case of buildings erected between December 6, 1969 and
September 5, 1987, the Department may grant a revocable consent for a ramp
which extends more than 44 inches from the building line if the ramp will make
a primary entrance to the building accessible.
            (C)   The ramp shall conform to the standards of the Americans With
Disabilities Act, 36 C.F.R. Part 1191, and § 27-308 of the Administrative Code.
A canopy may be erected above the ramp provided such canopy does not fully
enclose the ramp and provided such ramp is adequately illuminated and complies
with all other applicable regulations.
         (ii)   Annual rate. $25.
      (24)   Retaining walls.
         (i)   Standard. Retaining walls may be constructed only where
warranted by existing grade or by a change in grade undertaken with prior
approval by the Department of Buildings.
         (ii)   Annual rate. See 34 RCNY §
7-10.
      (25)   Sidewalk plaque or logo.
         (i)   Standard. The size of the logo or plaque shall not exceed nine
square feet with a maximum dimension of three feet along any side. The plaque
or logo shall be limited in design and content to a symbol or other element
referring to or naming the adjoining property owner, a district organization,
the district/neighborhood character, or consistent with an area-wide way-
finding graphic design system. The plaque or logo shall consist of material
that provides a stable, firm and slip-resistant surface and shall be installed
flush with the sidewalk surface.
         (ii)   Annual rate. $300 per plaque or logo.
      (26)   Socket with removable poles, posts, or similar devices, including
any connecting devices such as ropes, ribbons, horizontal poles, and the area
thereby enclosed.
         (i)   Standard. Sockets shall be flush with the sidewalk and fitted
with spring-mounted flush covers. Posts or poles shall be no fewer than 30
inches and no greater than 48 inches high, including any connecting devices.
         (ii)   Annual rate. The first year's annual rate shall be the greater
of $750 or (C × L × 0.16 × A), as defined in 34 RCNY §
7-10(a), where A is the area of the enclosed area, and subsequent years' rates
shall be determined in accordance with 34 RCNY §
7-10(c).
      (27)   Stoop, step, ramp, vestibule or other entrance detail extending
beyond limits set in Articles 8 and 9 of Subchapter 4 of Chapter 1 of Title 27
of the Administrative Code, other than a ramp described in 34 RCNY §
7-04 (a)(23) or a stoop or other improvement described in 34 RCNY §
7-04 (a)(29).
         (i)   Standard. Such structures shall be constructed pursuant to the
requirements of the New York City Department of Buildings and shall have a
maximum width of eight feet and shall extend as far as such structures on
adjacent buildings.
         (ii)   Annual rate. See 34 RCNY §
7-10.
      (28)   Stoop or any other improvement eligible for a revocable consent
pursuant to these rules and adjacent to a building which is located within a
designated New York City historic district or which is a designated New York
City landmark.
         (i)   Standard. No revocable consent shall be granted for such a
structure located in a designated New York City historic district or attached
to a designated New York City landmark building without the prior written
approval of the Landmarks Preservation Commission pursuant to Chapter 3 of
Title 25 of the Administrative Code. Refer to standards in this section for
individual structures.
         (ii)   Annual rate. $25 for residential buildings with fewer than six
units. For all other buildings, see the appropriate paragraph of this
subdivision.
      (29)   Street lamp or light fixture.
         (i)   Standard. Street lamps or light fixtures which replace or
augment existing lighting shall be placed and illuminated as approved by the
Department's Division of Street Lighting. The base shall be no greater than 18
inches in diameter. Hours of illumination shall coincide with those of the
City's street lights.
         (ii)   Annual rate. $150.
      (30)   Tunnel.
         (i)   Standard. All tunnels and related structures shall be
constructed underground or within the adjacent building pursuant to the
requirements of the New York City Department of Buildings.
         (ii)   Annual rate. See 34 RCNY §
7-10. If the structure is not in use, the rate shall be 10% of the rate in
effect pursuant to the formulas described in 34 RCNY §
7-10.
      (31)   Vault extending beyond the curbline or underground improvement not
otherwise governed by license procedures contained in § 19-117 of the
Administrative Code.
         (i)   Standard. All vaults shall be constructed underground pursuant
to the requirements of the New York City Department of Buildings.
         (ii)   Annual rate. See 34 RCNY §
7-10.
      (32)   Any improvement listed in 34 RCNY §
7-04  for which a consent is proposed to be granted where the grantee has filed
an application concerning the subject property pursuant to § 4-105 of the
Administrative Code, or any improvement listed in 34 RCNY §
7-04 where the construction of such improvement was funded 50 percent or more
by a City agency.
         (i)   Standard. Refer to standards listed above for individual
structures.
         (ii)   Annual rate. The Department may set rates for such consents
without reference to the formulas described in 34 RCNY §
7-10; such rates shall be set forth in the agreements memorializing the
consents.
      (33)   Any improvement listed in 34 RCNY §
7-04 which has been approved for use for security purposes by the New York City
Police Department.
         (i)   Standard. Refer to standards listed above for individual
structures.
         (ii)   Annual rate. None.
         (iii)   This paragraph shall not be construed to apply to any
improvement(s) listed in paragraph 35 of subdivision (a) of 34 RCNY §
7-04.
      (34)   Upon approval by the Public Design Commission, any work of art
that is fully integrated into an improvement listed in 34 RCNY §
7-04.
         (i)   Standard. Such an improvement with an integrated art element
must adhere to the standards listed in this section for individual structures.
         (ii)   Annual rate. 50% reduction to the annual rate listed in this
section for individual structures.
      (35)   Portions of the street used in connection with loading docks, bays
or other like facilities for loading and unloading of goods and materials of or
for the use of foreign, domestic or multinational governmental entities, where,
in the judgment of the New York City Police Department, the location of such
facility is necessary due to security concerns applicable to such entity.
         (i)   To be referred to DCP to determine whether the improvement has
land use impacts.
         (ii)   Annual rate. An amount determined by the Department to be
adequate compensation.
      (36)   Bicycle racks.
         (i)   Standard. All bicycle racks shall be installed in compliance
with the general conditions set forth in 34 RCNY §
7-06. A request that adheres to minimum clearances may nonetheless be denied by
the Department if the bicycle rack would interfere with the safe passage of
pedestrians.
         (ii)   Annual rate. $25
      (37)   Any improvement that has been certified by a New York State
Licensed Professional Engineer as a component of a flood mitigation system as
defined in 34 RCNY §
2-10.
         (i)   Standard.
            (A)   The Department may grant a revocable consent for flood
mitigation system components. Except in the case of a public service
corporation facility, a revocable consent will only be granted to a petitioner:
               (a)   for the protection of a building or portion of a building
under this paragraph where such building or portion of a building was erected
prior to January 8, 2015 or where a lawful building permit was issued by the
Department of Buildings for the erection of such building prior to January 8,
2016; or
               (b)   for the protection of a building or portion of a building
located within an area of special flood hazard, as such term is defined in
section G201.2 of Appendix G of the New York City Building Code.
            (B)   Such improvements shall be designed and constructed in
compliance with the requirements of the New York City Department of Buildings
and any other applicable requirements of or terms and conditions of approvals
issued by other City entities. The Department will consult with the New York
City Department of Environmental Protection and any other agency the Department
deems necessary or desirable regarding an application for a revocable consent
for flood mitigation system components prior to its approval of such
application.
         (ii)   Fee. $2,000. This fee shall apply to the initial revocable
consent application and shall not apply to renewal applications so long as the
design of the improvement has not changed.
      (38)   Electric micromobility device battery swapping and charging
cabinet. 
         (i)   Standard. 
            (A)   An electric micromobility device battery swapping and
charging cabinet may be installed adjacent to:
               1.   A building where the ground floor has a non-residential
use; or
               2.   A residential building with five or more dwelling units.
            (B)   The height of each electric micromobility device battery
swapping and charging cabinet shall not exceed eight feet and five inches. The
width of each such cabinet shall not exceed four feet. The depth of each such
cabinet shall not exceed four feet.
            (C)   An electric micromobility device battery swapping and
charging cabinet shall be securely affixed to the ground.
            (D)   The distance between any two electric micromobility device
swapping and charging cabinets shall be a minimum of three feet, unless
otherwise approved by the New York City Fire Department.
            (E)   An electric micromobility device battery swapping and
charging cabinet may be installed above a sidewalk vault where:
               1.   Such sidewalk vault is licensed pursuant to § 19-117 of the
Administrative Code; and
               2.   A registered design professional, as defined in § 28-101.5
of the Administrative Code, has certified that such sidewalk vault has been
inspected and that the sidewalk above such vault can safely support the
electric micromobility device battery swapping and charging cabinet.
            (F)   An electric micromobility device battery swapping and
charging cabinet may be installed adjacent to a 90-degree or angled parking
spot, provided that bollards in accordance with 34 RCNY §
7-04(a)(20) shall be installed between the electric micromobility device
battery swapping and charging cabinet and such parking spot.
            (G)   No revocable consent shall be granted for an electric
micromobility device battery swapping and charging cabinet without the prior
written approval of the New York City Fire Department.
         (ii)   Annual rate. $25.
   (b)   Other improvements approved by the Board of Estimate. Revocable
consents that were granted by the Board of Estimate prior to July 1, 1990 for
private improvements which are not listed in subdivision (a) above may be
renewed, amended, or revoked by the Commissioner in his or her sole discretion,
provided that any renewal or amendment shall be submitted to DCP when required
pursuant to 34 RCNY §
7-03. In each year of such consent, the annual rate shall increase by the
average of the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers in New York and New
Jersey published by the U.S. Department of Labor's Bureau of Labor Statistics
("CPI") increase for the ten years prior to the date of the renewal of the
consent. For consents granted pursuant to this subdivision to public service
corporations, their annual rate increase shall be reduced by 15%.
   (c)   Compliance with requirements. All improvements for which a revocable
consent is granted shall comply with the general conditions in 34 RCNY §
7-06.
(Amended City Record 2/4/2016, eff. 3/5/2016; amended City Record 1/2/2025,
eff. 2/1/2025)
§ 7-05 Revocable Consents for Telecommunications Purposes.
Petitions for revocable consents for telecommunications purposes shall be
reviewed and may be granted by DoITT, subject to approval by the Department and
review by DCP, where appropriate. Petitions for such consents shall be filed
with the Department and shall be forwarded by the Department to DoITT for
processing. Petitioners shall submit any additional information which may be
required by DoITT.
§ 7-06 General Conditions.
   (a)   Advertising prohibited. No advertising shall appear on any improvement
which is the subject of a revocable consent agreement.
   (b)   Maintenance. Graffiti shall be removed within seven days of
appearance. Art Commission approved colors shall be used and maintained.
Sidewalks fronting the entire property must be in good condition, without
violations or illegal encroachments.
   (c)   Clearances for above-ground structures.
      (1)   Corner clearance policy. No revocable consent will be granted for
above-ground structures located within the corner quadrant (the area ten feet
from either side of the area created by extending the building line to the
curb) pursuant to Executive Order #22 of 4/13/95, as amended.
      (2)   Improvements shall be at least 18 inches from the curb line (front
face of curb).
      (3)   Clear path. A straight unobstructed path ("clear path") for
pedestrian circulation on the sidewalk shall remain after the installation of
the improvement. The minimum width of the clear path shall be the greater of
eight feet or one-half of the sidewalk width. The minimum width of the clear
path shall be the greater of ten and one-half feet or one-half of the sidewalk
width where a bench, information kiosk or bicycle rack with bicycles parallel
to the curb or a queuing area enclosed by poles abuts the clear path. The
minimum width of the clear path shall be the greater of 12 1/2 feet or one-half
of the sidewalk width where a bicycle rack with bicycles perpendicular to the
curb abuts the clear path. The clear path shall be maintained for 15 feet to
either side of the improvement. When possible, the improvement shall abut, be
aligned with, or be located between other major obstructions such as subway
entrances, bus stop shelters, newsstands, and sidewalk cafes.
      (4)   Improvements shall not be located under fire escapes.
      (5)   (i)   The following minimum distances shall be required between the
revocable consent improvement and the specified element or object, except as
otherwise specified herein:
Subway Entrance (open side)                                  15'
Sidewalk Cafes                                               15'
Newsstand                                                    15'
Bus Stop (with/without shelter)                              15'
Fire Hydrant/Standpipe                                       10'
Driveway                                                     10'
Bicycle Rack (including all bicycles)                        8'
Street Tree                                                  5'
Bench                                                        5'
Principal Building Entrance                                  5'
Ramp intended to provide access for people with disabilities 5'
Subway Entrance (closed end or side)                         5'
Public Telephone                                             5'
Planters on the sidewalk not adjacent to the building facade 5'
Mail Box                                                     4'
Street Lights                                                4'
Parking Meters                                               4'
Edge of Tree Pit                                             3'
Street Signs                                                 3'
Utility Hole Covers, Cellar Doors, Areaways                  3'
Transformer Vault, Sidewalk Grates                           3'
All Other Legal Street Furniture                             5'
 
         (ii)   Benches, information kiosks, litter receptacles, mail boxes,
planters and public telephones may be located in an aligned grouping with a
reduced minimum clearance between them of three feet. Other structures may be
incorporated into such groupings provided the minimum clearances in
subparagraph (i) above are provided. In no case shall such groupings extend for
a length greater than 30 feet along the sidewalk. The listed elements may also
be combined, without separation, into a single structure provided the overall
length of such unitary structure and any other of the listed elements outside
the grouping or unitary structure shall be no more than 15 feet. In no case
shall a grouping or unitary structure be less than 15 feet from another
grouping or unitary structure.
   (d)   Waiver.
      (1)   Where strict compliance with these rules shall create undue
hardship, the Commissioner may waive or modify these rules, in specific cases,
except where prohibited by law, if in his/her opinion, the public health,
safety and general welfare will not be endangered thereby. The petitioner shall
request such waiver in writing and shall provide any information requested by
the Department which may assist the Commissioner in his or her determination.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the above provisions, prior to waiving the
standards or rules related to the location or dimensions of improvements, the
Department shall refer the proposed change to DCP for review.
§ 7-07 Application Requirements.
   (a)   Petition form. An application for a new revocable consent or for a
renewal, modification, assignment or rescission of an existing revocable
consent shall be made on a petition form obtained from the Department, and
shall be signed by the petitioner or a person authorized to enter into binding
agreements on behalf of the petitioner. In the case of a new consent, the
petitioner shall submit the original plus ten copies of the completed form; in
the case of a renewal, modification, assignment or rescission, petitioner shall
submit the original plus five copies.
   (b)   Business certificates. The petitioner shall submit a copy of any
applicable business certificate, such as a certificate of incorporation or
partnership certificate. With respect to petitions for an assignment or
transfer of a revocable consent, the petitioner shall submit a copy of the
business certificate of the assignee or transferee.
   (c)   Plans.
      (1)   Paper or mylar prints of a plan shall be submitted in the
equivalent number of prints as are required for the petition form. Each plan
print shall measure 18 by 24 inches unless otherwise authorized by the
Department.
      (2)   The plan shall bear the seal of a Professional Engineer or
Registered Architect licensed by the State of New York.
      (3)   The plan shall be drawn to scale and shall indicate the block and
lot number of the property of the petitioner. The plan shall indicate in detail
the method of construction, applicable technical information, and the materials
to be used. A title box shall be placed on the right hand side of each sheet
containing the words "Plan Showing Location of Proposed (structure type) to be
Constructed in (name of street), Borough of (borough), to Accompany Application
of (petitioner's name), dated (petition date), to the Department of
Transportation of the City of New York" and shall indicate the date it was
prepared and any subsequent revisions.
      (4)   All details of existing structures shall be shown in standard line
thickness. All proposed new construction and existing structures which are the
subject of the petition shall be plainly shown in red. Proposed removals or
relocations, if any, of existing conduits, pipes lines, or other structures
shall be clearly indicated by red dashed lines.
      (5)   The plan shall show the building lines and curb lines, railroad
tracks, and, if applicable, any electrical conduits, sewers and other
substructures in the street which may be affected in any manner by the proposed
construction. All such information shall be obtained and verified by the
petitioner. The location, character and dimensions of all such structures and
substructures shall be accurately shown and indicated by dimensions on the
plan.
      (6)   The plan shall include longitudinal and transverse sections to show
the relative position of the existing structures in the street and the proposed
new construction.
      (7)   The applicant shall provide photographs of the existing conditions
and may be required to provide photo simulations of the proposed structure and
its surroundings as they would appear after installation.
      (8)   The plan shall also include the Professional Engineer's or
Registered Architect's estimate of the current cost to remove or deactivate the
proposed improvement and restore all sidewalks and pavements to current
Department standards for new construction. Alternatively, the cost of removal
may be provided on a separate sheet of paper provided that it is signed and
sealed by a Professional Engineer or Registered Architect.
      (9)   Following the installation of any improvement for which a consent
has been granted, the petitioner shall submit to the Department two copies of a
plan indicating the "as built" condition. Such plan shall include any changes
approved by the Department, with any deviations from the original plan shown by
a double red line. Such plan shall be signed, sealed and dated by a
Professional Engineer, Registered Architect or a Licensed Land Surveyor and
shall include a certification which reads: "This drawing represents the as-
built condition and shows the actual location of all subsurface conditions
uncovered during this installation."
   (d)   Pedestrian congestion. The Department may require a petitioner to
submit additional information concerning pedestrian density and volume as well
as the width of the usable pedestrian path at the site of a proposed revocable
consent structure. The Department may require that such information include a
pedestrian flow analysis conducted according to the performance standards
described in the Transportation Research Board's Highway Capacity Manual
chapter on pedestrian flow.
   (e)   Additional copies and information. Upon the request of the Department,
the petitioner shall provide additional copies of the petition and/or plan. The
petitioner shall also provide any additional supporting information requested
by the Department or by DCP, where referral has been made to DCP.
   (f)   Waiver of plan requirements. For petitions concerning minor
improvements, such as planters, trash and litter receptacles, or benches, the
Department may waive the requirement that the plan be prepared by a
Professional Engineer or Registered Architect where such submission is not
otherwise required by law, and where the petitioner has requested a waiver in
writing.
   (g)   Exception. The requirements of this section shall not apply to
revocable consents for public service corporation facilities ancillary to, but
not within, a franchise, if the revocable consent covers multiple structures
whose locations are not known at the time of the granting of the consent. Plans
for each such structure shall be submitted prior to construction and shall meet
the requirements of 34 RCNY
Chapter 2 of the Rules of the City of New York.
§ 7-08 Filing Fees.
   (a)   General information. Filing fees for petitions shall be submitted with
the petition form and any required plans or supporting documents. Filing fees
shall be non-refundable.
   (b)   Specified improvements. The filing fees listed in this paragraph shall
apply to petitions for the following specified types of improvements:
accessibility lift; bench; enclosure for trash receptacle; litter receptacle;
planted area; planter; ramp intended to provide access for people with
disabilities; stoop or step; or any improvement which has been approved by the
Landmarks Preservation Commission:
      (1)   initial petition:.....$100.00
      (2)   renewal:.....$100.00
      (3)   modification:.....$100.00
      (4)   assignment or transfer:.....$100.00
      (5)   rescission:.....$100.00
   (c)   All other improvements, except for improvements approved for use for
security purposes by the New York City Police Department.
      (1)   initial petition:.....$750.00
         (i)   initial petition with a Special Street Plan Type F application
with proof of payment of a fee in excess of $650.00:.....$100.00
      (2)   renewal:.....$500.00
      (3)   modification
         (i)   contractual:.....$375.00
         (ii)   structural:.....$550.00
      (4)   assignment or transfer:.....$200.00
      (5)   rescission:.....$375.00
   (d)   Improvements approved for use for security purposes by the New York
City Police Department. Filing fees shall not apply to any improvements
approved for use for security purposes by the New York City Police Department.
§ 7-09 Action by the Department.
   (a)   The Department shall, within 30 calendar days of receipt of a complete
petition for a revocable consent, forward a copy of such petition to: the
Borough President for the borough in which the proposed improvement is to be
located; all Community Boards in whose districts the proposed improvement is to
be located; DCP, if required to do so pursuant to 34 RCNY §
7-03; and all other City agencies affected by the proposed consent. The
Department shall allow 30 calendar days for the Borough President, Community
Board, and other affected agencies to comment on the petition.
   (b)   The Department shall inform the petitioner in writing of all
objections. Review of the petition shall be stayed until all objections are
resolved. The petitioner shall be given the opportunity to revise the petition
or plan in order to resolve the objection(s). If any objection has not been
resolved within 90 days from the date the petitioner was informed of the latest
objection, such petition may, in the discretion of the Department, be deemed to
have been withdrawn.
   (c)   Prior to granting any revocable consent or renewal or modification to
the location or an increase in the dimension of an improvement, the Department
shall hold a public hearing on the terms and conditions of the proposed
revocable consent agreement. Notice of such hearing shall be published by the
Department at the expense of the petitioner in accordance with Section 371 of
the Charter.
   (d)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Department may deny a petition for
a revocable consent without a hearing if, in the sole judgment of the
Commissioner, the grant of such consent would interfere with the use of the
inalienable property of the City (including streets and sidewalks) for public
purpose or would otherwise not be in the best interest of the City.
   (e)   The revocable consent agreement shall be filed by the Department with
the appropriate County Clerk.
§ 7-10 Annual Rate Schedule for Revocable Consent Improvements.
For all improvements that do not have an annual rate set forth in 34 RCNY §
7-04(a), the annual rate of compensation for the first year of the term of each
revocable consent shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
   (a)   Definitions and variables. 
      "A" means the maximum area of the improvement for which a consent has
been or is proposed to be granted, as projected onto a horizontal plane (the
"footprint").
      "Benefited Property" means the real property which is adjacent to the
improvement for which a revocable consent has been or is proposed to be
granted, and which is benefited by the improvement.
      "C" means 100 percent plus the percent change (plus or minus) in the
Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers in New York and New Jersey
published by the U.S. Department of Labor's Bureau of Labor Statistics ("CPI")
on July 1 of the year for which the revocable consent annual rate is being
calculated, compared to the CPI on July 1, 2003.
      "E" means the standard escalating factor, which shall be a percentage
equal to the average annual percentage increase in the CPI for the ten years
immediately preceding the year for which the standard escalating factor is
being determined; the Department shall determine the standard escalating factor
on July 1 of the year to be applied to all consents granted or renewed between
that July 1 and the next succeeding June 30, inclusive.
      "L" means the Current Transitional Assessed Value or the Actual Assessed
Value, whichever is lower, of the Benefited Property, in its unimproved state
(in dollars and cents per square foot); provided, however, that if there is
more than one Benefited Property, "L" shall be equal to the average of the
Current Transitional Assessed Values of all the Benefited Properties in their
unimproved states (in dollars and cents per square foot). Note: For cables
contained within conduit owned by another entity, L=0.
      "M" means the applicable multiplier. For pipes and conduits with up to 25
square feet in cross-sectional area, the applicable multiplier is 0.04. For all
other improvements, the applicable multiplier is 0.08.
      "Minimum Annual Charge" shall be assessed as follows: For improvements
having a maximum cross-sectional area greater than four square feet, the
Minimum Annual Charge shall be $3,000. For improvements having a maximum cross-
sectional area of four square feet or less, the Minimum Annual Charge is
$1,500, except that pipes and conduits having an outside diameter of three
inches or less (inclusive of any protective sheath or casing) shall be assessed
a Minimum Annual Charge of $750.
      "R1" means the rate of compensation for the first year of the revocable
consent agreement which shall be determined in accordance with 34 RCNY §
7-10(b), below.
      "V" means the rate (in dollars and cents) obtained from Table A relating
to the volume occupied by the improvement. For improvements exceeding nine feet
in height, the computation will be made in units up to nine feet in height and
then added together.
   (b)   Rate for first year. R1 shall equal C[V + (L × M × A)], or the Minimum
Annual Charge, whichever is greater.
   (c)   Rate for each subsequent year.
      second year = R1 + (E × R1)
      third year = R1 + (2E × R1)
      fourth year = R1 + (3E × R1)
      fifth year = R1 + (4E × R1)
      sixth year = R1 + (5E × R1)
      seventh year = R1 + (6E × R1)
      eighth year = R1 + (7E × R1)
      ninth year = R1 + (8E × R1)
      tenth year = R1 + (9E × R1)
   (d)   Consents granted on or prior to June 30, 1991. For those consents
granted on or before June 30, 1991 which provide for annual fees to be computed
based upon the rate schedule currently in effect, annual compensation shall
equal R1 as calculated pursuant to 34 RCNY §
7-10(b).
   (e)   Revenue. All revocable consent revenue shall be collected by the
Department.
Table A
Cross-Section Area
Length in Up to 1.4 1.4 to 4 4 to 20 20 to 81 81 to 162 162 to 243 Smaller
feet      sq. ft.   sq. ft.  sq. ft. sq. ft.  sq. ft.   sq. ft.    Pipes up to
                                                                   3"
Cross-Section Area
Length in Up to 1.4 1.4 to 4  4 to 20   20 to 81  81 to 162 162 to    Smaller
feet      sq. ft.   sq. ft.   sq. ft.   sq. ft.   sq. ft.   243 sq.   Pipes up
                                                            ft.       to 3"
Up to     $13.90    $27.83    $34.78    $41.72    $69.56    $83.48    $7.25 per
100'      per ft.   per ft.   per ft.   per ft.   per ft.   per ft.   ft.
          $1,390 +  $2,783 +  $3,478 +  $4,172 +  $6,956 +  $8,348 +  $726 +
100' -    $8.17 per $16.35    $20.43    $24.51    $40.87    $49.04    $4.26 per
150'      ft over   per ft    per ft    per ft    per ft    per ft    ft over
          100 ft.   over 100  over 100  over 100  over 100  over 100  100 ft.
                    ft.       ft.       ft.       ft.       ft.
          $1,799 +  $3,600 +  $4,499 +  $5,397 +  $9,000 +  $10,800 + $939 +
150' -    $7.72 per $15.45    $19.30    $23.16    $38.62    $46.34    $4.03 per
200'      ft. over  per ft.   per ft.   per ft.   per ft.   per ft.   ft. over
          150 ft.   over 150  over 150  over 150  over 150  over 150  150 ft.
                    ft.       ft.       ft.       ft.       ft.
          $2,185 +  $4,373 +  $5,464 +  $6,555 +  $10,931 + $13,117 + $1,140 +
200' -    $7.29 per $14.59    $18.23    $21.87    $36.46    $43.76    $3.80 per
250'      ft. over  per ft.   per ft.   per ft.   per ft.   per ft.   ft. over
          200 ft.   over 200  over 200  over 200  over 200  over 200  200 ft.
                    ft.       ft.       ft.       ft.       ft.
          $2,549 +  $5,102 +  $6,376 +  $7,649 +  $12,754 + $15,305 + $1,330 +
250' -    $6.83 per $13.67    $17.08    $20.49    $34.16    $41.00    $3.56 per
300'      ft. over  per ft.   per ft.   per ft.   per ft.   per ft.   ft. over
          250 ft.   over 250  over 250  over 250  over 250  over 250  250 ft.
                    ft.       ft.       ft.       ft.       ft.
          $2,891 +  $5,786 +  $7,230 +  $8,673 +  $14,462 + $17,355 + $1,508 +
300' -    $6.40 per $12.81    $16.00    $19.20    $32.01    $38.42    $3.34 per
350'      ft. over  per ft.   per ft.   per ft.   per ft.   per ft.   ft. over
          300 ft.   over 300  over 300  over 300  over 300  over 300  300 ft.
                    ft.       ft.       ft.       ft.       ft.
          $3,211 +  $6,426 +  $8,030 +  $9,633 +  $16,062 + $19,276 + $1,675 +
350' -    $5.94 per $11.89    $14.85    $17.82    $29.71    $35.66    $3.10 per
400'      ft. over  per ft.   per ft.   per ft.   per ft.   per ft.   ft. over
          350 ft.   over 350  over 350  over 350  over 350  over 350  350 ft.
                    ft.       ft.       ft.       ft.       ft.
          $3,508 +  $7,021 +  $8,772 +  $10,524 + $17,548 + $21,059 + $1,830 +
400' -    $5.70 per $11.41    $14.25    $17.10    $28.51    $34.22    $2.97 per
450'      ft. over  per ft.   per ft.   per ft.   per ft.   per ft.   ft. over
          400 ft.   over 400  over 400  over 400  over 400  over 400  400 ft.
                    ft.       ft.       ft.       ft.       ft.
          $3,793 +  $7,591 +  $9,485 +  $11,379 + $18,973 + $22,770 + $1,979 +
450' -    $5.21 per $10.43    $13.03    $15.63    $26.06    $31.28    $2.72 per
525'      ft. over  per ft.   per ft.   per ft.   per ft.   per ft.   ft. over
          450 ft.   over 450  over 450  over 450  over 450  over 450  450 ft.
                    ft.       ft.       ft.       ft.       ft.
          $4,183 +  $8,373 +  $10,462 + $12,551 + $20,928 + $25,116 + $2,183 +
525' -    $4.33 per $9.48 per $11.85    $14.22    $23.71    $28.45    $2.47 per
600'      ft. over  ft. over  per ft.   per ft.   per ft.   per ft.   ft. over
          525 ft.   525 ft.   over 525  over 525  over 525  over 525  525 ft.
                              ft.       ft.       ft.       ft.
          $4,508 +  $9,084 +  $11,351 + $13,618 + $22,706 + $27,249 + $2,368 +
600' -    $4.33 per $8.66 per $10.83    $12.99    $21.66    $25.99    $2.26 per
30,000'   ft. over  ft. over  per ft.   per ft.   per ft.   per ft.   ft. over
          600 ft.   600 ft.   over 600  over 600  over 600  over 600  600 ft.
                              ft.       ft.       ft.       ft.
          $134,408  $268,884  $336,251  $403,318  $672,506  $806,949  $70,168 +
          + $2.82   + $5.64   + $7.05   + $8.46   + $14.11  + $16.93  $1.47 per
For More  per ft.   per ft.   per ft.   per ft.   per ft.   per ft.   ft. over
Than      over      over      over      over      over      over      30,000
          30,000    30,000    30,000    30,000    30,000    30,000    ft.
          ft.       ft.       ft.       ft.       ft.       ft.
 
Chapter 8: Employee Commute Options Program [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 12/20/2021, eff. 1/19/2022)
§ 8-01 Background and Authority. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 12/20/2021, eff. 1/19/2022)
§ 8-02 Applicability. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 12/20/2021, eff. 1/19/2022)
§ 8-03 Definitions. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 12/20/2021, eff. 1/19/2022)
§ 8-04 AVO Subregions. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 12/20/2021, eff. 1/19/2022)
§ 8-05 Target APOs. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 12/20/2021, eff. 1/19/2022)
§ 8-06 Schedule for Submission of Initial Compliance Plans. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 12/20/2021, eff. 1/19/2022)
§ 8-07 Schedule for Submission of Compliance Plan Updates and Maintenance
Reports. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 12/20/2021, eff. 1/19/2022)
§ 8-08 Fees. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 12/20/2021, eff. 1/19/2022)
§ 8-09 Penalties. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 12/20/2021, eff. 1/19/2022)
§ 8-10 Department Conference. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 12/20/2021, eff. 1/19/2022)
§ 8-11 Hearings. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 12/20/2021, eff. 1/19/2022)
§ 8-12 Post Hearing Relief. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 12/20/2021, eff. 1/19/2022)
§ 8-13 Severability. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 12/20/2021, eff. 1/19/2022)
