 TITLE I
 General Provisions
Article
 1 Short title and definitions (§§ 1--2-b.)
 2 Dignity for all students (§§ 10-18.)
 3 Education department (§§ 101-187.)
 Part I - General provisions (§§ 101-140.)
 Part IV - Scientific and historic places (§ 174.)
 Part V - Education department optional retirement program
 (§§ 180-187.)
 5 University of the state of New York (§§ 201-292.)
 Part I - General organization (§§ 201-239.)
 Part 1-A - Cody center for autism and developmental
 disabilities (§§ 240-243)
 Part II - Libraries (§§ 245-285.)
 Part III - Federal funds for vocational education
 (§§ 290-292.)
 6 Enacted without article heading. (§§ 293-297.)
 7 Commissioner of education (§§ 301-318.)
 7-A Standardized testing (§§ 340-348.)
 8 State University and state financial assistance for higher
 education (§§ 350-365.)
 8-A State university construction fund (§§ 370-384.)
 8-B State university optional retirement program (§§ 390-397.)
 8-C Special annuity (§§ 398--399-A.)
 9 School buildings and sites (§§ 401-420.)
 10 New York city educational construction fund (§§ 450-471.)
 10-B City of Yonkers educational construction fund (§§ 475-495.)
 10-C Winter sports education trust fund (§ 495-a.)
 10-D Regional college cooperative services board (§§ 496-500.)
 11 State teachers' retirement system for public school teachers
 (§§ 501-539.)
 12 Health and safety grants for nonpublic school children
 (§§ 549-553.)
 12-A Arthur O. Eve Elementary and secondary education opportunity
 program (§§ 559-563.)
 13 Higher education student financial aid programs
 (§§ 601--609-a.)
 13-A Liberty scholarships (§§ 610-612.)
 13-B Student lending accountability, transparency and enforcement
 act (§§ 620-632.)
 14 New York state higher education services corporation
 (§§ 651-689.)
 Part I - Corporate structure (§§ 651-660.)
 Part II - Student financial aid (§§ 661--679-e.)
 Subpart I - General provisions (§§ 661--665-a.)
 Subpart II - General awards (§§ 667--669-g.)
 Subpart III - Academic performance awards (§§ 670-679.)
 Subpart IV - Other awards (§§ 679-a--679-e.)
 Part III - Student loans (§§ 680--683-b.)
 Part IV - Miscellaneous provisions (§§ 686-689.)
 Part V - The New York higher education loan program
 (§§ 690-694-b.)
 14-A New York state college choice tuition savings program
 (§§ 695--695-g.)
 15 Text-books (§§ 701-705.)
 15-A School library materials (§§ 711-712.)
 15-B Higher education textbooks (§ 715.)
 16 Computer technology (§§ 751-755.)
 17 Instruction in certain subjects (§§ 801-816.)
 19 Medical and health service (§§ 901-918.)
 21 Vocational rehabilitation (§§ 1001-1009.)
 23 Career education in counties (§§ 1101-1116.)
 Part I - Vocational education and extension boards
 (§§ 1101-1107.)
 Part II - County commission for special education in
 Westchester County (§§ 1110-1116.)
 23-A Service centers for independent living (§§ 1120-1124.)
 23-B Child abuse in an educational setting (§§ 1125-1133.)
 24 New York state rural education research program act
 (§§ 1201-1207.)
 ARTICLE I
 SHORT TITLE AND DEFINITIONS
Section 1. Short title.
 2. Definitions.
 2-a. Release of directory information; access to institutions.
 2-b. Use of student social security numbers restricted.
 2-c. Release of student information to certain entities.
 2-d. Unauthorized release of personally identifiable
 information.
 Section 1. Short title. This chapter shall be known as the "Education
Law".
 § 2. Definitions. Wherever used in this chapter, the following terms
shall have the respective meanings hereinafter set forth or indicated:
 1. Academy. The term "academy" means an incorporated institution for
instruction in secondary education, and such high schools, academic
departments in union free school districts and similar unincorporated
schools as are admitted by the regents to the university as of academic
grade.
 2. College. The term "college" includes universities and other
institutions for higher education authorized to confer degrees.
 3. University. The term "university" means The University of the State
of New York.
 4. Regents. The term "regents" means board of regents of The
University of the State of New York.
 5. Commissioner. The term "commissioner" means commissioner of
education of the state of New York.
 6. Department. The term "department" means education department of the
state of New York.
 7. Secondary education. The term "secondary education" means
instruction of academic grade, between the elementary grades and the
college or university.
 8. Higher education. The term "higher education" means education in
advance of secondary education, and includes the work of colleges,
universities, professional and technical schools, and educational work
connected with libraries, museums, university and educational extension
courses and similar agencies.
 9. Trustee. The term "trustees," when not used in reference to a
school district, includes directors, managers or other similar members
of the governing board of an educational institution. The terms
"trustee" and "trustees", respectively, when used in reference to a
school district, shall include the plural or singular meaning, as the
case may be, unless otherwise specified.
 10. Parental relation. The term "persons in parental relation" to a
child includes the parents, guardians or other persons, whether one or
more, lawfully having the care, custody or control of such child,
including persons who have been designated pursuant to title fifteen-A
of article five of the general obligations law as persons in parental
relation to the child.
 11. Compulsory school ages. The term "child of compulsory school age"
means any child between six and sixteen years of age lawfully required
to attend upon instruction.
 12. School authorities. The term "school authorities" means the
trustees, or board of education, or corresponding officers, whether one
or more, and by whatever name known, of a city school district, or other
school district however created.
 13. School officer. The term "school officer" means a clerk,
collector, or treasurer of any school district; a trustee; a member of a
board of education or other body in control of the schools by whatever
name known in a union free school district, central school district,
central high school district, or in a city school district; a
superintendent of schools; a district superintendent; a supervisor of
attendance or attendance officer; or other elective or appointive
officer in a school district whose duties generally relate to the
administration of affairs connected with the public school system.
 14. Board of education. The term "board of education" shall include by
whatever name known the governing body charged with the general control,
management and responsibility of the schools of a union free school
district, central school district, central high school district, or of a
city school district.
 15. School year. The term "school year" means the period commencing on
the first day of July in each year and ending on the thirtieth day of
June next following.
 16. City school district. a. The following school districts are hereby
designated and declared to be city school districts: (1) Any school
district coterminous with a city on January first, nineteen hundred
fifty; (2) any school district part of which was without and part of
which was within a city on January first, nineteen hundred fifty, and
which then contained the whole or the greater portion of the children of
the city between birth and eighteen years of age, as shown by the school
census; and (3) any school district wholly within, but not coterminous
with, a city on January first, nineteen hundred fifty, and which then
contained the greater portion of the children of the city between birth
and eighteen years of age, as shown by the school census.
 b. Whenever a city shall be created after January first, nineteen
hundred fifty, that school district shall be and become a city school
district which, on the effective date of the incorporation of such city,
is: (1) coterminous with the city; (2) partly without and partly within
the city and then contains the whole or the greater portion of the
children of the city between birth and eighteen years of age, as shown
by the school census; or (3) wholly within but not coterminous with the
city and then contains the greater portion of the children of the city
between birth and eighteen years of age, as shown by the school census.
 c. The corporate existence of any school district, which, by virtue of
the provisions of this subdivision, shall be and become a city school
district, shall continue, and any such school district thereafter shall
be governed by the provisions of this chapter applicable to city school
districts.
 * 17. State university. The term "state university" means the state
university of New York, as created by article eight of this chapter.
 * NB There are 2 sub 17's
 * 17. City. The term "city" means the city school district of such
city where the context clearly so indicates.
 * NB There are 2 sub 17's
 18. Minor or infant. The term "minor" or "infant" means a person who
has not attained the age of eighteen years.
 19. Expenditures. For purposes of computing aid to public school
districts, boards of cooperative educational services, nonpublic
elementary and secondary schools, public and cooperative library systems
or public and free association libraries pursuant to this chapter or any
other law, such aid shall be computed using state aid worksheets
developed pursuant to regulations of the commissioner, designed to
reflect use of the state comptroller's definition of expenditures to the
extent possible. Such worksheet definitions of expenditures shall be
used notwithstanding the fact that this chapter or other applicable law
may use terms such as cash expenditures, expenses, costs, paid,
payments, or other such terms.
 24. Career education. The term "career education" means organized
educational programs offering a sequence of courses which are directly
related to the preparation of individuals in paid or unpaid employment
in current or emerging occupations requiring other than a baccalaureate
or advanced degrees, and shall include vocational and occupational
education. Such programs shall include competency-based applied learning
which contributes to an individual's academic knowledge, higher-order
reasoning, and problem solving skills, work activities, general
employability skills, and the skills necessary for economic independence
as a productive and contributing member of society. Such term also
includes applied technology education. Except where the intent indicates
otherwise, the terms "vocational education" and "occupational education"
shall mean "career education."
 § 2-a. Release of directory information; access to institutions.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, if a
trustee, president, principal, or officer of any institution belonging
to the University of the State of New York, or a board of education of
any public school, in any city, union free, common or central school
district or the administrator of any non-public school of secondary
education receiving state funds permits the release of directory
information relating to pupils or permits access to school buildings,
school grounds or other school property to persons who inform pupils of
educational, occupational or career opportunities, such trustee,
president, principal, officer, board or administrator shall provide
access to directory information relating to pupils and access to such
school property on the same basis for official representatives of the
state militia and the armed forces of the United States for the purpose
of informing pupils of educational, occupational or career opportunities
within the state militia or armed forces of the United States. Pursuant
to this section, access provided to school property or directory
information shall not be used for purposes other than informing students
of educational, occupational or career opportunities.
 § 2-b. Use of student social security numbers restricted. No public or
private elementary or secondary school or college as defined in section
two of this article shall display any student's social security number
to identify such student for posting or public listing of grades, on
class rosters or other lists provided to teachers, on student
identification cards, in student directories or similar listings, or,
unless specifically authorized or required by law, for any public
identification purpose.
 § 2-c. Release of student information to certain entities. 1.
Definitions. As used in this section the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
 a. "Student information" shall mean personally identifiable
information and biometric records as such terms are defined in section
99.3 of title 34 of the code of federal regulations implementing the
Family Education Rights and Privacy Act, as such federal law and
regulations are from time to time amended, or any other individual
student records and shall also include de-identifiable information which
means a collection of data or information that has been altered with the
goal of making the student or students associated with such data or
information permanently unknowable.
 b. "Personally identifiable information" shall mean personally
identifiable information as defined in section 99.3 of title 34 of the
code of federal regulations implementing the Family Education Rights and
Privacy Act, section 1232-g of title 20 of the United States code, as
such federal law and regulations are from time to time amended.
 c. "Shared learning infrastructure service provider" or "SLISP" shall
mean any entity that collects, stores, organizes, or aggregates student
information and contracts with or enters into an agreement with the
department for the purposes of providing student information to a data
dashboard operator for use in a data dashboard. Provided that the term
SLISP shall not include boards of cooperative educational services or
regional information centers operated by boards of cooperative
educational services or other public entities.
 d. "Data dashboard" shall mean an electronic data system or hosted
software application or applications that is designed to utilize data
and information collected, stored, organized or aggregated by a SLISP
and that is designed to provide, through a contract between a New York
school district and a data dashboard operator, end users such as
educators, students and their families with access to customized student
information with the goal of supporting instruction and student
learning.
 e. "Data dashboard operator" shall mean any third party contractor
owning or operating a data dashboard that contracts or otherwise enters
into an agreement to utilize data and information from a SLISP.
 f. "Educational agency" shall mean any public school district, board
of cooperative educational services, special act school district, public
school kindergarten program, universal pre-kindergarten programs
authorized pursuant to section thirty-six hundred two-e of this chapter,
publicly funded pre-kindergarten programs, approved preschool special
education programs pursuant to section forty-four hundred ten of this
chapter, approved private school for the education of students with
disabilities and a state supported or state operated school subject to
the provisions of article eighty-five, eighty-seven or eighty-eight of
this chapter.
 g. "Student" shall mean any person attending an educational agency
identified in paragraph f of this subdivision.
 2. An educational agency may opt out of providing personally
identifiable information to a SLISP or data dashboard operator for the
purpose of creating data dashboards. An educational agency may at any
time request that any personally identifiable information associated
with such agency not be shared or provided to a SLISP or data dashboard
operator. Such request shall be made to the department and upon receipt
of such request, the department shall take all actions necessary to
prevent and prohibit the sharing or providing of such information to any
SLISP or data dashboard operator and that upon receipt of such request,
the department shall take actions to immediately ensure that any
personally identifiable information provided to any SLISP or data
dashboard operator is deleted from such SLISP or operator and destroyed
in a secure manner.
 3. The commissioner and the department are hereby prohibited from
providing any student information to a SLISP and the commissioner and
department shall take actions to immediately ensure that any student
information provided to any SLISP shall be deleted from such SLISP and
destroyed in a secure manner.
 § 2-d. Unauthorized release of personally identifiable information. 1.
Definitions. As used in this section the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
 a. "Building principal" means a building principal subject to annual
performance evaluation review under the provisions of section three
thousand twelve-c, section three thousand twelve-d, or section three
thousand twelve-e of this chapter.
 b. "Classroom teacher" means a teacher subject to annual performance
evaluation review under the provisions of section three thousand
twelve-c, section three thousand twelve-d, or section three thousand
twelve-e of this chapter.
 c. "Educational agency" means a school district, board of cooperative
educational services, school, or the education department.
 d. "Personally identifiable information," as applied to student data,
means personally identifiable information as defined in section 99.3 of
title thirty-four of the code of federal regulations implementing the
family educational rights and privacy act, section twelve hundred
thirty-two-g of title twenty of the United States code, and, as applied
to teacher or principal data, means "personally identifying information"
as such term is used in subdivision ten of section three thousand
twelve-c of this chapter.
 e. "School" means any public elementary or secondary school, universal
pre-kindergarten program authorized pursuant to section thirty-six
hundred two-e of this chapter, an approved provider of preschool special
education, any other publicly funded pre-kindergarten program, a school
serving children in a special act school district as defined in section
four thousand one of this chapter, an approved private school for the
education of students with disabilities, a state-supported school
subject to the provisions of article eighty-five of this chapter, or a
state-operated school subject to the provisions of article eighty-seven
or eight-eight of this chapter.
 f. "Student" means any person attending or seeking to enroll in an
educational agency.
 g. "Eligible student" means a student eighteen years or older.
 h. "Parent" means a parent, legal guardian, or person in parental
relation to a student.
 i. "Student data" means personally identifiable information from
student records of an educational agency.
 j. "Teacher or principal data" means personally identifiable
information from the records of an educational agency relating to the
annual professional performance reviews of classroom teachers or
principals that is confidential and not subject to release under the
provisions of section three thousand twelve-c of this chapter.
 k. "Third party contractor" shall mean any person or entity, other
than an educational agency, that receives student data or teacher or
principal data from an educational agency pursuant to a contract or
other written agreement for purposes of providing services to such
educational agency, including but not limited to data management or
storage services, conducting studies for or on behalf of such
educational agency, or audit or evaluation of publicly funded programs.
Such term shall include an educational partnership organization that
receives student and/or teacher or principal data from a school district
to carry out its responsibilities pursuant to section two hundred
eleven-e of this title and is not an educational agency as defined in
paragraph c of this subdivision, and a not-for-profit corporation or
other non-profit organization, other than an educational agency.
 2. Chief privacy officer. a. The commissioner shall appoint a chief
privacy officer within the department for a term of three years, which
may be renewed for three-year terms thereafter. The chief privacy
officer shall be qualified by training or experience in state and
federal education privacy laws and regulations, civil liberties,
information technology, and information security. The chief privacy
officer shall report to the commissioner on matters affecting privacy
and the security of student, teacher, and principal data.
 b. The functions of the chief privacy officer shall include, but not
be limited to:
 (1) promoting the implementation of sound information practices for
privacy and security of student data or teacher or principal data;
 (2) assisting the commissioner in handling instances of data breaches
as well as assisting the commissioner in due process proceedings
regarding any alleged breaches of student data or teacher or principal
data;
 (3) providing assistance to educational agencies within the state on
minimum standards and best practices associated with privacy and the
security of student data or teacher or principal data;
 (4) formulating a procedure within the department whereby parents,
students, teachers, superintendents, school board members, principals,
and other persons or entities the chief privacy officer determines is
appropriate, may request information pertaining to student data or
teacher or principal data in a timely and efficient manner;
 (5) assisting the commissioner in establishing a protocol for the
submission of complaints of possible breaches of student data or teacher
or principal data;
 (6) making recommendations as needed regarding privacy and the
security of student data on behalf of the department to the governor,
the speaker of the assembly, the temporary president of the senate, and
the chairs of the senate and assembly education committees; and
 (7) issuing an annual report on data privacy and security activities
and progress, the number and disposition of reported breaches, if any,
and a summary of any complaint submitted pursuant to subparagraph five
of this paragraph.
 c. The chief privacy officer shall have the power to:
 (1) access all records, reports, audits, reviews, documents, papers,
recommendations, and other materials maintained by an educational agency
that relate to student data or teacher or principal data;
 (2) to review and comment upon any department program, proposal,
grant, or contract that involves the processing of student data or
teacher or principal data before the commissioner begins or awards the
program, proposal, grant, or contract; and
 (3) any other powers that the commissioner shall deem appropriate.
 3. Parents bill of rights for data privacy and security. a. A parents
bill of rights for data privacy and security shall be published on the
website of each educational agency and shall be included with every
contract an educational agency enters into with a third party contractor
where the third party contractor receives student data or teacher or
principal data.
 b. The parents bill of rights for data privacy and security shall
state in clear and plain English terms that:
 (1) A student's personally identifiable information cannot be sold or
released for any commercial purposes;
 (2) Parents have the right to inspect and review the complete contents
of their child's education record;
 (3) State and federal laws protect the confidentiality of personally
identifiable information, and safeguards associated with industry
standards and best practices, including but not limited to, encryption,
firewalls, and password protection, must be in place when data is stored
or transferred;
 (4) A complete list of all student data elements collected by the
State is available for public review at (insert website address here) or
by writing to (insert mailing address here); and
 (5) Parents have the right to have complaints about possible breaches
of student data addressed. Complaints should be directed to (insert
phone number, email and mailing address here).
 c. The parents bill of rights for data privacy and security shall
include supplemental information for each contract an educational agency
enters into with a third party contractor where the third party
contractor receives student data or teacher or principal data. Such
supplemental information shall be developed by the educational agency
and shall include:
 (1) the exclusive purposes for which the student data or teacher or
principal data will be used;
 (2) how the third party contractor will ensure that the
subcontractors, persons or entities that the third party contractor will
share the student data or teacher or principal data with, if any, will
abide by data protection and security requirements;
 (3) when the agreement expires and what happens to the student data or
teacher or principal data upon expiration of the agreement;
 (4) if and how a parent, student, eligible student, teacher or
principal may challenge the accuracy of the student data or teacher or
principal data that is collected; and
 (5) where the student data or teacher or principal data will be stored
(described in such a manner as to protect data security), and the
security protections taken to ensure such data will be protected,
including whether such data will be encrypted.
 d. The chief privacy officer, with input from parents and other
education and expert stakeholders, shall develop additional elements of
the parents bill of rights for data privacy and security. The
commissioner shall promulgate regulations for a comment period whereby
parents and other members of the public may submit comments and
suggestions to the chief privacy officer to be considered for inclusion.
The parents bill of rights for data privacy and security shall be
completed within one hundred twenty days after the effective date of
this section.
 4. Data collection transparency and restrictions. a. The department
shall promote the least intrusive data collection policies practicable
that advance the goals of improving academic achievement, empowering
parents with information and advancing efficient and effective school
operations while minimizing the collection and transmission of
personally identifiable information.
 b. The chief privacy officer shall develop, regularly update and make
publicly available on the department's website and through such
additional methods as may facilitate accessibility an inventory and
understandable description of the student, teacher and principal data
elements collected with an explanation and/or legal or regulatory
authority outlining the reasons such data elements are collected and the
intended uses and disclosure of the data.
 c. Except as otherwise specifically authorized by law, the department
shall only collect personally identifiable information relating to an
educational purpose.
 d. The department may only require districts to submit personally
identifiable information, including data on disability status and
student suspensions, where such release is required by law or otherwise
authorized under the family educational rights and privacy act, 20
U.S.C. section 1232g, and the personal privacy protection law.
 e. Except as required by law or in the case of educational enrollment
data, school districts shall not report to the department the following
student data elements:
 (1) juvenile delinquency records;
 (2) criminal records;
 (3) medical and health records; and
 (4) student biometric information.
 f. Personally identifiable information maintained by educational
agencies, including data provided to third-party contractors and their
assignees, shall not be sold or used for marketing purposes.
 g. Parents shall have the right to inspect and review their child's
educational record including any student data stored or maintained by an
educational agency. The department shall develop policies for school
districts that:
 (1) provide for annual notification to parents of their right to
request student data;
 (2) ensure security when providing student data to parents, including
that only authorized individuals receive such data; and
 (3) specify a reasonable amount of time in which school districts
should respond to such requests.
 5. Data security and privacy standards. a. The commissioner, in
consultation with the chief privacy officer, shall promulgate
regulations establishing standards for educational agency data security
and privacy policies and shall develop one or more model policies for
use by educational agencies. The commissioner shall seek the input of
experts, including those from security, cyber-security and fields in
addition to education that have experience with personal data
protection, in developing such standards and policies.
 b. The standards for data security and privacy policies shall include,
but not be limited to:
 (1) data privacy protections, including criteria for determining
whether a proposed use of personally identifiable information would
benefit students and educational agencies, and processes to ensure that
personally identifiable information is not included in public reports or
other public documents;
 (2) data security protections, including data systems monitoring, data
encryption, incident response plans, limitations on access to personally
identifiable information, safeguards to ensure personally identifiable
information is not accessed by unauthorized persons when transmitted
over communication networks, and destruction of personally identifiable
information when no longer needed; and
 (3) application of all such restrictions, requirements and safeguards
to third-party contractors.
 c. Following promulgation of regulations by the commissioner pursuant
to paragraph a of this subdivision each educational agency shall ensure
that it has a policy on data security and privacy in place that is
consistent with applicable state and federal laws and applied to student
data and, where applicable, to teacher or principal data. Such policy
shall be published on the educational agency's website, if it exists,
and notice of such policy shall be provided to all officers and
employees of the educational agency.
 d. As applied to student data, such policy shall provide all
protections afforded to parents and persons in parental relationships,
or students where applicable, required under the family educational
rights and privacy act, 20 U.S.C. section 1232g, where applicable the
individuals with disabilities education act, sections fourteen hundred,
et seq. of title twenty of the United States code, and the federal
regulations implementing such statutes. Each educational agency shall
ensure that it has in place provisions in its contracts with third party
contractors or in separate data sharing and confidentiality agreements
that require that confidentiality of the shared student data or teacher
or principal data be maintained in accordance with federal and state law
and the educational agency's policy on data security and privacy.
 e. Each educational agency that enters into a contract or other
written agreement with a third party contractor under which the third
party contractor will receive student data or teacher or principal data
shall ensure that such contract or agreement includes a data security
and privacy plan that outlines how all state, federal, and local data
security and privacy contract requirements will be implemented over the
life of the contract, consistent with the educational agency's policy on
data security and privacy. Such plan shall include, but shall not be
limited to, a signed copy of the parents bill of rights for data privacy
and security, and a requirement that any officers or employees of the
third party contractor and its assignees who have access to student data
or teacher or principal data have received or will receive training on
the federal and state law governing confidentiality of such data prior
to receiving access.
 f. Each third party contractor that enters into a contract or other
written agreement with an educational agency under which the third party
contractor will receive student data or teacher or principal data shall:
 (1) limit internal access to education records to those individuals
that are determined to have legitimate educational interests;
 (2) not use the education records for any other purposes than those
explicitly authorized in its contract;
 (3) except for authorized representatives of the third party
contractor to the extent they are carrying out the contract, not
disclose any personally identifiable information to any other party:
 (i) without the prior written consent of the parent or eligible
student; or
 (ii) unless required by statute or court order and the party provides
a notice of the disclosure to the department, district board of
education, or institution that provided the information no later than
the time the information is disclosed, unless providing notice of the
disclosure is expressly prohibited by the statute or court order;
 (4) maintain reasonable administrative, technical and physical
safeguards to protect the security, confidentiality and integrity of
personally identifiable student information in its custody;
 (5) uses encryption technology to protect data while in motion or in
its custody from unauthorized disclosure using a technology or
methodology specified by the secretary of the United States department
of health and human services in guidance issued under Section
13402(H)(2) of Public Law 111-5.
 6. Breach and unauthorized release of personally identifiable
information. a. Each third party contractor that receives student data
or teacher or principal data pursuant to a contract or other written
agreement with an educational agency shall be required to notify such
educational agency of any breach of security resulting in an
unauthorized release of such data by the third party contractor or its
assignees in violation of applicable state or federal law, the parents
bill of rights for student data privacy and security, the data privacy
and security policies of the educational agency and/or binding
contractual obligations relating to data privacy and security, in the
most expedient way possible and without unreasonable delay. The
educational agency shall, upon notification by the third party
contractor, be required to report to the chief privacy officer any such
breach of security and unauthorized release of such data. The chief
privacy officer shall, upon belief that such breach and unauthorized
release constitutes criminal conduct, report such breach and
unauthorized release to law enforcement in the most expedient way
possible and without unreasonable delay.
 b. In the case of an unauthorized release of student data, the
educational agency shall notify the parent or eligible student of the
unauthorized release of student data that includes personally
identifiable information from the student records of such student in the
most expedient way possible and without unreasonable delay. In the case
of an unauthorized release of teacher or principal data, the educational
agency shall notify each affected teacher or principal of the
unauthorized release of data that includes personally identifiable
information from the teacher or principal's annual professional
performance review in the most expedient way possible and without
unreasonable delay.
 c. In the case of notification to a parent, eligible student, teacher
or principal under paragraph b of this subdivision due to the
unauthorized release of student data by a third-party contractor or its
assignee, the third-party contractor shall promptly reimburse the
educational agency for the full cost of such notification.
 d. Each violation of a third party contractor pursuant to paragraph a
of this subdivision shall be punishable by a civil penalty of the
greater of five thousand dollars or up to ten dollars per student,
teacher, and principal whose data was released, provided that the latter
amount shall not exceed the maximum penalty under paragraph (a) of
subdivision six of section eight hundred ninety-nine-aa of the general
business law.
 e. If the chief privacy officer determines that a third party
contractor or its assignee, in violation of applicable state or federal
law, the data privacy and security policies of the educational agency
provided by such educational agency to the third party contractor and/or
binding contractual obligations relating to data privacy and security,
has released any student data or teacher or principal data received from
an educational agency to any person or entity not authorized by law to
receive such data pursuant to a lawful subpoena or otherwise, the chief
privacy officer, after affording the third party contractor with notice
and an opportunity to be heard, shall be authorized to:
 (1) order that the third party contractor be precluded from accessing
student data or teacher or principal data, as applicable, from the
educational agency from which the contractor obtained the data that was
improperly disclosed for a fixed period of up to five years; and/or
 (2) order that a third party contractor or assignee who knowingly or
recklessly allowed for the unauthorized release of student data or
teacher or principal data be precluded from accessing student data or
teacher or principal data from any educational agency in the state for a
fixed period of up to five years; and/or
 (3) order that a third party contractor or assignee who knowingly or
recklessly allowed for the unauthorized release of student data or
teacher or principal data shall not be deemed a responsible bidder or
offerer on any contract with an educational agency that involves the
sharing of student data or teacher or principal data, as applicable for
purposes of the provisions of section one hundred three of the general
municipal law or paragraph c of subdivision ten of section one hundred
sixty-three of the state finance law, as applicable, for a fixed period
of up to five years; and/or
 (4) require the third party contractor to provide training at the
contractor's expense on the federal and state law governing
confidentiality of student data and/or teacher or principal data and the
provisions of this section to all its officers and employees with access
to such data, prior to being permitted to receive subsequent access to
such data from the educational agency from which the contractor obtained
the data that was improperly disclosed or from any educational agency;
and/or
 (5) if it is determined that the unauthorized release of student data
or teacher or principal data on the part of the third party contractor
or assignee was inadvertent and done without intent, knowledge,
recklessness or gross negligence, the commissioner may determine that no
penalty be issued upon the third party contractor.
 7. Implementation and enforcement. a. The commissioner, in
consultation with the chief privacy officer, shall promulgate
regulations establishing procedures to implement the provisions of this
section, including but not limited to procedures for the submission of
complaints from parents and/or persons in parental relation to students,
classroom teachers or building principals, or other staff of an
educational agency, making allegations of improper disclosure of student
data and/or teacher or principal data by a third party contractor or its
officers, employees or assignees that may be subject to the sanctions
set forth in subdivision six of this section. Upon receipt of a
complaint or other information indicating that such an improper
disclosure by a third party contractor may have occurred, the chief
privacy officer shall be authorized to investigate, visit, examine and
inspect the third party contractor's facilities and records and obtain
documentation from, or require the testimony of, any party relating to
the alleged improper disclosure of student data or teacher or principal
data.
 b. Except as provided under paragraph d of subdivision six of this
section, each violation of any provision of this section by a third
party contractor or its assignee shall be punishable by a civil penalty
of up to one thousand dollars; a second violation by the same third
party contractor involving the same student data or teacher or principal
data shall be punishable by a civil penalty of up to five thousand
dollars; any subsequent violation by the same third party contractor
involving the same student date or teacher or principal data shall be
punishable by a civil penalty of up to ten thousand dollars. Each
violation of this subdivision shall be considered a separate violation
for purposes of civil penalties and the total penalty shall not exceed
the maximum penalty under paragraph (a) of subdivision six of section
eight hundred ninety-nine-aa of the general business law.
 c. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as creating a
private right of action against the department or an educational agency.
 d. Nothing in this section shall limit the administrative use of
student data or teacher or principal data by a person acting exclusively
in the person's capacity as an employee of an educational agency or of
the state or any of its political subdivisions, any court or the federal
government that is otherwise required by law.
 ARTICLE 2
 DIGNITY FOR ALL STUDENTS
Section 10. Legislative intent.
 11. Definitions.
 12. Discrimination and harassment prohibited.
 13. Policies and guidelines.
 14. Commissioner's responsibilities.
 15. Reporting by commissioner.
 16. Protection of people who report harassment, bullying or
 discrimination.
 17. Application.
 18. Severability and construction.
 § 10. Legislative intent. The legislature finds that students' ability
to learn and to meet high academic standards, and a school's ability to
educate its students, are compromised by incidents of discrimination or
harassment including bullying, taunting or intimidation. It is hereby
declared to be the policy of the state to afford all students in public
schools an environment free of discrimination and harassment. The
purpose of this article is to foster civility in public schools and to
prevent and prohibit conduct which is inconsistent with a school's
educational mission.
 § 11. Definitions. For the purposes of this article, the following
terms shall have the following meanings:
 1. "School property" shall mean in or within any building, structure,
athletic playing field, playground, parking lot, or land contained
within the real property boundary line of a public elementary or
secondary school; or in or on a school bus, as defined in section one
hundred forty-two of the vehicle and traffic law.
 2. "School function" shall mean a school-sponsored extra-curricular
event or activity.
 3. "Disability" shall mean disability as defined in subdivision
twenty-one of section two hundred ninety-two of the executive law.
 4. "Employee" shall mean employee as defined in subdivision three of
section eleven hundred twenty-five of this title.
 5. "Sexual orientation" shall mean actual or perceived
heterosexuality, homosexuality or bisexuality.
 6. "Gender" shall mean actual or perceived sex and shall include a
person's gender identity or expression.
 7. "Harassment" and "bullying" shall mean the creation of a hostile
environment by conduct or by threats, intimidation or abuse, including
cyberbullying, that (a) has or would have the effect of unreasonably and
substantially interfering with a student's educational performance,
opportunities or benefits, or mental, emotional or physical well-being;
or (b) reasonably causes or would reasonably be expected to cause a
student to fear for his or her physical safety; or (c) reasonably causes
or would reasonably be expected to cause physical injury or emotional
harm to a student; or (d) occurs off school property and creates or
would foreseeably create a risk of substantial disruption within the
school environment, where it is foreseeable that the conduct, threats,
intimidation or abuse might reach school property. Acts of harassment
and bullying shall include, but not be limited to, those acts based on a
person's actual or perceived race, color, weight, national origin,
ethnic group, religion, religious practice, disability, sexual
orientation, gender or sex. For the purposes of this definition the term
"threats, intimidation or abuse" shall include verbal and non-verbal
actions.
 8. "Cyberbullying" shall mean harassment or bullying as defined in
subdivision seven of this section, including paragraphs (a), (b), (c)
and (d) of such subdivision, where such harassment or bullying occurs
through any form of electronic communication.
 9. "Race" shall, for the purposes of this article include traits
historically associated with race, including but not limited to, hair
texture and protective hairstyles.
 10. "Protective hairstyles" shall include, but not be limited to, such
hairstyles as braids, locks, and twists.
 § 12. Discrimination and harassment prohibited. 1. No student shall be
subjected to harassment or bullying by employees or students on school
property or at a school function; nor shall any student be subjected to
discrimination based on a person's actual or perceived race, color,
weight, national origin, ethnic group, religion, religious practice,
disability, sexual orientation, gender, or sex by school employees or
students on school property or at a school function. Nothing in this
subdivision shall be construed to prohibit a denial of admission into,
or exclusion from, a course of instruction based on a person's gender
that would be permissible under section thirty-two hundred one-a or
paragraph (a) of subdivision two of section twenty-eight hundred
fifty-four of this chapter and title IX of the Education Amendments of
1972 (20 U.S.C. section 1681, et. seq.), or to prohibit, as
discrimination based on disability, actions that would be permissible
under section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973.
 2. An age-appropriate version of the policy outlined in subdivision
one of this section, written in plain-language, shall be included in the
code of conduct adopted by boards of education and the trustees or sole
trustee pursuant to section twenty-eight hundred one of this chapter and
a summary of such policy shall be included in any summaries required by
such section twenty-eight hundred one.
 § 13. Policies and guidelines. The board of education and the trustees
or sole trustee of every school district shall create policies,
procedures and guidelines that shall include, but not be limited to:
 1. Policies and procedures intended to create a school environment
that is free from harassment, bullying and discrimination, that include
but are not limited to provisions which:
 a. identify the principal, superintendent or the principal's or
superintendent's designee as the school employee charged with receiving
reports of harassment, bullying and discrimination;
 b. enable students and parents to make an oral or written report of
harassment, bullying or discrimination to teachers, administrators and
other school personnel that the school district deems appropriate;
 c. require school employees who witness harassment, bullying or
discrimination, or receive an oral or written report of harassment,
bullying or discrimination, to promptly orally notify the principal,
superintendent or the principal's or superintendent's designee not later
than one school day after such school employee witnesses or receives a
report of harassment, bullying or discrimination, and to file a written
report with the principal, superintendent or the principal or
superintendent's designee not later than two school days after making
such oral report;
 d. require the principal, superintendent or the principal's or
superintendent's designee to lead or supervise the thorough
investigation of all reports of harassment, bullying and discrimination,
and to ensure that such investigation is completed promptly after
receipt of any written reports made under this section;
 e. require the school, when an investigation reveals any such verified
harassment, bullying or discrimination, to take prompt actions
reasonably calculated to end the harassment, bullying or discrimination,
eliminate any hostile environment, create a more positive school culture
and climate, prevent recurrence of the behavior, and ensure the safety
of the student or students against whom such harassment, bullying or
discrimination was directed. Such actions shall be consistent with the
guidelines created pursuant to subdivision four of this section;
 f. prohibit retaliation against any individual who, in good faith,
reports, or assists in the investigation of, harassment, bullying or
discrimination;
 g. include a school strategy to prevent harassment, bullying and
discrimination;
 h. require the principal to make a regular report on data and trends
related to harassment, bullying and discrimination to the
superintendent;
 i. require the principal, superintendent or the principal's or
superintendent's designee, to notify promptly the appropriate local law
enforcement agency when such principal, superintendent or the
principal's or superintendent's designee, believes that any harassment,
bullying or discrimination constitutes criminal conduct;
 j. include appropriate references to the provisions of the school
district's code of conduct adopted pursuant to section twenty-eight
hundred one of this chapter that are relevant to harassment, bullying
and discrimination;
 k. require each school, at least once during each school year, to
provide all school employees, students and parents with a written or
electronic copy of the school district's policies created pursuant to
this section, or a plain-language summary thereof, including
notification of the process by which students, parents and school
employees may report harassment, bullying and discrimination. This
subdivision shall not be construed to require additional distribution of
such policies and guidelines if they are otherwise distributed to school
employees, students and parents;
 l. maintain current versions of the school district's policies created
pursuant to this section on the school district's internet website, if
one exists;
 2. Guidelines to be used in school training programs to discourage the
development of harassment, bullying and discrimination, and to make
school employees aware of the effects of harassment, bullying,
cyberbullying and discrimination on students and that are designed:
 a. to raise the awareness and sensitivity of school employees to
potential harassment, bullying and discrimination, and
 b. to enable employees to prevent and respond to harassment, bullying
and discrimination; and
 3. Guidelines relating to the development of nondiscriminatory
instructional and counseling methods, and requiring that at least one
staff member at every school be thoroughly trained to handle human
relations in the areas of race, color, weight, national origin, ethnic
group, religion, religious practice, disability, sexual orientation,
gender, and sex; and
 4. Guidelines relating to the development of measured, balanced and
age-appropriate responses to instances of harassment, bullying or
discrimination by students, with remedies and procedures following a
progressive model that make appropriate use of intervention, discipline
and education, vary in method according to the nature of the behavior,
the developmental age of the student and the student's history of
problem behaviors, and are consistent with the district's code of
conduct; and
 5. Training required by this section shall address the social patterns
of harassment, bullying and discrimination, as defined in section eleven
of this article, including but not limited to those acts based on a
person's actual or perceived race, color, weight, national origin,
ethnic group, religion, religious practice, disability, sexual
orientation, gender or sex, the identification and mitigation of
harassment, bullying and discrimination, and strategies for effectively
addressing problems of exclusion, bias and aggression in educational
settings.
 § 14. Commissioner's responsibilities. The commissioner shall:
 1. Provide direction, which may include development of model policies
and, to the extent possible, direct services, to school districts
related to preventing harassment, bullying and discrimination and to
fostering an environment in every school where all children can learn
free of manifestations of bias;
 2. Provide grants, from funds appropriated for such purpose, to local
school districts to assist them in implementing the guidelines set forth
in this section;
 3. Promulgate regulations to assist school districts in implementing
this article including, but not limited to, regulations to assist school
districts in developing measured, balanced, and age-appropriate
responses to violations of this policy, with remedies and procedures
following a progressive model that make appropriate use of intervention,
discipline and education and provide guidance related to the application
of regulations; and
 4. Provide guidance and educational materials to school districts
related to best practices in addressing cyberbullying and helping
families and communities work cooperatively with schools in addressing
cyberbullying, whether on or off school property or at or away from a
school function.
 5. The commissioner shall prescribe regulations that school
professionals applying on or after December thirty-first, two thousand
thirteen for a certificate or license, including but not limited to a
certificate or license valid for service as a classroom teacher, school
counselor, school psychologist, school social worker, school
administrator or supervisor or superintendent of schools shall, in
addition to all other certification or licensing requirements, have
completed training on the social patterns of harassment, bullying and
discrimination, as defined in section eleven of this article, including
but not limited to those acts based on a person's actual or perceived
race, color, weight, national origin, ethnic group, religion, religious
practice, disability, sexual orientation, gender or sex, the
identification and mitigation of harassment, bullying and
discrimination, and strategies for effectively addressing problems of
exclusion, bias and aggression in educational settings.
 § 15. Reporting by commissioner. The commissioner shall create a
procedure under which material incidents of harassment, bullying and
discrimination on school grounds or at a school function are reported to
the department at least on an annual basis. Such procedure shall provide
that such reports shall, wherever possible, also delineate the specific
nature of such incidents of harassment, bullying and discrimination,
provided that the commissioner may comply with the requirements of this
section through use of the existing uniform violent incident reporting
system. In addition the department may conduct research or undertake
studies to determine compliance throughout the state with the provisions
of this article.
 § 16. Protection of people who report harassment, bullying or
discrimination. Any person having reasonable cause to suspect that a
student has been subjected to harassment, bullying or discrimination, by
an employee or student, on school grounds or at a school function, who,
acting reasonably and in good faith, reports such information to school
officials, to the commissioner or to law enforcement authorities, acts
in compliance with paragraph e or i of subdivision one of section
thirteen of this article, or otherwise initiates, testifies,
participates or assists in any formal or informal proceedings under this
article, shall have immunity from any civil liability that may arise
from the making of such report or from initiating, testifying,
participating or assisting in such formal or informal proceedings, and
no school district or employee shall take, request or cause a
retaliatory action against any such person who, acting reasonably and in
good faith, either makes such a report or initiates, testifies,
participates or assists in such formal or informal proceedings.
 § 17. Application. Nothing in this article shall:
 1. Apply to private, religious or denominational educational
institutions; or
 2. Preclude or limit any right or cause of action provided under any
local, state or federal ordinance, law or regulation including but not
limited to any remedies or rights available under the Individuals With
Disabilities Education Act, Title VII of the Civil Rights Law of 1964,
section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 or the Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990.
 § 18. Severability and construction. The provisions of this article
shall be severable, and if any court of competent jurisdiction declares
any phrase, clause, sentence or provision of this article to be invalid,
or its applicability to any government agency, person or circumstance is
declared invalid, the remainder of this article and its relevant
applicability shall not be affected. The provisions of this article
shall be liberally construed to give effect to the purposes thereof.
 ARTICLE 2-A
 JACK REID LAW: PROTECT ALL STUDENTS ACT
Section 19. Legislative intent.
 20. Definitions.
 21. Bullying and harassment prevention and response.
 22. Applicability.
 23. Severability and construction.
 § 19. Legislative intent. The legislature finds that students' ability
to learn and to meet high academic standards, and a school's ability to
educate its students, are compromised by incidents of harassment
including bullying, taunting or intimidation. It is hereby declared to
be the policy of the state to afford all students in nonpublic schools
an environment free of bullying and harassment. The purpose of this
article is to foster civility in nonpublic schools and to prevent and
prohibit conduct which is inconsistent with a school's educational
mission.
 § 20. Definitions. For the purposes of this article, the following
terms shall have the following meanings:
 1. "School property" shall mean in or within any building, structure,
athletic playing field, playground, parking lot, or land contained
within the real property boundary line of a nonpublic elementary or
secondary school; or in or on a school bus, as defined in section one
hundred forty-two of the vehicle and traffic law.
 2. "School function" shall mean a nonpublic school-sponsored
extra-curricular event or activity.
 3. "Harassment" and "bullying" shall mean the creation of a hostile
environment by conduct or by threats, intimidation or abuse, including
cyberbullying, that (a) has or would have the effect of unreasonably and
substantially interfering with a student's educational performance,
opportunities or benefits, or mental, emotional or physical well-being;
(b) reasonably causes or would reasonably be expected to cause a student
to fear for their physical safety; (c) reasonably causes or would
reasonably be expected to cause physical injury or emotional harm to a
student; or (d) occurs off school property and creates, or would
foreseeably create, a risk of substantial disruption within the school
environment, where it is foreseeable that the conduct, threats,
intimidation or abuse might reach school property. For purposes of this
definition, the term "threats, intimidation or abuse" shall include
verbal and non-verbal actions.
 4. "Cyberbullying" shall mean harassment or bullying as defined in
subdivision three of this section, where such harassment or bullying
occurs through any form of electronic communication.
 5. "School" shall mean any nonpublic elementary or secondary school.
 § 21. Bullying and harassment prevention and response. 1. No student
shall be subjected to harassment or bullying, including cyberbullying,
by other students on school property or at a school function.
 2. Every school, subject to this section, shall adopt a written in
plain-language and age-appropriate anti-bullying and harassment policy,
which must be published on the school's website or internal
parent/student portal and shared annually with employees, parents, and
students. Such policy shall include but not be limited to information on
how bullying and harassment is defined, how incidents will be reported,
investigated, and documented, and an age-appropriate process for
notifying the victim about the final outcome of the investigation.
 3. School employees who witness bullying or harassment, or receive an
oral or written report of bullying or harassment, shall promptly notify
the principal or head of school or the principal's or head of school's
designee, orally not later than one school day after such school
employee witnesses or receives a report of bullying and harassment, and
must file a written report with the principal or head of school's
designee not later than two school days after making the initial oral
report.
 4. Upon a report of bullying, harassment, or retaliation, the
principal or head of school, or the principal or head of school's
designee, must investigate promptly, communicate their findings with the
victim and take immediate steps and appropriate follow-up action
reasonably calculated to ensure that such conduct has stopped and ensure
the safety of the student or students including retaliation against any
individual who in good faith reports such bullying or assists in the
investigation.
 § 22. Applicability. Nothing in this section is intended to infringe
upon any right to exercise free expression or the free exercise of
religion or religiously based views protected under the First Amendment
to the United States Constitution, section eight of article I of the New
York State Constitution, sections three hundred thirteen and thirty-two
hundred one of this chapter, and subdivision eleven of section two
hundred ninety-six of the executive law.
 § 23. Severability and construction. The provisions of this article
shall be severable, and if any court of competent jurisdiction declares
any phrase, clause, sentence or provision of this article to be invalid,
or its applicability to any government agency, person or circumstance is
declared invalid, the remainder of this article and its relevant
applicability shall not be affected. The provisions of this article
shall be liberally construed to give effect to the purposes thereof.
 ARTICLE 3
 EDUCATION DEPARTMENT
 PART I
 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 101. Education department; regents of the university.
 101-a. Promulgation of rules and regulations of commissioner
 relating to the supervision of services for the public
 good conducted under supervision of school districts.
 101-b. Paperwork reduction.
 102. Associate and assistant commissioners.
 103. Divisions of department.
 104. Other officers and employees.
 105. Removals and suspensions.
 106. Joint seal.
 107. Compact for education.
 108. State education building.
 109. (Enacted without section heading).
 110. Refunds.
 111. Indian affairs.
 112. Children in care; responsibility for education.
 112-a. Students confined in certain facilities; responsibility
 for issuance of diplomas.
 113. Leaves of absence to professional members of the
 department.
 114. Reduction of salaries for investment in custodial
 accounts.
 140. Historical documentary heritage grants and aid.
 PART IV
 SCIENTIFIC AND HISTORIC PLACES
Section 174. Powers formerly exercised by the state board of geographic
 names.
 PART V
 EDUCATION DEPARTMENT OPTIONAL RETIREMENT PROGRAM
Section 180. Definitions.
 181. Education department optional retirement program
 established.
 182. Rates of contribution.
 183. Election.
 184. Survivor's benefits.
 185. Social security.
 186. State not liable for payment of benefits.
 187. Inconsistent provisions of other acts superseded.
 PART I
 GENERAL PROVISIONS
 § 101. Education department; regents of the university. There shall
continue to be in the state government an education department. The
department is charged with the general management and supervision of all
public schools and all of the educational work of the state, including
the operations of The University of the State of New York and the
exercise of all the functions of the education department, of The
University of the State of New York, of the regents of the university
and of the commissioner of education and the performance of all their
powers and duties, which were transferred to the education department by
section three hundred twelve of the state departments law or shall have
been prescribed by law before March sixteenth, nineteen hundred
twenty-seven, whether in terms vested in such department or university
or in any sub-department, division or bureau thereof or in such
commissioner, board or officer, and such functions, powers and duties
shall continue to be vested in the education department continued by
this chapter and shall continue to be exercised and performed therein by
or through the appropriate officer, sub-department, division or bureau
thereof, together with such functions, powers and duties as hereafter
may be conferred or imposed upon such department by law. All the
provisions of this chapter, in so far as they are not inconsistent with
the provisions of this chapter as hereby amended or may be made
applicable, shall apply to the education department continued by this
chapter as hereby amended and to The University of the State of New
York, the board of regents of the university, the commissioner of
education and to the divisions, bureaus and officers in such department.
The head of the department shall continue to be the regents of The
University of the State of New York, who shall appoint, and at pleasure
may remove, the commissioner of education. The commissioner shall
continue to be the chief administrative officer of the department. The
regents also may appoint and, at pleasure, remove a deputy commissioner
of education, who shall perform such duties as the regents may assign to
him by rule and who, in the absence or disability of the commissioner or
when a vacancy exists in the office of commissioner, shall exercise and
perform the functions, powers and duties conferred or imposed on the
commissioner by this chapter. The regents of The University of the
State of New York shall continue to constitute a board and The
University of the State of New York, which was continued under such name
by section two of article eleven of the constitution, shall continue to
be governed and all its corporate powers to be exercised by such board.
 § 101-a. Promulgation of rules and regulations of commissioner
relating to the supervision of services for the public good conducted
under supervision of school districts. The commissioner of education
shall promulgate rules and regulations for the supervision, by school
districts, of programs of performing services for the public good by
certain infants pursuant to the provisions of sections seven hundred
fifty-eight-a and 353.6 of the family court act. Such rules and
regulations, shall include, but not be limited to, provisions (a)
assuring that the conditions of work, including wages, meet the
standards therefor prescribed pursuant to the labor law; (b) affording
coverage to the child under the workers' compensation law; (c) assuring
that the entity receiving such services shall not utilize the same to
replace its regular employees; and (d) providing for reports to the
family court not less frequently than every six months, unless the
family court orders otherwise.
 § 101-b. Paperwork reduction. 1. The commissioner shall be authorized
to receive and accept reports, plans, applications and all other
information required to be reported by statute or regulation through
electronic means. The commissioner shall accept hard copy non-electronic
filings or submissions if the school district is able to demonstrate
that complying with electronic submission requirements would create
undue hardship for the school district or some other good cause exists
that would make electronic submission extremely impractical for the
school district.
 2. It shall be the duty of the commissioner to review all existing
reports and plans that school districts and boards of cooperative
educational services are required to submit and by November first, two
thousand ten, the commissioner shall submit to the board of regents, the
governor, the speaker of the assembly, the temporary president of the
senate, the director of the budget and the chairs of the respective
fiscal and education committees of the senate and assembly specific
recommendations to eliminate unnecessary or duplicative reporting
requirements; and where possible, recommendations to consolidate
reports, plans and other information required to be submitted to the
commissioner including which recommendations could be implemented
administratively and which would require statutory authorization.
 § 102. Associate and assistant commissioners. The commissioner of
education shall appoint, subject to the approval of the regents, such
associate and assistant commissioners as he shall deem necessary for the
proper organization and general classification of the work of the
department, and assign to such associate and assistant commissioners the
work which shall be under their respective supervision.
 § 103. Divisions of department. By action of the regents upon the
recommendation of the commissioner of education the department may be
divided into divisions and bureaus. By like action new divisions and
bureaus may be created and divisions and bureaus may be consolidated or
abolished, and the administrative work of the department assigned to the
several divisions and bureaus.
 § 104. Other officers and employees. The commissioner of education,
subject to the approval of the regents, shall have power, in conformity
with their rules, to appoint all other needed officers and employees and
fix their titles, duties and salaries.
 § 105. Removals and suspensions. With the approval of the regents,
the commissioner of education may, at his pleasure, remove from office
any assistant commissioner, or other appointive officer or employee;
and, when the regents are not in session, the commissioner may, during
his pleasure, suspend, without salary, any such officer or employee, but
not longer than till the adjournment of the succeeding meeting of the
regents.
 § 106. Joint seal. The regents of the university upon the
recommendation of the commissioner of education shall adopt, and may
modify at any time, a seal, which shall be used in common as the seal of
the education department and of the university; and copies of all
records thereof and of all acts, orders, decrees and decisions made by
the regents or by the commissioner of education, and of their official
papers, and of the drafts or machine copies of any of the foregoing, may
be authenticated under the said seal and shall then be evidence equally
with and in like manner as the originals.
 § 107. Compact for education. 1. The compact for education is hereby
entered into and enacted into law with all jurisdictions legally joining
therein, in the form substantially as follows:
 COMPACT FOR EDUCATION PREAMBLE
 WHEREAS, the proper education of all citizens is one of the most
important responsibilities of the states to preserve a free and open
society in the United States; and,
 WHEREAS, the increasing demands of our whole national life for
improving and expanding educational services require a broad exchange of
research data and information concerning the problems and practices of
education; and,
 WHEREAS, there is a vital need for strengthening the voices of the
states in the formulation of alternative nationwide educational
policies,
 THE STATES AFFIRM the need for close and continuing consultation among
our several states on all matters of education, and do hereby establish
this compact for education.
 Article I. Purpose and Policy.
 A. It is the purpose of this compact to:
 1. Establish and maintain close cooperation and understanding among
executive, legislative, professional educational and lay leadership on a
nationwide basis at the state and local levels.
 2. Provide a forum for the discussion, development, crystallization
and recommendation of public policy alternatives in the field of
education.
 3. Provide a clearing house of information on matters relating to
educational problems and how they are being met in different places
throughout the nation, so that the executive and legislative branches of
state government and of local communities may have ready access to the
experience and record of the entire country, and so that both lay and
professional groups in the field of education may have additional
avenues for the sharing of experience and the interchange of ideas in
the formation of public policy in education.
 4. Facilitate the improvement of state and local educational systems
so that all of them will be able to meet adequate and desirable goals in
a society which requires continuous qualitative and quantitative advance
in educational opportunities, methods and facilities.
 B. It is the policy of this compact to encourage and promote local and
state initiative in the development, maintenance, improvement and
administration of educational systems and institutions in a manner which
will accord with the needs and advantages of diversity among localities
and states.
 C. The party states recognize that each of them has an interest in the
quality and quantity of education furnished in each of the other states,
as well as in the excellence of its own educational systems and
institutions, because of the highly mobile character of individuals
within the nation, and because the products and services contributing to
the health, welfare and economic advancement of each state are supplied
in significant part by persons educated in other states.
 Article II. State Defined.
 As used in this compact, "state" means a state, territory, or
possession of the United States, the District of Columbia, or the
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
 Article III. The Commission.
 A. The educational commission of the states, hereinafter called "the
commission", is hereby established. The commission shall consist of
seven members representing each party state. One of such members shall
be the governor; two shall be members of the state legislature selected
by its respective houses and serving in such manner as the legislature
may determine; and four shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure
of the governor, unless the laws of the state otherwise provide. If the
laws of a state prevent legislators from serving on the commission, six
members shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the governor,
unless the laws of the state otherwise provide. In addition to any other
principles or requirements which a state may establish for the
appointment and service of its members of the commission, the guiding
principle for the composition of the membership on the commission from
each party state shall be that the members representing such state
shall, by virtue of their training, experience, knowledge or
affiliations be in a position collectively to reflect broadly the
interests of the state government, higher education, the state education
system, local education, lay and professional, public and non-public
educational leadership. Of those appointees, one shall be the head of a
state agency or institution, designated by the governor, having
responsibility for one or more programs of public education. In addition
to the members of the commission representing the party states, there
may be not to exceed ten non-voting commissioners selected by the
steering committee for terms of one year. Such commissioners shall
represent leading national organizations of professional educators or
persons concerned with educational administration.
 B. The members of the commission shall be entitled to one vote each on
the commission. No action of the commission shall be binding unless
taken at a meeting at which a majority of the total number of votes on
the commission are cast in favor thereof. Action of the commission shall
be only at a meeting at which a majority of the commissioners are
present. The commission shall meet at least once a year. In its bylaws,
and subject to such directions and limitations as may be contained
therein, the commission may delegate the exercise of any of its powers
to the steering committee or the executive director, except for the
power to approve budgets or requests for appropriations, the power to
make policy recommendations pursuant to article V and adoption of the
annual report pursuant to article III (j).
 C. The commission shall have a seal.
 D. The commission shall elect annually, from among its members, a
chairman, who shall be a governor, a vice chairman and a treasurer. The
commission shall provide for the appointment of an executive director.
Such executive director shall serve at the pleasure of the commission,
and together with the treasurer and such other personnel as the
commission may deem appropriate shall be bonded in such amount as the
commission shall determine. The executive director shall be secretary.
 E. Irrespective of the civil service, personnel or other merit system
laws of any of the party states, the executive director subject to the
approval of the steering committee shall appoint, remove or discharge
such personnel as may be necessary for the performance of the functions
of the commission, and shall fix the duties and compensation of such
personnel. The commission in its bylaws shall provide for the personnel
policies and programs of the commission.
 F. The commission may borrow, accept or contract for the services of
personnel from any party jurisdiction, the United States, or any
subdivision or agency of the aforementioned governments, or from any
agency of two or more of the party jurisdictions or their subdivisions.
 G. The commission may accept for any of its purposes and functions
under this compact any and all donations, and grants of money,
equipment, supplies, materials and services, conditional or otherwise,
from any state, the United States, or any other governmental agency, or
from any person, firm, association, foundation, or corporation, and may
receive, utilize and dispose of the same. Any donation or grant accepted
by the commission pursuant to this paragraph or services borrowed
pursuant to paragraph (f) of this article shall be reported in the
annual report of the commission. Such report shall include the nature,
amount and conditions, if any, of the donation, grant, or services
borrowed, and the identity of the donor or lender.
 H. The commission may establish and maintain such facilities as may be
necessary for the transacting of its business. The commission may
acquire, hold, and convey real and personal property and any interest
therein.
 I. The commission shall adopt bylaws for the conduct of its business
and shall have the power to amend and rescind these bylaws. The
commission shall publish its bylaws in convenient form and shall file a
copy thereof and a copy of any amendment thereto, with the appropriate
agency or officer in each of the party states.
 J. The commission annually shall make to the governor and legislature
of each party state a report covering the activities of the commission
for the preceding year. The commission may make such additional reports
as it may deem desirable.
 Article IV. Powers.
 In addition to authority conferred on the commission by other
provisions of the compact, the commission shall have authority to:
 1. Collect, correlate, analyze and interpret information and data
concerning educational needs and resources.
 2. Encourage and foster research in all aspects of education, but with
special reference to the desirable scope of instruction, organization,
administration, and instructional methods and standards employed or
suitable for employment in public educational systems.
 3. Develop proposals for adequate financing of education as a whole
and at each of its many levels.
 4. Conduct or participate in research of the types referred to in this
article in any instance where the commission finds that such research is
necessary for the advancement of the purposes and policies of this
compact, utilizing fully the resources of national associations,
regional compact organizations for higher education, and other agencies
and institutions, both public and private.
 5. Formulate suggested policies and plans for the improvement of
public education as a whole, or for any segment thereof, and make
recommendations with respect thereto available to the appropriate
governmental units, agencies and public officials.
 6. Do such other things as may be necessary or incidental to the
administration of any of its authority or functions pursuant to this
compact.
 Article V. Cooperation With Federal Government.
 A. If the laws of the United States specifically so provide, or if
administrative provision is made therefor within the federal government,
the United States may be represented on the commission by not to exceed
ten representatives. Any such representative or representatives of the
United States shall be appointed and serve in such manner as may be
provided by or pursuant to federal law, and may be drawn from any one or
more branches of the federal government, but no such representatives
shall have a vote on the commission.
 B. The commission may provide information and make recommendations to
any executive or legislative agency or officer of the federal government
concerning the common educational policies of the states, and may advise
with any such agencies or officers concerning any matter of mutual
interest.
 Article VI. Committees.
 A. To assist in the expeditious conduct of its business when the full
commission is not meeting, the commission shall elect a steering
committee of thirty members which, subject to the provisions of this
compact and consistent with the policies of the commission, shall be
constituted and function as provided in the bylaws of the commission.
One-third of the voting membership of the steering committee shall
consist of governors, and the remainder shall consist of other members
of the commission. A federal representative on the commission may serve
with the steering committee, but without vote. The voting members of the
steering committee shall serve for terms of two years, except that
members elected to the first steering committee of the commission shall
be elected as follows: fifteen for one year and fifteen for two years.
The chairman, vice chairman, and treasurer of the commission shall be
members of the steering committee and, anything in this paragraph to the
contrary notwithstanding, shall serve during their continuance in these
offices. Vacancies in the steering committee shall not affect its
authority to act, but the commission at its next regularly ensuing
meeting following the occurrence of any vacancy shall fill it for the
unexpired term. No person shall serve more than two terms as a member of
the steering committee: provided that service for a partial term of one
year or less shall not be counted toward the two term limitation.
 B. The commission may establish advisory and technical committees
composed of state, local, and federal officials, and private persons to
advise it with respect to any one or more of its functions. Any advisory
or technical committee may, on request of the state concerned, be
established to consider any matter of special concern to two or more of
the party states.
 C. The commission may establish such additional committees as its
bylaws may provide.
 Article VII. Finance.
 A. The commission shall advise the governor or designated officer or
officers of each party state of its budget and estimated expenditures
for such period as may be required by the laws of that party state. Each
of the commission's budgets of estimated expenditures shall contain
specific recommendations of the amount or amounts to be appropriated by
each of the party states.
 B. The total amount of appropriation requests under any budget shall
be apportioned among the party states. In making such apportionment, the
commission shall devise and employ a formula which takes equitable
account of the populations and per capita income levels of the party
states.
 C. The commission shall not pledge the credit of any party states. The
commission may meet any of its obligations in whole or in part with
funds available to it pursuant to article III (g) of this compact,
provided that the commission takes specific action setting aside such
funds prior to incurring an obligation to be met in whole or in part in
such manner. Except where the commission makes use of funds available to
it pursuant to article III (g) thereof, the commission shall not incur
any obligation prior to the allotment of funds by the party states
adequate to meet the same.
 D. The commission shall keep accurate accounts of all receipts and
disbursements. The receipts and disbursements of the commission shall be
subject to the audit and accounting procedures established by its
bylaws. However, all receipts and disbursements of funds handled by the
commission shall be audited yearly by a qualified public accountant, and
the report of the audit shall be included in and become part of the
annual reports of the commission.
 E. The accounts of the commission shall be open at any reasonable time
for inspection by duly constituted officers of the party states and by
any persons authorized by the commission.
 F. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prevent commission
compliance with laws relating to audit or inspection of accounts by or
on behalf of any government contributing to the support of the
commission.
 Article VIII. Eligible Parties; Entry Into and Withdrawal.
 A. This compact shall have as eligible parties all states,
territories, and possessions of the United States, the District of
Columbia, and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico. In respect of any such
jurisdiction not having a governor, the term "governor", as used in this
compact, shall mean the closest equivalent official of such
jurisdiction.
 B. Any state or other eligible jurisdiction may enter into this
compact and it shall become binding thereon when it has adopted the
same: provided that in order to enter into initial effect, adoption by
at least ten eligible party jurisdictions shall be required.
 C. Adoption of the compact may be either by enactment thereof or by
adherence thereto by the governor; provided that in the absence of
enactment, adherence by the governor shall be sufficient to make his
state a party only until December thirty-one, nineteen hundred
sixty-seven. During any period when a state is participating in this
compact through gubernatorial action, the governor shall appoint those
persons who, in addition to himself, shall serve as the members of the
commission from his state, and shall provide to the commission an
equitable share of the financial support of the commission from any
source available to him.
 D. Except for a withdrawal effective on December thirty-one, nineteen
hundred sixty-seven in accordance with paragraph C of this article, any
party state may withdraw from this compact by enacting a statute
repealing the same, but no such withdrawal shall take effect until one
year after the governor of the withdrawing state has given notice in
writing of the withdrawal to the governors of all other party states. No
withdrawal shall affect any liability already incurred by or chargeable
to a party state prior to the time of such withdrawal.
 Article IX. Construction and Severability.
 This compact shall be liberally construed so as to effectuate the
purposes thereof. 1. The provisions of this compact shall be severable
and if any phrase, clause, sentence or provision of this compact is
declared to be contrary to the constitution of any state or of the
United States, or the applicability thereof to any government, agency,
person or circumstances is held invalid, the validity of the remainder
of this compact and the applicability thereof to any government, agency,
person or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. If this compact
shall be held contrary to the constitution of any state participating
therein, the compact shall remain in full force and effect as to the
state affected as to all severable matters.
 2. Of the seven members of the educational commission of the states
representing this state, one shall be the governor, one shall be
appointed by the temporary president of the senate from among the
members of that body, one shall be appointed by the speaker of the
assembly from among the members of that body, one shall be the
commissioner of education, and three shall be appointed by and serve at
the pleasure of the governor. The members of the commission representing
this state shall receive no compensation for their services but shall be
allowed their actual and necessary expenses in performance of their
duties hereunder.
 3. Pursuant to article III (i) of the compact, the commission shall
file a copy of its bylaws and any amendment thereto with the governor.
 § 108. State education building. The state education building shall
be occupied exclusively by the education department, including the
university, with the state library, the state museum, and its other
divisions and bureaus, together with such other work with which the
commissioner of education and the regents have official relations, as
the regents may, in their discretion, provide for therein, and such
building and the offices of such department shall be maintained at state
expense under the charge and care of such department.
 § 109. Any person, association, organization or corporation may be
permitted to use the auditorium in the state education building at
Albany for such purposes as may be authorized by regulations of the
commissioner of education upon payment of such fee as may be required
pursuant to a schedule for such purpose adopted by the commissioner of
education and approved by the director of the division of the budget.
 § 110. Refunds. 1. Moneys received by the state education department
pursuant to this chapter prior to July first, nineteen hundred
forty-two, may be refunded: (a) Where such moneys were not required by
law or regents' rule. (b) Where such moneys were in excess of the
amounts required by law or regents' rule. (c) Where fees are paid by
applicants who are not permitted to enter examinations for which such
fees are paid. Any such moneys received after July first, nineteen
hundred forty-two shall not be so refunded unless application for such
refund has been made within two years after its receipt by the state
education department, except that applicants for professional licenses
may make an application for a refund within two years of the withdrawal
or denial of the application, whichever occurs first.
 2. Applicants for professional licenses not receiving such licenses
may be granted partial refunds not exceeding fifty percent of the fee
paid to the department unless they have failed the examinations for
such licenses, in which case such applicants may not receive a refund.
Each applicant for a professional license who has at any time received a
partial refund of an initial license application fee shall pay all
required fees upon submitting any subsequent application for initial
licensure.
 § 111. Indian affairs. The education department, by or through the
appropriate division, bureau or officer thereof, shall exercise and
perform the functions, powers and duties conferred or imposed by law in
relation to the education of children upon the Indian reservations.
 § 112. Children in care; responsibility for education. 1. The
department shall establish and enforce standards of instruction,
personnel qualifications and other requirements for education services
or programs, as determined by rules of the regents and regulations of
the commissioner, with respect to the individual requirements of
children who are in full-time residential care in facilities or homes
operated or supervised by any state department or agency or political
subdivision. The department shall cooperate with the office of children
and family services, the department of mental hygiene and local
departments of social services with respect to educational and
vocational training programs for children placed with, committed to or
under the supervision of such agencies. The department shall promulgate
regulations requiring the cooperation of local school districts in
facilitating the prompt enrollment of children who are released or
conditionally released from residential facilities operated by or under
contract with the office of children and family services, the department
of mental hygiene and local departments of social services and in
implementing plans for release or conditional release submitted to the
family court pursuant to paragraph (c) of subdivision seven of section
353.3 of the family court act and the educational components of
permanency hearing reports submitted pursuant to section one thousand
eighty-nine of the family court act. Such regulations regarding the
educational components of permanency hearing reports submitted pursuant
to section one thousand eighty-nine of the family court act shall be
developed in conjunction with the office of children and family
services. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to apply to
responsibility for the provision or payment of care, maintenance or
other services subject to the provisions of the executive law, mental
hygiene law, social services law or any other law.
 2. The commissioner shall prepare a report and submit it to the
governor, the speaker of the assembly and the temporary president of the
senate by December thirty-first, nineteen hundred ninety-six and on
December thirty-first of each successive year. Such report shall
contain, for each facility operated by or under contract with the office
of children and family services that provides educational programs, an
assessment of each facility's compliance with the rules of the board of
regents, the regulations of the commissioner, and this chapter. Such
report shall include, but not be limited to: the number of youth
receiving services under article eighty-nine of this chapter; the
office's activities undertaken as required by subdivisions one, two,
four and eight of section forty-four hundred three of this chapter; the
number of youth receiving bilingual education services; the number of
youth eligible to receive limited English proficient services;
interviews with facility residents conducted during site visits; library
services; the ratio of teachers to students; the curriculum; the length
of stay of each youth and the number of hours of instruction provided;
instructional technology utilized; the educational services provided
following the release and conditional release of the youth, including,
but not limited to, the implementation of requirements for the
enrollment of such youth in school contained in plans for release and
conditional release submitted to the family court pursuant to paragraph
(c) of subdivision seven of section 353.3 of the family court act and in
the educational components of permanency hearing reports submitted
pursuant to section one thousand eighty-nine of the family court act and
the compliance by local school districts with the regulations
promulgated pursuant to subdivision one of this section; and any
recommendations to ensure compliance with the rules of regents,
regulations of the commissioner, and this chapter.
 3. The department shall conduct site visits every four years, with at
least one day's notice, of each facility operated by the office of
children and family services that provides educational programs to
ensure compliance with rules of the board of regents, regulations of the
commissioner, and this chapter. Such site visits shall include personal
interviews with facility residents.
 * 4. The commissioner shall establish procedures for administrative
appeals to resolve interagency disputes between school districts and
state departments or agencies or political subdivisions over
responsibility for provision of, or payment for, special education
programs or services to children with disabilities in full-time
residential care in facilities or homes operated or supervised by such
state departments or agencies or political subdivisions. During the
pendency of any such appeal, the state department or agency responsible
for developing the student's individualized education program, or the
school district responsible for developing the student's individualized
education program where there is no state department or agency so
responsible, shall provide and pay for the special education programs
and services on the student's individualized education program and may
seek reimbursement in the appeal. The commissioner shall be authorized
to make all orders that in the commissioner's judgment are proper or
necessary to give effect to the decision in the appeal. Upon a
determination that a public agency has failed to provide or pay for such
special education programs and services, the commissioner shall certify
the amount of such costs to the state comptroller and the state
comptroller to deduct such amount from any state funds that become due
to such public agency.
 * NB Repealed June 30, 2027
 § 112-a. Students confined in certain facilities; responsibility for
issuance of diplomas. 1. A person under twenty-one years of age who has
not received a high school diploma and who is placed with, committed to,
under the supervision of, detained or otherwise confined in any facility
operated or administered by a state department or agency or political
subdivision of the state which provides educational programs pursuant to
section one hundred twelve of this article, or who is confined in a
correctional facility, as defined in subdivision four of section two of
the correction law, and who participates in an educational program
provided by such facility, shall be issued a high school diploma by the
school district of location except when credit bearing educational
programming is provided by another school district. When credit bearing
educational programming is provided by another school district, that
district shall be responsible for issuing the high school diploma. The
school district responsible for issuing the diploma must determine if
such person has completed the minimum New York state diploma
requirements as set forth in the regulations of the commissioner while
placed with, committed to, under the supervision of, detained or
confined in such facility.
 2. For purposes of this section the term "school district of location"
means the school district in which the facility where such youth is
placed, committed, supervised, detained or confined is located.
 § 113. Leaves of absence to professional members of the department.
The department, subject to such regulations as the commissioner may
promulgate, may grant any professional member of the staff of the
department an extended leave of absence for advanced study, research,
professional writing or other experience of recognized professional
value, for not to exceed one year in seven at the rate of not to exceed
one-half the regular salary paid, or for not to exceed six months with
salary at full rate for such leave. The balance of salaries
appropriated for such persons, or so much thereof as may be necessary,
may be applied during the period of such absence for the purpose of the
salaries of substitutes to take the place of the persons thus on leave.
Not more than five such leaves of absence shall be granted during any
one fiscal year.
 § 114. Reduction of salaries for investment in custodial accounts. 1.
The department, in its discretion, may enter into a written agreement
with any employee to reduce the annual salary otherwise payable by law
to such employee for the purpose of investing in a custodial account, as
permitted by paragraph seven of subdivision (b) of section four hundred
three of the United States internal revenue code, as amended, or in a
tax deferred annuity, as permitted by subdivision (b) of section four
hundred three of the United States internal revenue code, as amended,
for such employee. Any such agreement shall be subject to approval and
filing by the comptroller, and shall specify the amount of such
reduction and the effective date thereof. Any such agreement may be
terminated at any time upon written notice by either such employee or
the department. Such termination shall take effect at the beginning of
the payroll period the first day of which is nearest to the thirtieth
day following the day on which such notification of termination was (a)
received by the department, in the event such termination is initiated
by the employee, or (b) sent to the employee, in the event such
termination is initiated by the department. No more than one such
agreement shall be entered into in any period of twelve successive
calendar months.
 2. Upon approval and filing by the comptroller of any such agreement
the comptroller shall reduce an employee's salary pursuant to said
agreement and pay an amount equal to the amount agreed upon for such
salary reduction as an employer contribution to the designated custodian
of the employee's account or the issuer of the employee's annuity.
Notwithstanding the reductions of salary authorized by this section, (a)
the amount of employer and employee contributions otherwise required on
behalf of an employee electing the optional retirement program pursuant
to part five of this article shall continue to be made on the basis of
the salary of such employee without regard to such reduction, or (b) in
the event a member of a public retirement system in this state agrees to
a reduction of salary pursuant to this section, such agreement shall not
cause the employee to lose any benefits under such public retirement
system to which such employee would otherwise be entitled had he or she
not agreed to a reduction in salary for the purpose of establishing a
custodial account or purchasing a tax-deferred annuity, and any required
employer and employee contributions shall continue to be made on the
basis of the salary of such employee without regard to such reduction.
Any survivor's benefit payable pursuant to sections one hundred
fifty-four and one hundred fifty-four-a of the civil service law shall
be based upon the salary of such employee without regard to the
reduction authorized by this section.
 3. Any payroll deduction, other than income tax withholdings as
required by law, which may be required or authorized pursuant to law,
contract, agreement, or any other instrument, the amount of which is
determined in relation to an employee's earnings, shall be based on the
salary of such employee without regard to reduction thereof pursuant to
any agreement authorized by this section.
 4. Payments for custodial accounts or tax deferred annuities shall be
made by the comptroller to the designated custodian or custodians of
such accounts or the issuers of such annuities out of moneys otherwise
available in accordance with law for salaries of the employees who have
entered into agreements pursuant to this section.
 5. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to diminish or
impair any benefits to which such employee or his legal representatives
or beneficiaries would be otherwise entitled had such salary reduction
agreement not been entered into in accordance with the provisions of
this section.
 * § 115. Use of artificial intelligence systems and automated
decision-making tools by the state university of New York, the city
university of New York, or community colleges. 1. The use of artificial
intelligence systems as defined by section one hundred three-e of the
state technology law and automated decision-making tools as defined by
section five hundred one of the state technology law shall not affect
(a) the existing rights of employees pursuant to an existing collective
bargaining agreement, or (b) the existing representational relationships
among employee organizations or the bargaining relationships between the
employer and an employee organization.
 2. The use of such artificial intelligence systems and automated
decision-making tools shall not result in the: (a) discharge,
displacement or loss of position, including partial displacement such as
a reduction in the hours of non-overtime work, wages, or employment
benefits, or result in the impairment of existing collective bargaining
agreements; or (b) transfer of existing duties and functions currently
performed by employees of the state or any agency or public authority
thereof to an artificial intelligence system or automated
decision-making tool.
 3. The use of such artificial intelligence system or automated
decision-making tool shall not alter the rights or benefits, and
privileges, including but not limited to terms and conditions of
employment, civil service status, and collective bargaining unit
membership status of all existing employees of the state university of
New York, the city university of New York, or community colleges shall
be preserved and protected.
 * NB Repealed July 1, 2028
 § 140. Historical documentary heritage grants and aid. 1. Short title.
This section shall be known and may be cited as the "New York
documentary heritage act".
 2. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall
mean:
 a. "Historical records". Records that contain significant information
that is of enduring value and are therefore worthy of long-term
retention and systematic management. Historical records may include
diaries, journals, ledgers, minutes, reports, photographs, maps,
drawings, blueprints, agreements, memoranda, deeds, case files, and
other material. They may take any of several physical forms: parchment,
paper, microfilm, cassette tape, film, videotape, computer tapes, discs,
and other "machine readable" formats.
 b. "Historical records program". Any deliberate, organized program to
collect, hold, care for, and make available historical records,
including identifying, appraising, arranging, describing, and
referencing them and using them in exhibitions and other public and
educational programs.
 c. "Institutions eligible for historical records program grants".
Chartered or incorporated nonprofit archives, libraries, historical
societies and museums and other nonprofit institutions in New York state
which operate historical records programs and which meet standards to be
established by the commissioner pursuant to regulations adopted for such
purposes. Institutions operated by state or federal government agencies,
and local government archives shall not be eligible for historical
records project grants, except that an institution of the state
university of New York or the city university of New York may apply for
historical records project grants with regard to records other than
internal records generated by the institution after July first, nineteen
hundred forty-eight if it is a component of the state university of New
York or after July first, nineteen hundred seventy-nine if it is a
component of the city university of New York or after the subsequent
date on which the institution became a component of such university.
 d. "Historical records program project". A project to carry out one or
more of the activities described in subdivision three of this section.
 e. "Cooperative project". A collaborative effort undertaken by two or
more historical records programs, to meet shared needs or to accomplish
a common purpose, or a project undertaken by a service provider to
address the historical records needs of more than one historical records
program.
 f. "Regional advisory and assistance agency". A reference and research
library resources system, or an alternate public or nonprofit agency or
organization willing to provide historical records program development
advice and assistance services covering a reference and research library
resources system region which is acceptable to the commissioner.
 g. "Historical records program development advice and assistance".
Advice and assistance on the development and strengthening of historical
records programs, promotion of cooperation, coordinated documentation
planning, training in historical records management techniques, advice
and assistance in reporting of information concerning historical records
to statewide and national data bases where appropriate, and initiatives
to increase public awareness of the values and uses of historical
records.
 h. "Service provider". A nonprofit professional or other association,
local government, college or university, historical service agency, or
other nonprofit institution or system which provides services to
historical records programs.
 i. "Cost sharing". Local funds, local in-kind services, and other
funds and support from other than state sources.
 j. "Program year". The annual period from July first through June
thirtieth.
 3. Scope of activities to be supported. The commissioner is authorized
to provide grants and advice to institutions eligible for historical
records programs and cooperative projects, and aid to regional advisory
and assistance agencies, the central administration of the state
university of New York and the central administration of the city
university of New York. Grants shall be used to support the development
and administration of historical records programs; the surveying,
appraisal, identification, collection, duplication, arrangement,
description, and making available of historical records; public and
educational programming relating to historical records; projects to
improve archival techniques; and projects to promote the research use of
historical records. Aid to regional advisory and assistance agencies
shall be used to promote and assist the development of historical
records programs. Aid to the central administrations of the state
university of New York and the city university of New York shall be used
to develop guidelines, policies and procedures, training, technical
assistance, materials, oversight, retention and disposition schedules
for university records, and to promote, guide and direct the component
institutions of such universities in the sound administration of
archival records.
 4. Distribution of funds. a. Historical documentary heritage funds
shall be distributed as follows: (1) Grants. (i) individual historical
records program projects shall be eligible for at least thirty-five
percent of the amount available;
 (ii) cooperative projects shall be eligible for up to twenty percent
of the amount available.
 (2) Aid. (i) regional advisory and assistance agencies shall be
eligible for forty percent of the amount available;
 (ii) the central administration of the state university of New York
shall be eligible for two and one-half percent of the total amount
available;
 (iii) the central administration of the city university of New York
shall be eligible for two and one-half percent of the total amount
available.
 b. Notwithstanding the provisions of subparagraphs one and two of
paragraph a of this subdivision, the commissioner, taking into account
the recommendations of the New York state historical records advisory
board, may distribute funds designated for one purpose to address the
needs of another purpose, provided that the commissioner determines that
the significance of the contributions to be realized from the proposals
in one category outweighs the significance of the contributions to be
realized from the proposals in another category.
 5. Cost-sharing. The commissioner shall determine the amount of
cost-sharing required from historical records programs, including
cooperative programs. For individual historical records program projects
involving arrangement, description, and other work relating directly to
the administration of historical records held by a program, the amount
of such cost-sharing shall be at least fifty percent.
 6. Applications for historical records program projects. a. Filing. By
dates determined by the commissioner each year, an eligible institution
may file an application, in a form prescribed by the commissioner, for a
grant to support the approved costs of a proposed historical records
project.
 b. Content. Such application shall include, but need not be limited
to:
 (1) a statement describing the applicant's need for the funding
requested;
 (2) collection statements and policies used by the institution to
guide its acquisition efforts;
 (3) a summary description of the records included in the historical
records program of the institution;
 (4) the status of finding aids and published guides for the historical
records held by the institution;
 (5) the current and/or anticipated level of use and audience for the
historical records;
 (6) the importance of the historical records for documenting life in
New York;
 (7) the expected impact of the grant upon the historical records
program;
 (8) the plan of work for the activities for which the funding is
sought;
 (9) the proposed project budget, including cost-sharing which would be
committed to the project; and
 (10) the staff and other resources devoted to the institution's
historical records program on an ongoing basis.
 c. Approval. In approving any application pursuant to this
subdivision, the commissioner shall consider:
 (1) information in the proposal as set forth in paragraph b of this
subdivision;
 (2) the capacity of the institution to make the historical records
known and accessible for research, education, public programs, improved
policy making and other public benefits;
 (3) the potential for improving the documentation of the heritage of
any racial and ethnic group; and
 (4) the potential for improving the documentation of under documented
subjects, institutions, or activities.
 7. Application for cooperative projects. a. Filing. By dates to be
established by the commissioner each year, a service provider or an
eligible institution acting as fiscal agent on behalf of a group of
eligible institutions, may file an application, in a form prescribed by
the commissioner. A group of cooperating institutions may be formed
because of a common purpose, rather than because of geographical
proximity.
 b. Content. Such application shall include, but need not be limited
to:
 (1) a statement describing the applicant's need for the funding
requested;
 (2) a description of the issue, problem, or need that the project will
address;
 (3) a description of the historical records programs to be served and
how the effort to be undertaken in a cooperative project relates to and
will strengthen these programs;
 (4) description of the plan of work for the project;
 (5) outcome or product of the project and how it will improve the
identification and administration of historical records or contribute to
the strengthening of historical records programs; and
 (6) the proposed budget, including cost-sharing that would be
contributed to the project.
 c. Approval. In approving any application pursuant to this
subdivision, the commissioner shall consider:
 (1) information in the proposal as set forth in paragraph b of this
subdivision;
 (2) the importance of the records involved for the documentation of
life in New York state;
 (3) the importance of the project and the intended outcome or product
in terms of strengthening the programs of the cooperating institutions
and promoting improved historical records management;
 (4) the capacities of the cooperating institutions or service
providers for carrying out the project, including prior experience with
cooperative or service projects; and
 (5) the potential for cooperating institutions to sustain an ongoing
productive cooperative relationship as a result of the project.
 8. Aid for regional advisory and assistance agencies. a. Coordination.
The commissioner shall establish statewide priorities for regional
advisory and assistance agencies and shall assist and coordinate their
efforts.
 b. Historical records program advice and assistance plans. To be
eligible to receive aid annually, each participating regional advisory
and assistance agency shall submit an annual workplan acceptable to the
commissioner, and, after the first year of receiving aid, a report on
activities of the prior year and a five-year plan, by dates designated
by the commissioner. The five-year plan shall outline goals and
objectives to be accomplished in the region during the five-year period.
The annual workplan shall describe the activities to be carried out
during the year and the program advice and assistance to be provided.
The five-year plans and the annual workplans shall reflect regional
priorities and shall be consistent with statewide priorities established
by the commissioner.
 c. Aid. The commissioner shall each year determine the distribution of
aid among eligible regional advisory and assistance agencies. In doing
so, he shall take into account the level of resources needed to provide
the services described in paragraphs f and g of subdivision two of this
section in a satisfactory manner, the extent of the geographical area
served by each agency, and the size of the population served by each
agency, and shall distribute the available funds in such a manner as
will best give effect to this section.
 9. Aid for state university of New York and city university of New
York. To be eligible to receive aid annually, the central
administration of the state university of New York and the central
administration of the city university of New York shall each submit an
annual workplan acceptable to the commissioner, and, after the first
year of receiving aid, a report on activities of the prior year and a
five-year plan.
 11. Regulations. The commissioner shall adopt regulations to implement
the provisions of this section.
 PART IV
 SCIENTIFIC AND HISTORIC PLACES
 § 174. Powers formerly exercised by the state board of geographic
names. The regents, or such bureau, division or officers of the
university or of the education department as may be designated by them
for such purpose, shall 1. Determine and establish the correct
historical and etymological form of the place names in this state and
recommend the adoption of such correct forms for public use.
 2. Determine the form and propriety of new place names proposed for
general use, and no corporation, individual or community shall introduce
such new place names without the consent and approval of this board.
 3. Co-operate with the United States board of geographic names and
with the United States post-office department in establishing a proper,
correct and historically accurate form for all place names proposed as
designations of new post-offices.
 4. No petition or recommendation for the naming of any mountain, lake,
river or other natural object for or in honor of any living person shall
be granted, approved or consented to by the regents of the university or
by the committee on geographic names appointed by it except by unanimous
vote.
 PART V
 EDUCATION DEPARTMENT OPTIONAL RETIREMENT PROGRAM
 § 180. Definitions. Wherever used in this part V of this article:
 1. The term "eligible employee" means each employee of the education
department who occupies a position which is designated by the
commissioner as requiring the rendering of professional services within
the field of supervision of higher education, and who, at the time of
his initial employment with the department or within one year prior
thereto, owns or owned a contract which may legally be continued
pursuant to this part. An eligible employee who has elected to be
covered by the education department optional retirement program shall
not be deemed ineligible by virtue of a subsequent assignment within the
education department to a sphere of responsibility outside of the field
of supervision of higher education. No person receiving a retirement
benefit from any retirement or pension system of New York state or any
political subdivision thereof shall be eligible to elect the education
department optional retirement program.
 2. The term "education department optional retirement program" means
the retirement program established pursuant to part V of this article.
 3. The term "electing employee" means any eligible employee who
exercises his election pursuant to this part V of this article to
participate in the education department optional retirement program.
 4. The term "state salary" means all amounts paid by or for the state
as compensation for services rendered by an eligible employee.
 5. The term "insurer" means a life insurance corporation, or other
corporation, subject to department of financial services supervision.
 § 181. Education department optional retirement program established.
1. There is hereby established an education department optional
retirement program which shall provide for the continuation of contracts
providing retirement and death benefits for or on behalf of electing
employees. Under such program the state and such employees shall
contribute, to the extent authorized or required, towards the
continuation of such contracts, which shall have been issued to and
shall have previously become the property of such employees.
 2. The commissioner shall, in his discretion, designate the insurer or
insurers to which payment of such contributions under this article may
be made and shall approve the form and content of such contracts. In
making such designation and giving such approval the commissioner shall
give due consideration to (i) the nature and extent of the rights and
benefits to be provided by such contracts for electing employees and
their beneficiaries, (ii) the relation of such rights and benefits to
the amount of contributions to be made under this part V of this
article, (iii) the suitability of such rights and benefits to the needs
and interests of electing employees and to the interests of the
department in the employment and retention of eligible employees, and
(iv) the authority and ability of the designated insurer or insurers to
provide rights and benefits under such contracts.
 3. The commissioner is hereby authorized to provide for the
administration of such education department optional retirement program
and to perform or authorize the performance of such functions as may be
necessary for such purposes in accordance with this part V of this
article.
 § 182. Rates of contribution. 1. Employer contributions. In the case
of any electing employee initially appointed on or before June
thirtieth, nineteen hundred ninety-two, the state shall, during
continuance of his employment, make contributions at the rate of nine
percentum of that portion of his state salary upon which contributions
are or may hereafter be paid to the secretary of the treasury of the
United States pursuant to article three of the retirement and social
security law and at the rate of twelve percentum of that portion of his
state salary above said amount, out of moneys which shall be
appropriated to the department for such purpose. In the case of any
electing employee initially appointed on or after July first, nineteen
hundred ninety-two, the state shall, during continuance of his
employment, make contributions at the rate of eight percentum of his
state salary during the first seven years of such employment and at the
rate of ten percentum of his state salary, thereafter, out of moneys
which shall be appropriated to the department for such purpose. For
purposes of this subdivision, that portion of the employee's salary upon
which contributions are paid to the secretary of the treasury of the
United States pursuant to article three of the retirement and social
security law shall not exceed sixteen thousand five hundred dollars.
 2. Employee contributions. In the case of any electing employee,
contributions at the rate of three per centum of his state salary shall
be deducted by the state comptroller as the employee contribution,
provided however, that such employee contribution shall be made by the
state in accordance with subdivision one of this section during such
period as (a) either section seventy-a of the retirement and social
security law or section five hundred twenty-eight of this title provides
that the contribution of each member of the New York state employees'
retirement system or the New York state teachers' retirement system in
the employ of the state shall be reduced by at least eight per centum of
his compensation, or (b) employee contributions to either such system
are no longer required by reason of such system becoming noncontributory
for state employees.
 Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, beginning April first,
two thousand thirteen any electing employee appointed on or after April
first, two thousand twelve, the rate at which each such employee shall
contribute in any current plan year (January first to December
thirty-first) shall be determined by reference to the wages of such
member in the second plan year (January first to December thirty-first)
preceding such current plan year as follows:
 (a) members with wages of forty-five thousand dollars per annum or
less shall contribute three per centum of annual wages;
 (b) members with wages greater than forty-five thousand per annum, but
not more than fifty-five thousand per annum shall contribute three and
one-half per centum of annual wages;
 (c) members with wages greater than fifty-five thousand per annum, but
not more than seventy-five thousand per annum shall contribute four and
one-half per centum of annual wages;
 (d) members with wages greater than seventy-five thousand per annum
but not more than one hundred thousand per annum shall contribute five
and three-quarters per centum of annual wages; and
 (e) members with wages greater than one hundred thousand per annum
shall contribute six per centum of annual wages.
 Notwithstanding the foregoing, during each of the first three plan
years (January first to December thirty-first) in which such member has
established membership in the Education Department Optional Retirement
Program, such employee shall contribute a percent of annual wages in
accordance with the preceding schedule based upon a projection of annual
wages provided by the employer.
 3. Payment of contributions pursuant to subdivisions one and two of
this section shall be made to the designated insurer or insurers upon
audit and warrant of the state comptroller.
 § 183. Election. 1. Election of the education department optional
retirement program. (a) Each eligible employee initially appointed on or
after July first, nineteen hundred sixty-eight, shall, within thirty
days of his entry into service, elect (i) to join either the New York
state teachers' retirement system or the New York state employees'
retirement system in accordance with the provisions of law applicable
thereto or (ii) to elect the education department optional retirement
program established pursuant to this part V of this article. Each
eligible employee employed by the department prior to July first,
nineteen hundred sixty-eight shall make such election on or before
December fourth, nineteen hundred sixty-eight. Any such election shall
be effective as of the date of entry into service with the department,
except that with respect to those eligible employees possessing
contracts which may legally be continued under this part and who
initially entered into service with the department prior to the
effective date of this part, the deferred election shall be effective as
of the effective date of this part.
 (b) In the event an eligible employee fails to make an election as
provided in paragraph (a) of this subdivision, he shall be deemed to
have elected membership in the New York state teachers' retirement
system. Such membership shall be effective as of the date of entry into
service with the department.
 (c) The amount, if any, required to be contributed by any employee in
accordance with an election, a deferred election or a failure to elect
pursuant to paragraph (a) or paragraph (b) of this subdivision shall be
collected by payroll deductions in such manner as may be provided by the
state comptroller for those persons electing the education department
optional retirement program, or in the case of membership in either the
New York state employees' retirement system or the New York state
teachers' retirement system, by such retirement system. Nothing herein
contained shall be construed to authorize or require payment by the
state of contributions on account of services rendered prior to the
effective date of this part by eligible employees who at the time of
their employment with the department chose to continue, on a voluntary
basis, coverage similar to that conferred by this part, but shall be
construed to authorize continuation of such contracts after the
effective date of this part, subject to rules and regulations to be
established by the commissioner.
 2. Ineligibility for retirement system membership. Any employee who
elects the education department optional retirement program shall be
ineligible for membership in either the New York state employees'
retirement system or the New York state teachers' retirement system so
long as he shall remain employed in the department and shall continue in
the education department optional retirement program.
 3. (a) Any eligible employee who is a member of either the New York
state employees' retirement system or the New York state teachers'
retirement system at the time he elects the optional retirement program
established pursuant to this part shall be deemed to be a person who
discontinues service on the effective date of such election, for the
purpose of determining his eligibility for rights and benefits in either
such system; provided, however, that if he does not withdraw his
accumulated contributions (i) his continued service with the education
department while under the optional retirement program shall be deemed
to be member service in either the New York state employees' retirement
system or the New York state teachers' retirement system for the purpose
of determining his eligibility for any vested retirement allowance,
retirement allowance or ordinary death benefit under either such system
dependent upon a specified period of total service or upon attainment of
a specified age while in service or upon death while in service and (ii)
the amount of any such benefit to which he or his estate or person
designated by him may become entitled under either such system shall be
computed only on the basis of service otherwise creditable to him
therein and his compensation during such service.
 (b) Electing employees and their beneficiaries shall not be entitled
to any right or benefit under either the New York state employees'
retirement system or the New York state teachers' retirement system
other than a vested retirement allowance, retirement allowance or
ordinary death benefit to the extent expressly provided for in this
section.
 4. (a) Subdivision two of this section shall not apply to any eligible
employee who has elected the education department optional retirement
program and after June thirtieth, two thousand two, renders service
which is creditable in the New York state teachers' retirement system,
other than service for which a contribution is made to the education
department optional retirement program.
 (b) Subdivision three of this section shall not apply to any member of
the New York state teachers' retirement system who, after joining such
system, elects the education department optional retirement program.
 (c) Anything in subdivision three of this section notwithstanding, any
eligible employee who is a member of the New York state teachers'
retirement system and had elected the education department optional
retirement program prior to July first, two thousand two, may obtain
credit for service, other than service for which a contribution is made
to the education department optional retirement program, which is
creditable in such system, was rendered after such member had elected
the education department optional retirement program, and was rendered
between December first, nineteen hundred ninety-one and June thirtieth,
two thousand two, provided (i) such member has rendered at least five
years of service credited with the New York state teachers' retirement
system at the time such service is credited, and (ii) in the case of
such member subject to the provisions of article fourteen or fifteen of
the retirement and social security law, the member contributes three
percent of the wages earned for such service together with interest at
the rate of five percent per annum compounded annually from the date of
such service until payment is made.
 (d) Anything in this subdivision four notwithstanding, service as an
eligible employee for which a contribution is made to the education
department optional retirement program shall neither entitle any
eligible employee to join or rejoin the New York state teachers'
retirement system nor be creditable in such system.
 § 184. Survivor's benefits. In the case of the death of any electing
employee after the effective date of his election and before retirement,
the value of the death benefits provided by the contract or contracts
continued under the education department optional retirement program
which is attributable to the state's contribution as determined by the
commissioner, shall be deemed to be an ordinary death benefit provided
under a public pension plan within the meaning of section one hundred
fifty-four of the civil service law.
 § 185. Social security. Every electing employee shall have old-age,
survivors, and disability insurance coverage provided by the federal
social security act in accordance with the provisions of article three
of the retirement and social security law.
 § 186. State not liable for payment of benefits. Neither the state
nor the department shall be a party to any contract continued in whole
or in part with contributions made under the education department
optional retirement program established and administered pursuant to
this part V of this article. No retirement, death or other benefits
shall be payable by the state or by the department under such education
department optional retirement program, except as otherwise provided in
section 184. Such benefits shall be paid to electing employees or their
beneficiaries by the designated insurer or insurers in accordance with
the terms of their contracts.
 § 187. Inconsistent provisions of other acts superseded. Insofar as
the provisions of this part V of this article are inconsistent with the
provisions of any other act, general or special, the provisions of this
article shall be controlling.
ARTICLE 6
Section 293. Establishment of interstate library district.
 294. Appointment of members of governing board of interstate
 library district.
 295. Support of interstate library district.
 296. Compact administrator.
 297. Withdrawal.
 § 293. Establishment of interstate library district. One or more
incorporated public libraries of this state, by majority action of the
board of trustees thereof, may enter into an agreement with one or more
public library agencies in another state or states which have adopted
the interstate library compact for the purpose of establishing and
maintaining an interstate library district. For the purposes of this
act, a cooperative library system established under article five of this
chapter shall be deemed to be a public library.
 § 294. Appointment of members of governing board of interstate library
district. (a) The board of trustees of each public library which is a
party to an agreement establishing an interstate library district
pursuant to section two hundred ninety-three of this article, shall
appoint a member or members to represent such library on the governing
board of such interstate library district. The number of such
representatives shall be determined by the agreement establishing such
interstate library district.
 (b) The governing board of such interstate library district shall be a
body corporate.
 (c) Such governing board shall administer such interstate library
district as provided in this act.
 § 295. Support of interstate library district. Any library, library
system, county, city, village, town or school district of this state may
provide funds, including funds received from local taxation for state
aid for the support and operation of an interstate library district
established as provided herein, in accordance with the terms of the
agreement establishing the same provided that such agreement together
with the plan of library service thereunder has been approved by the
commissioner.
 § 296. Compact administrator. The commissioner of education shall be
the administrator for the interstate library compact pursuant to article
ten of the compact.
 § 297. Withdrawal. The commissioner of education is hereby designated
as the official who is authorized to send and receive the notices
provided in article eleven of the compact in the event of withdrawal of
this state or any other state from the compact.
 ARTICLE 7-A
 STANDARDIZED TESTING
Section 340. Definitions.
 341. Background reports.
 341-a. Standardized testing; reports.
 342. Disclosure of test contents.
 342-a. Special administrations.
 343. Notice.
 344. Disclosure of test scores.
 344-a. Pretest questions.
 344-b. Due process.
 344-c. Additional test subject rights.
 345. Regulations.
 346. Test subject review of computerized test.
 346-a. Advisory committee.
 347. Violations.
 348. Severability.
 § 340. Definitions. As used in this article: 1. "Standardized test" or
"test" means any test that is given in New York at the expense of the
test subject and designed for use and used in the process of selection
for post-secondary or professional school admissions. Such tests shall
include, but are not limited to, the Preliminary Scholastic Aptitude
Test, Scholastic Aptitude Test, ACT Assessment, Graduate Record
Examination, Medical College Admission Test, Law School Admission Test,
Dental Admission Testing Program, Graduate Management Admission Test,
Miller Analogies Test and the Test for Standard Written English. This
article shall not apply to any state, federal, or local civil service
test, any test used solely for placement, credit-by-examination or other
nonadmission purpose or any test developed and administered by an
individual school or institution solely for its own purposes or any
test, or portion of a test, designed to evaluate manual skills or other
physical abilities.
 2. "Commissioner" means the commissioner of education of the state of
New York.
 3. "Test subject" means an individual to whom a test is administered.
 4. "Test agency" means any organization, association, corporation,
partnership, or individual or person that develops, sponsors or
administers a test.
 5. "Part" means each portion of a test for which a score is
calculated.
 6. "Test form" means the test booklet or instrument used for each part
of each test.
 7. "Pretest question" means any question or group of questions on a
test not used to calculate the reported scores of a test subject, nor
used to equate scores for that test.
 8. "Test year" means the twelve-month period commencing September
first during which the test agency administers a particular test.
 9. "Computerized test" means any test form administered to test
subjects by means of a computer.
 § 341. Background reports. 1. Whenever any test agency prepares or
causes to have prepared research which is used in any study, evaluation
or statistical report pertaining to a test operational after January
first, nineteen hundred eighty, such study, evaluation or report shall
be filed with the commissioner. This section shall apply to any
unpublished study, evaluation or statistical report cited in memoranda
of support or opposition to legislation or proposed rules and
regulations relating to standardized testing written or published by
the test agency or its employees in behalf of the test agency on or
after July first, nineteen hundred ninety-three.
 2. If any reports or other documents submitted pursuant to this
section contain information identifiable with any test subject or test
user institution, such information shall be deleted prior to filing with
the commissioner.
 3. All reports or other documents submitted pursuant to this section
shall be public records.
 § 341-a. Standardized testing; reports. 1. Definitions. As used in
this section and section three hundred forty-six-a of this article, the
following words and terms shall have the following meanings:
 a. "Test" means a standardized test as defined in section three
hundred forty of this article; provided however, that the test of
English as a foreign language shall not constitute a test for purposes
of this section;
 b. "Test subject" means a test subject as defined in section three
hundred forty of this article.
 2. Not later than July first, nineteen hundred eighty-eight, and for
one year thereafter, test agencies shall ask each test subject to report
on the test answer sheet, test registration form, or other appropriate
means all of the following information:
 a. The test subject's race or ethnicity, including the following
groups: Black, White, American Indian, Asian, Hispanic or other;
 b. The test subject's gender, expressed as male or female; and
 c. The test subject's linguistic background, expressed as whether
English was the dominant language of the test subject's household.
 3. The test agency shall advise all test subjects that they are not
required to provide the information requested under paragraphs a and c
of subdivision two of this section, that they will not be penalized if
they do not provide the information, and that the information provided
will be used exclusively for research, recruitment, talent
identification and planning purposes.
 4. a. Not later than September first, nineteen hundred eighty-nine,
the test agency shall prepare and file or cause to be filed with the
committee described in section three hundred forty-six-a of this article
a report relating to each test administered and disclosed pursuant to
section three hundred forty-two of this article by the test agency in
New York between July first, nineteen hundred eighty-eight and July
first, nineteen hundred eighty-nine. Such report shall be subject to the
provisions of subdivisions two and three of section three hundred
forty-one of this article.
 b. Each such test report shall show by race or ethnicity, linguistic
background and gender, the mean-scaled scores of test subjects, the
standard deviation of scaled scores, and the distribution of scaled
scores.
 5. a. Not later than September first, nineteen hundred eighty-nine,
the test agency shall prepare and file or cause to be filed with the
committee an item report relating to each question used in calculating
the subject's raw score on each test form administered and disclosed
pursuant to section three hundred forty-two of this article in New York
between July first, nineteen hundred eighty-eight and July first,
nineteen hundred eighty-nine. Such report shall be subject to the
provisions of subdivisions two and three of section three hundred
forty-one of this article.
 b. Each such item report shall show for each question used in
calculating the test subject's raw score, the item's content area
specification, and where disclosed pursuant to section three hundred
forty-two of this article, information identifying the text of the item,
and the correct answer-rates and R-biserial correlations for all test
subjects, combined and separately by race, ethnicity, gender or
linguistic background as reported under subdivision two of this section.
Such item report shall also calculate the correct answer rates and
R-biserial correlations comparing performance by gender and language
dominance, within race and ethnic subgroups, including language
dominance by the total gender group. Content area specification shall be
reported for each exam to indicate area of knowledge, skill or ability
that an item purports to measure according to the examination's
manufacturer or sponsoring agency. Correct answer-rates shall be
calculated by dividing the number of correct answers for a question used
in calculating the subject's raw score on all test forms administered
and disclosed pursuant to section three hundred forty-two of this
article between July first, nineteen hundred eighty-eight and July
first, nineteen hundred eighty-nine by the number of test subjects to
whom those test forms were administered. R-biserial correlations shall
be calculated by correlating performance on a question used in
calculating the subject's raw score on each test form administered
between July first, nineteen hundred eighty-eight and July first,
nineteen hundred eighty-nine with performance on the tests as shown by
total scores.
 c. The test agency shall not be required to include in such test and
item reports under this subdivision and subdivision four of this section
information for any group comprising fewer than one hundred test
subjects.
 d. The test report will also include data showing measures of
differential item functioning on individual questions that take into
account differences in overall test performance. Data will be provided
for test items which contribute to the candidate scores and for which
differential item data are available. Differential item functioning data
shall be reported for comparative purposes between the following pairs
of groups: (Black-White), (Hispanic-White), (American Indian-White),
(Asian-White), (Other-White) and (Male-Female). Documentation as to the
methods by which these data have been calculated will accompany the
data. Differential item functioning data shall not be required for pairs
of groups comprising fewer than four hundred test subjects in each
group.
 e. The committee may request additional data, where already available
and published, from the test agencies to clarify the data previously
reported pursuant to this subdivision and subdivision four of this
section.
 § 342. Disclosure of test contents. 1. Within thirty days after the
results of any standardized test are released, the test agency shall
file or cause to be filed with the commissioner:
 a. a copy of all test questions used in calculating the test subject's
raw score;
 b. the corresponding acceptable answers to those questions; and
 c. all rules for converting raw scores into those scores reported to
the test subject together with an explanation of such rules.
 2. Within ninety days after filing a standardized test pursuant to
subdivision one of this section and for a period of not less than ninety
days after the offer is made, the test agency shall provide to the test
subject the opportunity to secure:
 a. a copy of the test questions used to calculate the test subject's
raw score;
 b. a copy of the test subject's answer sheet, or answer record where
there is no answer sheet, together with a copy of the correct answer
sheet to the same test with questions used to calculate the test
subject's raw score so marked; and
 c. a statement of the raw score used to calculate the scores reported
to the test subject.
 The agency may charge a nominal fee for providing such information,
not to exceed the direct cost thereof. Notwithstanding any other
provision in this section, a test agency shall permit a test subject to
elect in writing this opportunity both at the time the test subject
registers to take a test and at the time the test agency reports test
scores to the test subject; provided, however, that the provisions of
this paragraph shall not apply where either the materials described in
paragraph (a) or (b) of this subdivision are provided during the test
administration. The form permitting such election shall describe the
opportunity offered pursuant to this subdivision in clear and plain
English and shall be part of and included in the test registration form
and in a form provided to the test subject at the time test scores are
reported to the test subject.
 3. a. Notwithstanding subdivisions one and two of this section, a test
agency may withhold from disclosure any test forms administered in New
York in any given test program to not more than five percent of the
anticipated test subjects annually or to not more than five thousand
test subjects annually, whichever is less.
 b. Prior to the beginning of a test agency's testing year, the test
agency shall designate the dates upon which test forms to be filed with
the commissioner will be used. The test agency shall inform potential
test subjects of these dates.
 4. Within three years after the administration in New York of a
standardized test form not required to be disclosed under subdivision
three of this section the test agency shall file the test form and the
corresponding acceptable answers with the commissioner.
 5. Subdivisions one, two, three, and four of this section shall not
apply to the GRE Advanced Tests. With respect to such tests, the test
agency shall file with the commissioner the following:
 a. a copy of all test questions used in calculating the test subject's
raw score from one test form administered during the period set forth
below;
 b. the corresponding acceptable answers; and
 c. all rules for converting raw scores into those scores reported to
the test subject together with an explanation of such rules, in
accordance with the following schedule:
 (1) once every three years for such test administered to forty
thousand or more test subjects in New York annually, and
 (2) once every five years for such tests administered to five thousand
or less than forty thousand test subjects in New York annually, and
 (3) once every eight years for such tests administered to fewer than
five thousand test subjects in New York annually.
 5-a. Subdivisions one, two, three, four, five and six of this section
shall not apply to the Medical College Admission Test. With respect to
that test, the test agency shall file with the commissioner once every
four years the following:
 a. a copy of all test questions used in calculating the test subject's
raw score from one test form administered during the previous four-year
period;
 b. the corresponding acceptable answers; and
 c. all rules for converting raw scores into those scores reported to
the test subject together with an explanation of such rules.
 5-b. Subdivisions one, two, three, four, five, five-a and six of this
section shall not apply to SAT Subject Tests. With respect to such
tests, the test agency shall maintain on file with the commissioner a
complete sample test, reflecting tests currently in use, of each type of
SAT Subject Test to be administered in New York and provide to the test
subject the opportunity to secure a copy of a representative complete
sample test of a Subject Test. Whenever a new Subject Test is added the
test agency shall file and publish updated information consisting of
descriptions and sample items prior to the administration of any such
test in New York. Whenever a substantial change is made in any subject,
the test agency shall file and publish updated information consisting of
complete sample tests prior to the administration of any such test in
New York.
 6. Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, if a test agency
has administered a standardized test to less than two thousand test
subjects in New York annually, the test agency shall file with the
commissioner at least once every three years:
 a. a copy of all test questions used in calculating the test subject's
raw score from one test form administered during that three year period;
 b. the corresponding acceptable answers with the commissioner; and
 c. all rules for converting raw scores into those scores reported to
the test subject together with an explanation of such rules.
 7. Documents submitted to the commissioner pursuant to this section
shall be public records and, in collecting this material, the State
Education Department shall be considered an archive under Title 17 § 108
U.S.C.
 8. a. Within sixty days of the receipt of correspondence from a test
subject, their representative, or a user institution challenging or
questioning the keying, scoring, wording, or any aspect of a test
question or questions used to calculate test subjects' raw scores for
standardized tests filed with the commissioner pursuant to subdivision
one of this section, the test agency shall place such correspondence in
a separately maintained file. Such filed correspondence must contain no
information identifiable with any individual or user institution unless
authorized by that individual or institution.
 b. Within thirty days of the test agency's sending out a response to
the test subject, their representative or the user institution, the test
agency shall place on file a copy of any of the test agency's written
responses to such correspondence clarifying, explaining or defending the
test question or questions. Such filed responses must contain no
information identifiable with any individual or user institution unless
authorized by that individual or institution.
 c. Test subjects and any other individual shall be able to gain access
to such file by submitting a written request to the test agency. Test
agencies shall make copies of any of the requested contents of the file.
Test agencies may charge nominal fees to provide copies of any of the
contents of the file upon request. Such fees may not exceed the direct
costs of administering and maintaining such files and photocopying
requested materials.
 9. Each test agency shall report the following information to the
commissioner annually:
 a. the dates of each test administered by the test agency during the
testing year;
 b. the total number of test subjects who took the test at each
administration;
 c. the total amount of fees received from test subjects by the test
agency for the test for that testing year; and
 d. those expenses which are directly attributable to the test and
those expenses which are indirectly attributable to the test. The test
agency shall also list expenses indirectly attributable to all
activities of the test agency, including expenses not identifiable as
attributable to a test.
 10. a. Except as provided in paragraphs b, c, d and e of this
subdivision, subdivisions one and two of this section shall not apply to
any test agency which discloses test forms administered to at least
two-thirds of the test subjects in a test year, based on the number of
administrations in the most recent test year.
 b. Subdivisions one, two, three, four and six of this section shall
not apply to the SAT Test during the nineteen hundred
ninety-six--ninety-seven test year or to the two thousand eighteen--two
thousand nineteen test year so long as the College Entrance Examination
Board discloses in each such testing year:
 (i) four test forms used to administer the SAT Test in New York, or
 (ii) if fewer than four regular SAT Test administrations are offered
in New York during a test year, the same number of SAT Test forms as
regular SAT Test administrations in New York in that test year.
 b-1. Subdivisions one, two, three, four and six of this section shall
not apply to the SAT Test during the two thousand nineteen--two thousand
twenty test year or any subsequent test year, so long as the college
entrance examination board discloses in each such testing year:
 (i) if seven or more regular SAT Test administrations are offered in
New York during a test year, four SAT Test forms used to administer the
SAT Test in New York;
 (ii) if four, five or six regular SAT Test administrations are offered
in New York during a test year, three SAT Test forms used to administer
the SAT Test in New York; or
 (iii) if three or fewer regular SAT Test administrations are offered
in New York during a test year, the same number of SAT Test forms used
to administer the SAT Test in New York.
 b-2. Subdivisions one, two, three, four and six of this section shall
not apply to the ACT college entrance examination during the two
thousand nineteen--two thousand twenty test year or any subsequent test
year, so long as the ACT college entrance examination board discloses in
each such testing year:
 (i) if seven or more regular ACT college entrance examinations test
administrations are offered in New York during a test year, four ACT
college entrance examinations test forms used to administer the ACT
college entrance examination test in New York;
 (ii) if four, five or six regular ACT college entrance examinations
test administrations are offered in New York during a test year, three
ACT college entrance examinations test forms used to administer the ACT
college entrance examination test in New York; or
 (iii) if three or fewer regular ACT college entrance examinations test
administrations are offered in New York during a test year, the same
number of ACT college entrance examination test forms as regular ACT
college entrance examination test administrations in New York in that
test year.
 c. Subdivisions one, two, three, four, and six of this section shall
not apply to the Graduate Record Examination ("GRE") General Test during
the nineteen hundred ninety-six--ninety-seven test year so long as the
Graduate Record Examinations Board discloses in that test year the
greater of:
 (i) one GRE General Test form administered in New York, or
 (ii) one-half the number of GRE General Test forms administered in New
York in that test year.
 d. Subdivisions one, two, three, four, and six of this section shall
not apply to the GRE General Test during the nineteen hundred
ninety-seven--ninety-eight test year or any subsequent test year, so
long as the Graduate Record Examinations Board discloses in each such
test year one-half of the number of GRE General Test forms administered
in regular administrations in New York in that test year if it offers at
least two regular administrations of that test in New York in that test
year.
 e. Subdivisions one, two, three, four, and six of this section shall
not apply to the Test of English as a Foreign Language ("TOEFL") during
the nineteen hundred ninety-six--ninety-seven test year or any
subsequent test year so long as the TOEFL Policy Council discloses in
each such test year:
 (i) five test forms used to administer the TOEFL in New York, or
 (ii) if fewer than five regular TOEFL administrations are offered in
New York during a test year, the same number of TOEFL forms as such
regular administrations in New York during that test year.
 f. Any test agency offering one or more nondisclosed administrations
pursuant to this subdivision shall provide to test subjects, in a clear
and conspicuous manner in its registration materials, notice of which
test administrations will or will not be disclosed.
 g. For the purposes of this subdivision, a "regular" administration
means a regular Saturday major paper-and-pencil administration of the
SAT I or GRE General Test or a regular Friday major paper-and-pencil
administration of the TOEFL. A "regular" administration does not include
any other administration (whether offered on a Friday or Saturday or
otherwise), whether a makeup administration, an administration for
Saturday Sabbath observers, or other special-purpose administration, or
any individual administration.
 11. Notwithstanding subdivision one of this section, a test agency
which administered a computerized standardized test in test year
nineteen hundred ninety-four shall file with the commissioner:
 a. no later than September first, nineteen hundred ninety-six the test
item pool used for an operational test administered as of December
first, nineteen hundred ninety-four, and the corresponding acceptable
answers.
 b. no later than September first, nineteen hundred ninety-seven that
portion of the test item pool used for an operational test administered
during the nineteen hundred ninety-six test year equivalent to one
paper-and-pencil test form, and the corresponding acceptable answers.
 c. no later than September first, nineteen hundred ninety-eight that
portion of the test item pool used for an operational test administered
during the nineteen hundred ninety-seven test year equivalent to two
paper-and-pencil test forms, and the corresponding acceptable answers.
 d. no later than September first, nineteen hundred ninety-nine that
portion of the test item pool used for an operational test administered
during the nineteen hundred ninety-eight test year equivalent to six
paper-and-pencil test forms, and the corresponding acceptable answers.
 § 342-a. Special administrations. 1. When regular test
administrations are given on days of religious observance which prevent
attendance by test subjects at such regular administrations special
administrations shall be offered with the same frequency as regular
administrations as soon after or before as is possible, at comparable
times, places and cost.
 2. Provided, however, a test agency shall not be required to offer a
greater number of special administrations than were offered during the
base year commencing August first, nineteen hundred seventy-eight and
ending July thirty-first, nineteen hundred seventy-nine unless the
number of regular administrations is increased in any subsequent testing
year, in which case the provisions of subdivision one shall apply.
 3. No test subject shall by reason of religious belief be denied by a
test agency, the opportunity to take a test which shall be disclosed
pursuant to subdivisions one and two of section three hundred forty-two
of this article during any twelve month period.
 § 343. Notice. 1. Each test agency shall provide, along with the
registration form or score report for a test, the following information:
 a. the purposes for which the test is constructed and is intended to
be used;
 b. statements designed to provide information for interpreting test
results, including but not limited to, explanations of the test score
scale, the standard error of measurement of the test, and a list of
available correlations between test scores and grades, successful
completion of a course of study and parental income; however, where a
range of the correlations of such studies is given, a median correlation
must also be provided;
 c. how the test scores will be reported, whether the raw test scores
will be converted in any way before being reported to the test subject
and whether and how the test agency will use the test score in raw or
transformed form by itself or together with any other information about
the test subject to predict in any way the subject's future academic
performance for any post secondary educational institution;
 d. a complete description of any promises or covenants that the test
agency makes to the test subject with regard to accuracy of scoring,
timely forwarding of information, policies for notifying test subjects
regarding inaccuracies in scoring or score reporting, any procedures to
increase fairness and equity with respect to race, ethnicity and
linguistic background and gender for test subjects with regard to test
questions and test forms, procedures for reviewing challenges by test
subjects, their representatives or user institutions to the keying,
scoring, wording or any aspect of a test question or questions used to
calculate test subjects' raw scores, and privacy of information relating
to the test subject;
 e. whether or not the test scores are the property of the test
subject, the time period during which the results will be retained by
the test agency, and policies regarding storage, disposal and future use
of test score data; and
 f. how the test subject may obtain the information required to be
dislcosed under section three hundred forty-two of this article.
 g. how the test subject may obtain information required to be
available under section three hundred forty-four-b of this article;
 h. a clear, easily understood written description of each section of
the test, including an indication of whether the test contains sections
of equating questions together with a statement of the purpose of such,
and an indication of whether the test contains sections of pretest
questions together with a statement of the purpose of such;
 i. a description of all services which will be provided at the
location of the test administration to accommodate handicapped or
disabled test subjects;
 j. a concise summary of test administration procedures which provides
essential information to the test subject about the conduct of the test
including the duties and responsibilities of the test proctor or
supervisor and the actions a test subject may take in the event of any
problems which may arise in the course of taking the test;
 k. a statement of the test agency's recommendations as to how test
scores shall be used by an institution to which scores are reported,
including any recommendation regarding the importance that the
institution should give to such scores relative to other factors, such
as prior academic record, in making any decision affecting a test
subject;
 l. a description of how test subjects can receive additional
information from test sponsors about the appropriate use of test scores;
 m. information which clearly describes the test subjects' rights
included in section three hundred forty-four-c of this article; and
 n. information documenting procedures used by the test agency to
insure that the test is fair to all test takers regardless of racial,
ethnic, gender or regional background.
 2. Any institution which is a test score recipient shall be provided
with the information specified in this section. The test agency shall
provide such information prior to or coincident with the first reporting
of a test score or scores to a recipient institution. Such institution
shall be encouraged to provide interpretive processing by qualified
personnel where such personnel are available.
 4. Each public postsecondary institution shall include in its catalog
or bulletin a statement whether applicants for undergraduate admission
are required to submit test scores. Such statement shall clearly state
how test scores are used in the decision process, how multiple score
reports are treated, whether component scores are summed or averaged,
and how test scores are used in placement decisions.
 § 344. Disclosure of test scores. The score of any test subject shall
not be released or disclosed by the test agency to any person,
organization, corporation, association, college, university, or
governmental agency or subdivision unless specifically authorized by the
test subject. A test agency may, however, release all scores received
by a test subject on a test to anyone designated by the test subject to
receive the current score.
 This section shall not be construed to prohibit release of scores and
other information in the possession of a test agency for purposes of
research leading to studies and reports concerning the tests themselves.
Such studies and reports must contain no information identifiable with
any individual test subject or user institution unless authorized by
that individual or institution.
 § 344-a. Pretest questions. The test agency shall cooperate with a
study conducted under the auspices of the National Research Council of
the effects of pretesting on test subjects' performance. The results of
such study shall be made available to the chair of the higher education
committee in the senate and the chair of the higher education committee
in the assembly.
 § 344-b. Due process. Each test agency shall ensure due process
protection of test subjects whose scores are being questioned for
suspected inauthenticity or irregularity in test administration.
 1. When a test agency is presented with information which renders the
test subject's test score suspect, whether that information is in the
form of allegations of collusion or cheating, or irregular test
administration, or irregular statistical data, or any other form, the
test agency is responsible for reviewing the information and determining
if withholding the test subject's score is warranted.
 2. If the test agency determines that withholding the test subject's
score is warranted, the test agency shall give the test subject written
notice of the test agency's decision. The notice shall be sent by
registered mail not later than five working days after the test agency's
decision.
 3. The notice to the test subject shall include all of the following:
 (a) a complete summary of the information submitted to the test agency
and relied upon by the test agency to withhold the score;
 (b) a complete summary of the pertinent facts surrounding the
investigation;
 (c) a statement of the test subject's right to receive, upon request,
details supporting the complete summaries referred to in paragraphs (a)
and (b) of this subdivision;
 (d) the policies and procedures that were followed by the test agency
in reviewing and rendering a decision to investigate the test score;
 (e) the potential consequences which may result from the
investigation, such as withholding or invalidating the test score;
 (f) a summary of the information that may be submitted to the test
agency by the test subject to support the authenticity of the test
score; and
 (g) a statement informing the test subject that the opportunity to
respond to the notice will be afforded for not more than fifteen working
days following the date the notice was delivered. No final decision on
the question of suspected irregularity or inauthenticity shall be
rendered by the test agency until the test subject under investigation
has responded, or the time for doing so has expired, whichever occurs
first.
 4. After the time period specified in paragraph (g) of subdivision
three of this section has expired, the test agency shall review all of
the evidence and shall make a good faith effort to render a decision
regarding the authenticity of the score, within fifteen working days and
notify the test subject immediately. No test agency shall cancel or
invalidate a test subject's test scores on the basis of an alleged
irregularity or inauthenticity unless, after all evidence has been
considered by the test agency, substantial evidence resulting from an
investigation conducted pursuant to this section supports the
cancellation or invalidation.
 5. When the test agency determines that substantial evidence exists to
support cancellation or invalidation of a test score, the test agency
shall provide the test subject with a choice of the following options:
 (a) cancellation of the test scores in question, with full refund of
all test fees;
 (b) an opportunity to take the test again privately and without
charge; or
 (c) an opportunity to seek arbitration or judicial review of the
matter.
 6. The test subject shall have thirty days following receipt of the
notice by registered mail to respond to the notice of inauthenticity or
irregularity.
 7. If the test subject responds to the notice of inauthenticity or
irregularity of test scores sent by the test agency within the time
period specified by subdivision six of this section, the test agency
shall review the contents of the response and comply with one of the
following:
 (a) If the test subject requests cancellation of the test scores, a
full refund of all test fees will be provided within a reasonable
period.
 (b) If the test subject requests an opportunity to take the test again
privately and without charge, the test agency shall make appropriate
accommodations that are mutually agreed upon by the test agency and test
subject so the test subject has sufficient time to prepare for the
retest. The retest shall be given in a reasonable and timely manner. If
the score on the retest is higher, the higher score shall be reported.
 (c) Nothing in this section precludes the parties from seeking
resolution of the testing problems by either judicial review or
arbitration. The test agency and the test subject shall make a good
faith effort to complete an arbitration process in no more than thirty
days after the election of such option.
 8. The test agency shall not release confidential information to any
authorized test score recipients regarding a test subject under pending
investigation, unless authorized to do so by the test subject.
 9. The test agency shall immediately release the test score to the
test subject and the test score recipients, if any, where substantial
evidence does not exist to render the inauthenticity or irregularity of
the test score.
 10. The procedures prescribed in this section do not apply to
instances where the cancellation of all test scores results from the
complete disruption of the administration of the test, such as by
natural disasters, national emergencies, inadequate or improper test
conditions, answer sheet printing errors, or testing agency errors.
 11. Time procedures described in this section shall not apply in those
instances where test scores have already been reported to test score
recipients.
 § 344-c. Additional test subject rights. A test subject who must
retake a test because of an error by the test agency, may not be charged
for taking the retest.
 § 345. Regulations. The commissioner shall promulgate regulations to
implement the provisions of this article.
 § 346. Test subject review of computerized test. Beginning in the test
year two thousand, a test agency which administered a computerized test
in test year nineteen hundred ninety-four shall offer test subjects who
take a computerized test a process whereby test subjects are afforded
the opportunity to review questions and answers from their computerized
tests. On or before July first, nineteen hundred ninety-eight, such test
agency shall submit to the commissioner a report detailing the
implementation of such process. Such report shall set forth in clear
language the nature of such opportunity, which shall also be sufficient
to meet the demands of such process. The commissioner shall review and
comment upon the report no later than September first, nineteen hundred
ninety-eight.
 § 346-a. Advisory committee. 1. There shall be created a temporary
committee to advise the legislature and make findings and
recommendations with respect to the effect of standardized tests used in
the process of post secondary admissions on test subjects of varying
racial, ethnic, linguistic background and gender and consider other
possible analytical methods to assure the fairness and equity of such
tests.
 2. The committee shall consist of ten members to be appointed as
follows: three each shall be appointed by the temporary president of the
senate and by the speaker of the assembly, and two each by the minority
leader of the senate and the minority leader of the assembly. At least
one of the members appointed by each of the four legislative leaders
shall be an individual with expertise in measurement and standardized
testing. Such committee shall be broadly representative of persons or
groups residing in the state of New York interested in and affected by
standardized admissions tests which may include, but is not limited to,
test subjects, test agencies, representatives of consumers of
standardized test, post-secondary administrators and faculty and
representatives of civil rights organizations.
 3. The committee shall select a chairperson from its membership and
may select professional staff, other than the data analysis researchers
or organizations described herein, who shall have expertise in
measurement and standardized testing to design and conduct the study.
The committee shall prepare a design for the analysis of the data
required for collection pursuant to this section. The study design
shall be available upon request for comment for a period for thirty days
after which time the committee shall select or solicit one or more
researchers or organizations to do the data analysis. The analyses shall
examine the differences in test performance between the subgroups
indicated in section three hundred forty-one-a of this article and
consider the impact upon those differences of using alternative methods
of item selection. Such professional staff, researchers and
organizations shall not have any direct financial ties, within five
years prior to the effective date of this section, to standardized
testing, nor to any source that has by personal testimony promoted or
opposed regulation of standardized testing, or from any source which has
been engaged in litigation, within five years prior to the effective
date of this section, against any entity engaged in the standardized
testing industry. The committee shall meet at least two times annually
and shall expire on the first day of September, nineteen hundred
ninety-one. The committee members shall receive no compensation for
their services, but shall be reimbursed for reasonable expenses actually
and necessarily incurred by them in the performance of their duties
under this article.
 4. The committee may accept any state grants or appropriations, or as
agent of the state, any grant, including federal grants, or any gift for
any of the purposes of this article; provided however, that the
committee shall not accept any grant or gift, directly or indirectly,
(a) from the standardized testing industry or from any source currently
receiving funds from the standardized testing industry, or (b) from any
source that has promoted or opposed regulation of standardized testing
or from any source that has been engaged in litigation within five years
prior to the effective date of this section against any entity engaged
in the standardized testing industry or from any source currently
receiving funds from any such sources. Any monies so received may be
expended by the committee to effectuate any purpose of this article,
subject to standard limitations as to approval of expenditures and
audit.
 5. The committee shall report its finding to the state legislature no
later than the thirty-first of March, nineteen hundred ninety.
 6. The committee shall pursue the aforementioned research if adequate
funds have been committed by the first day of July, nineteen hundred
eighty-nine to further the purposes of this article. Prior to February
first, nineteen hundred eighty-nine, the committee shall notify the
chairs of the assembly ways and means and senate finance committees
regarding funds received for the purposes of this article and shall
submit a request for such appropriations as may be necessary to
effectuate the purposes of this section. If no such funds have been
committed, the committee shall dissolve.
 § 347. Violations. Any test agency which violates any section of this
article shall be liable for a civil penalty of not more than one
thousand dollars for each violation.
 § 348. Severability. If any provision of this article shall be
declared unconstitutional or invalid, the other provisions shall remain
in effect notwithstanding.
 ARTICLE 15
 TEXT-BOOKS
Section 701. Power to designate text-books; purchase and loan of
 text-books; purchase of supplies.
 702. Requisites for change.
 704. Text-books containing seditious or disloyal matter.
 705. Penalty for violation.
 § 701. Power to designate text-books; purchase and loan of text-books;
purchase of supplies. 1. In the several cities and school districts of
the state, boards of education, trustees or such body or officer as
perform the functions of such boards, shall designate text-books to be
used in the schools under their charge.
 2. A text-book, for the purposes of this section shall mean: (i) any
book, or a book substitute, which shall include hard covered or
paperback books, work books, or manuals and (ii) for expenses incurred
after July first, nineteen hundred ninety-nine, any courseware or other
content-based instructional materials in an electronic format, as such
terms are defined in the regulations of the commissioner, which a pupil
is required to use as a text, or a text-substitute, in a particular
class or program in the school he or she legally attends. For expenses
incurred on or after July first, two thousand eleven, a text-book shall
also mean items of expenditure that are eligible for an apportionment
pursuant to sections seven hundred eleven, seven hundred fifty-one
and/or seven hundred fifty-three of this title, where such items are
designated by the school district as eligible for aid pursuant to this
section, provided, however, that if aided pursuant to this section, such
expenses shall not be aidable pursuant to any other section of law.
Expenditures aided pursuant to this section shall not be eligible for
aid pursuant to any other section of law. Courseware or other
content-based instructional materials in an electronic format included
in the definition of textbook pursuant to this subdivision shall be
subject to the same limitations on content as apply to books or book
substitutes aided pursuant to this section.
 3. In the several cities and school districts of the state, boards of
education, trustees or such body or officers as perform the function of
such boards shall have the power and duty to purchase and to loan upon
individual request, textbooks, to all children residing in such district
who are enrolled in a public school including children attending the
public schools of the district for whom the district is eligible to
receive reimbursement pursuant to paragraph a of subdivision eight of
section thirty-two hundred two of this chapter, provided, however, that
such children shall not be counted by any other school district, and to
all children residing in such district who are enrolled in a nonpublic
school. Textbooks loaned to children enrolled in said nonpublic schools
shall be textbooks which are designated for use in any public schools of
the state or are approved by any boards of education, trustees or other
school authorities. Such textbooks are to be loaned free to such
children subject to such rules and regulations as are or may be
prescribed by the board of regents and such boards of education,
trustees or other school authorities. Enrollment shall be as defined in
subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter.
 4. No school district shall be required to purchase or otherwise
acquire textbooks, the cost of which shall exceed an amount equal to the
apportionment pursuant to subdivision six of this section plus a minimum
lottery grant determined pursuant to subdivision four of section
ninety-two-c of the state finance law multiplied by the number of
children residing in such district and so enrolled in the base year; and
no school district shall be required to loan textbooks in excess of the
textbooks owned or acquired by such district; provided, however that all
textbooks owned or acquired by such district shall be loaned to children
residing in the district and so enrolled in public and nonpublic schools
on an equitable basis.
 5. In the several cities and school districts of the state, boards of
education, trustees or other school authorities may purchase supplies
and either rent, sell or loan the same to the pupils attending the
public schools in such cities and school districts upon such terms and
under such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by such boards of
education, trustees or other school authorities.
 6. The commissioner, in addition to the annual apportionment of public
monies pursuant to other articles of this chapter, shall apportion to
each school district an amount equal to the cost of the textbooks
purchased and loaned by the district pursuant to this section in the
base year, but in no case shall the aid apportioned to the district
exceed the product of the textbook factor plus a minimum lottery grant,
determined pursuant to subdivision four of section ninety-two-c of the
state finance law, and the sum of the enrollments in grades kindergarten
through twelve in the base year calculated pursuant to subparagraphs
four, five, and six of paragraph n of subdivision one of section
thirty-six hundred two of this chapter. Aid payable pursuant to this
section shall be deemed final and not subject to change after April
thirtieth of the school year for which payment was due.
 For aid payable in the two thousand seven--two thousand eight school
year and thereafter, the textbook factor shall equal forty-three dollars
and twenty-five cents.
 7. The apportionment provided for in this section shall be paid, at
such times as may be determined by the commissioner and approved by the
director of the budget, during the school year in which the expenditures
are reported to the department prior to such apportionment. Expenditures
by a school district in excess of the product of the textbook factor
plus a minimum lottery grant determined pursuant to subdivision four of
section ninety-two-c of the state finance law and the sum of the
enrollments in grades kindergarten through twelve in the base year
calculated pursuant to subparagraphs four, five, and six of paragraph n
of subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter in
any school year shall be deemed approved operating expense of the
district for the purpose of computation of state aid pursuant to section
thirty-six hundred two of this chapter, but expenditures up to such
product shall not be deemed approved operating expenses for such
purpose.
 8. In its discretion, a board of education may adopt regulations
specifying the date by which requests for the purchase and loan of
textbooks must be received by the district. Notice of such date shall be
given to all non-public schools. Such date shall not be earlier than the
first day of June of the school year prior to that for which such
textbooks are being requested, provided, however, that a parent or
guardian of a child not attending a particular non-public school prior
to June first of the school year may submit a written request for
textbooks within thirty days after such child is enrolled in such
non-public school. In no event however shall a request made later than
the times otherwise provided pursuant to this subdivision be denied
where a reasonable explanation is given for the delay in making the
request.
 § 702. Requisites for change. 1. When a text-book shall have been
designated for use in a school district or city as provided in
subdivision one of section seven hundred one, it shall not be lawful to
supersede such text-book by any other book within a period of five years
from the time of such designation, except upon a three-fourths vote of
the board of education, trustees or of such body or officer as performs
the function of such board.
 § 704. Text-books containing seditious or disloyal matter. No
text-book in any subject used in the public schools in this state shall
contain any matter or statements of any kind which are seditious in
character, disloyal to the United States or favorable to the cause of
any foreign country with which the United States may be at war. The
commission, consisting of the commissioner of education and of two
persons to be designated by the regents, whose duty it shall be on
complaint to examine text-books used in the public schools of the state,
in the subjects of civics, economics, English, history, language and
literature, for the purpose of determining whether such text-books
contain any matter or statements of any kind which are seditious in
character, disloyal to the United States or favorable to the cause of
any foreign country with which the United States may be at war, is
hereby continued. Any person may present a written complaint to such
commission that a text-book in any of the aforesaid subjects for use in
the public schools of this state or offered for sale for use in the
public schools of this state contains matter or statements in violation
of this section, specifying such matter or statements in detail. If the
commission determine that the text-book against which complaint is made
contains any such matter or statements, it shall issue a certificate
disapproving the use of such text-book in the public schools of this
state, together with a statement of the reasons for its disapproval,
specifying the matter found unlawful. Such certificate of disapproval
of a text-book, with a detailed statement of the reasons for its
disapproval, shall be duly forwarded to the boards of education or other
boards or authorities having jurisdiction of the public schools of the
school districts of this state, and after the receipt of such
certificate the use of a text-book so disapproved shall be discontinued
in such school district.
 Any contract hereafter made by any such board of education or other
school authorities for the purchase of a text-book in any of such
subjects, which has been so disapproved, shall be void. Any school
officer or teacher who permits a text-book in any of such subjects,
which has been so disapproved, to be used in the public schools of the
state, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
 § 705. Penalty for violation. Any person violating any of the
provisions of this article shall be liable to a penalty of not less than
fifty dollars nor more than one hundred dollars for every such
violation, to be sued for by any taxpayer of the school district, and
recovered before any justice of the peace and when collected, to be paid
to the collector or treasurer for the benefit of said school district.
 ARTICLE 15-A
 SCHOOL LIBRARY MATERIALS
Section 711. Aid for the purchase of school library materials.
 712. Loan of school library materials.
 § 711. Aid for the purchase of school library materials. 1. In the
several cities and school districts of the state, boards of education,
trustees or such body or officers as perform the functions of such
boards, shall designate school library materials to be used in the
schools in the district.
 2. School library materials, for the purposes of this article shall
mean digital materials, audio/visual materials and printed materials
that may or may not require magnification which meet all of the
following criteria: (1) materials which are catalogued and processed as
part of the school library or media center for use by elementary and/or
secondary school children and teachers; (2) materials which with
reasonable care and use may be expected to last more than one year; and
(3) materials which would not be eligible for aid pursuant to sections
seven hundred one and seven hundred fifty-one of this title. School
library materials meeting these criteria may include (i) hard cover,
paperback books and e-books, periodicals, that is, print and digital
publications which are subscription-based and appear at regular
intervals of less than one year on a continuing basis for an indefinite
period, documents other than books, pamphlets, musical scores, other
printed, digital and published materials, (ii) for school year nineteen
hundred eighty-six--eighty-seven and thereafter, audio/visual materials
including films, film strips, micro-film, sound recordings, processed
slides, transparencies, kinescopes, video tapes, maps, charts, globes,
pictorial works, including pictures and picture sets, reproductions,
photographs, graphic works, and any other audio/visual materials of a
similar nature made.
 3. No school district shall be required to purchase or otherwise
acquire school library materials, the cost of which shall exceed an
amount equal to the library materials factor multiplied by the sum of
the public school district enrollment and the nonpublic school
enrollment in the base year as defined in subparagraphs two and three of
paragraph n of subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this
chapter. For aid payable in the nineteen hundred ninety-eight--nineteen
hundred ninety-nine school year, the library materials factor shall be
four dollars. For aid payable in the two thousand seven--two thousand
eight school year and thereafter, the library materials factor shall be
six dollars and twenty-five cents.
 4. Commencing July first, nineteen hundred ninety eight, the
commissioner, in addition to the annual apportionment of public monies
pursuant to other articles of this chapter, shall apportion to each
school district an amount equal to the cost of the school library
materials purchased by the district pursuant to this section in the base
year, but in no case shall the aid apportioned to the district exceed
the product of the library materials factor and the sum of public school
district enrollment, nonpublic school enrollment, and additional public
enrollment as defined in subparagraphs two, three, and six of paragraph
n of subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter.
Aid payable pursuant to this section shall be deemed final and not
subject to change after April thirtieth of the school year for which
payment was due.
 § 712. Loan of school library materials. 1. In the several cities and
school districts of the state, boards of education, trustees or such
body or officers as perform the function of such boards shall have the
power and duty to loan upon request of an individual or a group of
individual pupils, to all pupils defined in subdivision three of section
seven hundred eleven of this article, school library materials. School
library materials loaned to such pupils attending private schools shall
be school library materials which are designated for use in any public
elementary or secondary schools of the state or are approved by any
board of education, trustees or other school authorities. Such school
library materials are to be loaned free to such children subject to such
rules and regulations as are or may be prescribed by the board of
regents and such boards of education, trustees or other school
authorities.
 2. No school district shall be required to loan school library
materials in excess of the school library materials owned or acquired by
such district pursuant to section seven hundred eleven of this article.
Such school library materials shall be loaned on an equitable basis to
children defined in subdivision three of section seven hundred eleven of
this article attending in the current year. The payment of tuition under
article eighty-nine of this chapter is deemed to be an equitable loan to
children for whom such tuition is paid.
 * ARTICLE 15-B
 HIGHER EDUCATION TEXTBOOKS
Section 715. Instructional materials; students with disabilities.
 * NB Repealed August 15, 2028
 * § 715. Instructional materials; students with disabilities. 1. For
purposes of this section, the following words shall have the following
meanings: (a) "College" means college as defined in subdivision two of
section six hundred one of this chapter;
 (b) "Instructional material or materials" means textbooks and other
materials written and published by commercial publishers primarily for
use by students in postsecondary instruction that are required or
essential to a student's success in a course of study in which a student
with a disability is enrolled. The determination of which materials are
"required or essential to student success" shall be made by the
instructor of the course. "Instructional material or materials" shall
also include commercially published nontextual mathematics and science
material wherever available software permits the conversion of existing
electronic files of the materials into a format that is compatible with
braille translation software or alternative media for students with
disabilities.
 (c) "Nonprinted instructional materials" means commercially published
instructional materials in formats other than print, and includes
commercially published instructional materials that require the
availability of electronic equipment in order to be used as a learning
resource, including, but not necessarily limited to, commercially
published software programs, video disks, and video and audio tapes.
 (d) "Printed instructional material or materials" means instructional
material or materials commercially published in book or other
commercially published printed form.
 (e) "Structural integrity" means all of the commercially published
printed instructional material, including, but not limited to, the text
of the material, sidebars, the table of contents, chapter headings and
subheadings, footnotes, pictures, illustrations, graphs, charts,
indexes, glossaries, and bibliographies. If good faith efforts fail to
produce an agreement pursuant to subdivision two of this section between
the publisher or manufacturer and the commissioner as to an electronic
format that will preserve the structural integrity of the commercially
published printed instructional material, the publisher or manufacturer
shall provide the instructional material in the most updated electronic
format taking into consideration the recommendation made by the National
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) and shall preserve as much
of the structural integrity of the commercially published printed
instructional material as possible.
 (f) "Specialized format" means braille, audio, or digital text that is
exclusively for use by blind persons and students with other
disabilities.
 (g) "Advisory council", means a group of individuals appointed as
follows: seven shall be appointed directly by the governor, two shall be
appointed on the nomination of the temporary president of the senate,
two shall be appointed on the nomination of the speaker of the assembly,
one shall be appointed on the nomination of the minority leader of the
senate, and one shall be appointed on the nomination of the minority
leader of the assembly. The council shall be comprised of
representatives from college disability student support services; the
department; the publisher community; students with disabilities and
other interested parties who will provide input into policy development,
program guidelines and implementation strategies for the implementation
of this section, and updates and technical assistance to regional
college disability service coordinators.
 (h) "Guidelines" means a set of information, training, technical
guidance and best practices used in implementing the provisions of this
section.
 Nothing in this subdivision shall be construed to prohibit a college
from assisting a student with a disability by using the electronic
version of commercially published printed instructional material
provided pursuant to this section solely to transcribe or arrange for
the transcription of the commercially published printed instructional
material into braille. In the event such a transcription is made, the
college shall have the right to share such braille copy of the
commercially published printed instructional material with other
students with disabilities.
 2. An individual, firm, partnership or corporation that publishes or
manufactures commercially published printed instructional materials for
students attending college shall provide for purchase by students with
disabilities such printed instructional material in an electronic format
mutually agreed upon by the commercial publisher or manufacturer and the
commissioner. These commercially published printed instructional
materials must be converted to an electronic format using the most
updated software technology available to the public at that time.
Computer files or electronic versions of commercially published printed
instructional materials shall maintain the structural integrity of such
printed instructional material, be compatible with commonly used braille
translation and speech synthesis software, and include corrections and
revisions as may be necessary. The computer files or electronic versions
of the commercially published printed instructional material shall be
available to students with disabilities at a cost comparable to the
printed version of such commercially published material and in a timely
manner, upon receipt of a written request that does all of the
following:
 (a) Certifies that the electronic version of the commercially
published printed instructional materials will be used by a student with
a disability.
 (b) Certifies that the student has a disability that prevents him or
her from using standard commercially published instructional materials.
 (c) Certifies that the commercially published printed instructional
material is for use by the student in connection with a course in which
he or she is registered or enrolled at the college.
 (d) Is signed by the coordinator of services for students with
disabilities at the college or by the campus or college official
responsible for monitoring compliance with the Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 12101 et seq.) at the college.
 3. An individual, firm, partnership or corporation specified in
subdivision two of this section may also require that, in addition to
the conditions enumerated above, the request shall include a statement
signed by the student agreeing to both of the following:
 (a) He or she will use the electronic copy of the commercially
published printed instructional material in specialized format solely
for his or her own educational purposes.
 (b) He or she will not copy or duplicate the commercially published
printed instructional material or electronic copy for use by others
consistent with the requirements of the copyright revision act of 1976,
as amended (17 U.S.C. §101 et seq.).
 4. If a college permits a student to directly use the electronic
version of a commercially published instructional material, such student
shall use the disk or file in a manner that complies at all times with
the Copyright Revisions Act of 1976, as amended (17 U.S.C. Sec. 101 et
seq.).
 5. An individual, firm, partnership or corporation that, for
commercial purposes, publishes or manufactures nonprinted instructional
materials for students attending college shall provide computer files or
other electronic versions of such nonprinted instructional materials for
use by students attending such college subject to the same conditions
set forth in subdivisions two and three of this section for printed
instructional materials, when technology is available to convert these
nonprinted instructional materials published or manufactured for
commercial purposes to a format that maintains the structural integrity
of such nonprinted instructional materials that is compatible with
braille translation and speech synthesis software.
 6. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to authorize any use of any
commercially published instructional materials that would constitute an
infringement of copyright under the Copyright Revision Act of 1976, as
amended (17 U.S.C. Sec. 101 et seq.).
 7. The governor shall convene a statewide advisory council as defined
in paragraph (g) of subdivision one of this section that will meet as
necessary to fulfill the functions set forth in paragraph (g) of
subdivision one of this section.
 * NB Repealed August 15, 2028
 ARTICLE 15-C
 TEXTBOOK ACCESS ACT
Section 720. Definitions.
 721. Pricing transparency.
 722. Sales of textbooks, textbook bundles.
 723. Special role of faculties in adoptions.
 724. Policies addressing course material adoptions and sample
 materials.
 § 720. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall
have the following meanings:
 1. "Bundled" means a textbook and any other learning material,
including, but not limited to, workbooks, online technologies,
dictionaries, CD-ROMS, or books, packaged together to be sold for one
price.
 2. "Institution of higher education" means any institution of higher
education, recognized and approved by the regents of the university of
the state of New York, which provides a course of study leading to the
granting of a post-secondary degree or diploma.
 3. "Publisher" means any publishing house, publishing firm, or
publishing company that publishes textbooks and supplemental materials.
 4. "Textbook" means any textbook that is adopted for a course, as
determined by the faculty member or members or entity charged with
choosing that textbook.
 5. "Supplemental materials" means materials that supplement the
primary textbook or textbooks that come in the form of another book,
online technologies, a workbook, CD-ROM, or any other format, and that
can be used by a faculty member or a student during the teaching of a
course.
 6. "Adopter" means any faculty member or academic department at
institutions of higher learning responsible for considering and choosing
textbooks and/or supplemental materials to be utilized in connection
with the accredited courses taught at institutions of higher education.
 § 721. Pricing transparency. 1. To ensure pricing transparency, all
publishers of college textbooks shall, on request, make readily
available to prospective adopters of their products who are members of
the faculties or purchasing entities of institutions of higher education
the price at which the publisher would make the products available to
the college bookstore that would offer the products to students.
 2. For purposes of this section, the term "products" means all
versions of a textbook or set of textbooks, except custom textbooks or
special editions of textbooks, available in the subject area for which a
prospective adopter is teaching a course, including supplemental
materials, both when sold together or separately from a textbook.
 § 722. Sales of textbooks, textbook bundles. Textbooks shall be sold
in the same manner as ordered by such faculty member or entity in charge
of selecting textbooks for courses. In the event such product is
unavailable as ordered, the bookstore, faculty, and relevant publisher
shall work together to provide the best possible substitute that most
closely matches the requested item or items, and the publisher shall
make available the price of such substitute or substitutes readily
available.
 § 723. Special role of faculties in adoptions. Each institution of
higher education shall institute policies that encourage faculty members
or the entity in charge of textbook adoptions to place their orders with
sufficient lead-time to enable the university, or contract-managed,
bookstore to confirm the availability of the requested materials and,
when appropriate, the availability of used textbooks or alternate
digital formats.
 § 724. Policies addressing course material adoptions and sample
materials. No employee at an institution of higher education shall
demand or receive any payment, loan, advance, goods, or deposit of
money, present or promised, for adopting specific course materials
required for coursework or instruction; with the exception that the
employee may receive:
 1. sample copies, instructor's copies, or instructional material, that
are not to be sold;
 2. royalties or other compensation from sales of textbooks that
include such instructor's own writing or work;
 3. honoraria for academic peer review of course materials; or
 4. training in the use of course materials and learning technologies.
 ARTICLE 16
 COMPUTER TECHNOLOGY
Section 751. Aid for computer software purchases.
 752. Loan of computer software.
 753. Instructional computer hardware and technology equipment
 apportionment.
 754. Loan of instructional computer hardware.
 755. Loan of smart schools classroom technology.
 § 751. Aid for computer software purchases. 1. In the several cities
and school districts of the state, boards of education, trustees or such
body or officers as perform the functions of such boards, shall
designate software programs to be used in conjunction with computers of
the school district.
 2. A software program, for the purposes of this article shall mean (a)
a computer program which a pupil is required to use as a learning aid in
a particular class in the school the pupil legally attends, or (b) for
expenses incurred after July first, two thousand nine, any content-based
instructional materials in an electronic format that are aligned with
state standards which are accessed or delivered through the internet
based on a subscription model. Such electronic format materials may
include a variety of media assets and learning tools, including video,
audio, images, teacher guides, and student access capabilities as such
terms are defined in the regulations of the commissioner. For expenses
incurred on or after July first, two thousand eleven, a software program
shall also mean items of expenditure that are eligible for an
apportionment pursuant to sections seven hundred one, seven hundred
eleven and/or seven hundred fifty-three of this title, where such items
are designated by the school district as eligible for aid pursuant to
this section, provided, however, that if aided pursuant to this section,
such expenses shall not be aidable pursuant to any other section of law.
 3. No school district shall be required to purchase or otherwise
acquire software programs, the cost of which shall exceed an amount
equal to the software factor multiplied by the sum of the public school
district enrollment and the nonpublic school enrollment in the base year
as defined in subparagraphs two and three of paragraph n of subdivision
one of section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter.
 4. The commissioner, in addition to the annual apportionment of public
monies pursuant to other articles of this chapter, shall apportion to
each school district an amount equal to the cost of the software
programs purchased by the district pursuant to this section in the base
year, but in no case shall the aid apportioned to the district exceed
the product of the software factor and the sum of public school district
enrollment, nonpublic school enrollment, and additional public
enrollment as defined in subparagraphs two, three, and six of paragraph
n of subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter.
 For aid payable in the nineteen hundred ninety-seven--ninety-eight and
nineteen hundred ninety-eight--ninety-nine school years, the software
factor shall equal four dollars and fifty-eight cents. For aid payable
in the nineteen hundred ninety-nine--two thousand school year, the
software factor shall equal seven dollars and fifty-five cents. For aid
payable in the two thousand--two thousand one school year, the software
factor shall equal fourteen dollars and ninety-eight cents. For aid
payable in the two thousand one--two thousand two school year, the
software factor shall equal twenty-three dollars and ninety cents. For
aid payable in the two thousand two--two thousand three school year and
thereafter, the software factor shall equal fourteen dollars and
ninety-eight cents. The apportionment provided for in this section shall
be paid at such times as may be determined by the commissioner and
approved by the director of the budget. Aid payable pursuant to this
section shall be deemed final and not subject to change after April
thirtieth of the school year for which payment was due.
 § 752. Loan of computer software. 1. In the several cities and school
districts of the state, boards of education, trustees or such body or
officers as perform the function of such boards shall have the power and
duty to loan upon request of an individual or a group of individual
pupils, to all pupils defined in subdivision three of section seven
hundred fifty-one of this article, software programs. Software programs
loaned to such pupils attending private schools shall be software
programs which are designated for use in any public elementary or
secondary schools of the state or are approved by any board of
education, trustees or other school authorities. Such software programs
are to be loaned free to such children subject to such rules and
regulations as are or may be prescribed by the board of regents and such
boards of education, trustees or other school authorities.
 2. No school district shall be required to loan software programs in
excess of the software programs owned or acquired by such district
pursuant to section seven hundred fifty-one of this article. Such
software programs shall be loaned on an equitable basis to children
defined in subdivision three of section seven hundred fifty-one of this
article attending in the current year. The payment of tuition under
article eighty-nine of this chapter is deemed to be an equitable loan to
children for whom such tuition is paid.
 § 753. Instructional computer hardware and technology equipment
apportionment. 1. In addition to any other apportionment under this
chapter, a school district shall be eligible for an apportionment under
the provisions of this section for approved expenses for (i) the
purchase or lease of micro and/or mini computer equipment or terminals
for instructional purposes or (ii) technology equipment, as defined in
paragraph c of subdivision two of this section, used for instructional
purposes, or (iii) for the repair of such equipment and training and
staff development for instructional purposes as provided hereinafter, or
(iv) for expenses incurred on or after July first, two thousand eleven,
any items of expenditure that are eligible for an apportionment pursuant
to sections seven hundred one, seven hundred eleven and/or seven hundred
fifty-one of this title, where such items are designated by the school
district as eligible for aid pursuant to this section, provided,
however, that if aided pursuant to this section, such expenses shall not
be aidable pursuant to any other section of law. Such aid shall be
provided pursuant to a plan developed by the district which demonstrates
to the satisfaction of the commissioner that the instructional computer
hardware needs of the district's public school students have been
adequately met and that the school district has provided for the loan of
instructional computer hardware to students legally attending nonpublic
schools pursuant to section seven hundred fifty-four of this article.
The apportionment shall equal the lesser of such approved expense in the
base year or, the product of (i) the technology factor, (ii) the sum of
the public school district enrollment and the nonpublic school
enrollment in the base year as defined in subparagraphs two and three of
paragraph n of subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this
chapter, and (iii) the building aid ratio, as defined in subdivision
four of section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter. For aid payable
in the two thousand seven--two thousand eight school year and
thereafter, the technology factor shall be twenty-four dollars and
twenty cents. A school district may use up to twenty percent of the
product of (i) the technology factor, (ii) the sum of the public school
district enrollment and the nonpublic school enrollment in the base year
as defined in subparagraphs two and three of paragraph n of subdivision
one of section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter, and (iii) the
building aid ratio for the repair of instructional computer hardware and
technology equipment and training and staff development for
instructional purposes pursuant to a plan submitted to the commissioner.
 2. As used in this article:
 a. "Current year" shall have the same meaning as that term is defined
in subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter;
 b. "Base year" shall have the same meaning as that term is defined in
subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this article; and
 c. "Technology equipment", for the purposes of this article, shall
mean equipment with a useful life used in conjunction with or in support
of educational programs including but not limited to video, solar
energy, robotic, satellite, laser and such other equipment as the
commissioner shall approve provided that expenses for the purchase or
lease of such equipment shall not be eligible for aid under any other
provisions of this chapter.
 3. No school district shall be required to purchase or otherwise
acquire instructional computer hardware or technology equipment, the
cost of which exceeds the amount of state aid provided pursuant to this
section.
 4. The apportionment provided for in this section shall be paid at
such times as may be determined by the commissioner and approved by the
director of the budget, during the school year in which the expenditures
are reported to the department prior to such apportionment, but not
earlier than the school year after the school year in which expenses are
incurred.
 5. Expenses aided pursuant to this section shall not be eligible for
aid pursuant to any other provision of this chapter.
 § 754. Loan of instructional computer hardware. 1. In the several
cities and school districts of the state, school authorities, as defined
in subdivision twelve of section two of this chapter, shall have the
power and duty, to the extent provided in this section, to loan, upon
request of an individual or a group of individual pupils, to all pupils
legally attending nonpublic elementary or secondary schools located in
the school district, instructional computer hardware which is designated
for use in any public elementary or secondary schools of the state or is
approved by any school authorities. Such instructional computer hardware
is to be loaned free to such children, commencing with the two thousand
seven--two thousand eight school year, subject to such rules and
regulations as are or may be prescribed by the board of regents and such
school authorities.
 2. No school district shall be required to loan instructional computer
hardware in excess of the instructional computer hardware acquired by
such district pursuant to section seven hundred fifty-three of this
article. Such instructional computer hardware shall be loaned on an
equitable basis to children attending nonpublic schools in the district
in the current year, provided that nothing in this article shall be
construed to require a school district to loan to children attending
nonpublic schools, pursuant to this section, instructional computer
hardware purchased with local or federal funds or with state funds other
than funds apportioned pursuant to this article. The payment of tuition
under article eighty-nine of this chapter is deemed to be an equitable
loan to children for whom such tuition is paid, and the provisions of
this section shall not apply.
 3. School authorities shall adopt regulations specifying the date by
which requests for the purchase and loan of instructional computer
hardware must be received by the district. Notice of such date shall be
given to all non-public schools in the school district. Such date shall
not be earlier than the first day of June of the school year prior to
that for which such instructional computer hardware is being requested,
provided, however, that a parent or guardian of a child not attending a
particular non-public school prior to June first of the school year may
submit a written request for instructional computer hardware within
thirty days after such child is enrolled in such non-public school. In
no event, however, shall a request made later than the times otherwise
provided pursuant to this subdivision be denied where a reasonable
explanation is given for the delay in making the request.
 § 755. Loan of smart schools classroom technology. 1. In the several
cities and school districts of the state, school authorities, as defined
in subdivision twelve of section two of this chapter, shall have the
power and duty, to the extent provided in this section, to loan, upon
request of an individual or a group of individual pupils, to all pupils
legally attending nonpublic elementary or secondary schools located in
the school district, smart schools classroom technology acquired
pursuant to subdivision sixteen of section thirty-six hundred forty-one
of this chapter which is designated for use in any public elementary or
secondary schools of the state or is approved by any school authorities.
Such smart schools classroom technology made available to nonpublic
students shall be limited to that allowable under both paragraph seven
of subdivision sixteen of section thirty-six hundred forty-one of this
chapter and section seven hundred fifty-four of this article. Such smart
schools classroom technology is to be loaned free to such children,
commencing with the two thousand fourteen--two thousand fifteen school
year, subject to such rules and regulations as are or may be prescribed
by the board of regents and such school authorities.
 2. No school district shall be required to loan smart schools
classroom technology in excess of the smart schools classroom technology
acquired by such district pursuant to subdivision sixteen of section
thirty-six hundred forty-one of this chapter. Such smart schools
classroom technology shall be loaned on an equitable basis to children
attending nonpublic schools in the district in the current year,
provided that nothing in this article shall be construed to require a
school district to loan to children attending nonpublic schools,
pursuant to this section, classroom technology purchased with local or
federal funds or with state funds other than funds apportioned pursuant
to subdivision sixteen of section three hundred sixty-four of this
chapter, and provided further that no school district may loan smart
schools classroom technology in an aggregate amount greater than two
hundred fifty dollars multiplied by the nonpublic school enrollment in
the base year, at time of enactment, as defined in subparagraph three of
paragraph n of subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this
chapter. The payment of tuition under article eighty-nine of this
chapter is deemed to be an equitable loan to children for whom such
tuition is paid, and the provisions of this section shall not apply.
 3. School authorities shall adopt regulations specifying the date by
which requests for the purchase and loan of smart schools classroom
technology must be received by the district. Notice of such date shall
be given to all non-public schools in the school district. For the two
thousand fourteen--two thousand fifteen school year, such date shall not
be earlier than the first day of January of such school year, and for
the two thousand fifteen--two thousand sixteen school year and
thereafter, such date shall not be earlier than the first day of June of
the school year prior to that for which such smart schools classroom
technology is being requested, provided, however, that a parent or
guardian of a child not attending a particular non-public school prior
to January first or June first of the school year, as applicable, may
submit a written request for smart schools classroom technology within
thirty days after such child is enrolled in such non-public school. In
no event, however, shall a request made later than the times otherwise
provided pursuant to this subdivision be denied where a reasonable
explanation is given for the delay in making the request.
 ARTICLE 17
 INSTRUCTION IN CERTAIN SUBJECTS
Section 801. Courses of instruction in patriotism and citizenship and
 in certain historic documents.
 801-a. Instruction in civility, citizenship and character
 education.
 802. Instruction relating to the flag; holidays.
 802-a. Instruction relating to general elections.
 803. Instruction in physical education and kindred subjects.
 803-a. Courses of study in prevention of child abduction.
 803-b. Courses of study in prevention of child sexual
 exploitation and child sexual abuse.
 804. Health education regarding mental health, alcohol, drugs,
 tobacco abuse and the prevention and detection of
 certain cancers.
 804-a. Comprehensive school health education demonstration
 program.
 804-b. Education regarding child development.
 804-c. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation instruction.
 804-d. Automated external defibrillator instruction.
 805. Asian American, Native Hawaiians and Pacific Islander
 history advisory committee; appointment; powers and
 duties.
 806. Courses of instruction in highway safety and traffic
 regulation; school safety patrols.
 806-a. Driver education.
 807. Fire and emergency drills.
 807-a. Fire inspections.
 807-b. College fire inspections.
 807-c. Transmission of fire alarm to fire department.
 807-d. Locating source of fires in schools.
 808. Instruction in fire and arson prevention.
 809. Instruction in the humane treatment of animals.
 809-a. Instruction in the safe use of firearms and in the game
 laws.
 810. Conservation day.
 811. Procurement, use and possession of hypodermic syringes
 and needles by school personnel for educational
 purposes.
 812. Health training program for secondary school students.
 813. School lunch period; scheduling.
 814. Courses of study in internet safety.
 815. State seal of biliteracy.
 816. Local library and school partnerships.
 817. Expanding access to advanced courses to improve
 educational equity.
 817*2. Student government.
 818. Evidence-based and scientifically based reading
 instruction.
 § 801. Courses of instruction in patriotism and citizenship and in
certain historic documents. 1. In order to promote a spirit of
patriotic and civic service and obligation and to foster in the children
of the state moral and intellectual qualities which are essential in
preparing to meet the obligations of citizenship in peace or in war, the
regents of The University of the State of New York shall prescribe
courses of instruction in patriotism, citizenship, civic education and
values, our shared history of diversity, the role of religious tolerance
in this country, and human rights issues, with particular attention to
the study of the inhumanity of genocide, slavery (including the freedom
trail and underground railroad), the Holocaust, and the mass starvation
in Ireland from 1845 to 1850, to be maintained and followed in all the
schools of the state. The boards of education and trustees of the
several cities and school districts of the state shall require
instruction to be given in such courses, by the teachers employed in the
schools therein. All pupils attending such schools, over the age of
eight years, shall attend upon such instruction.
 Similar courses of instruction shall be prescribed and maintained in
private schools in the state, and all pupils in such schools over eight
years of age shall attend upon such courses. If such courses are not so
established and maintained in a private school, attendance upon
instruction in such school shall not be deemed substantially equivalent
to instruction given to pupils of like age in the public schools of the
city or district in which such pupils reside.
 2. The regents shall prescribe courses of instruction in the history,
meaning, significance and effect of the provisions of the constitution
of the United States, the amendments thereto, the declaration of
independence, the constitution of the state of New York and the
amendments thereto, to be maintained and followed in all of the schools
of the state. The boards of education and trustees of the several cities
and school districts of the state shall require instruction to be given
in such courses, by the teachers employed in the schools therein. All
pupils attending such schools, in the eighth and higher grades, shall
attend upon such instruction.
 Similar courses of instruction shall be prescribed and maintained in
private schools in the state, and all pupils in such schools in grades
or classes corresponding to the instruction in the eighth and higher
grades of the public schools shall attend upon such courses. If such
courses are not so established and maintained in a private school,
attendance upon instruction in such school shall not be deemed
substantially equivalent to instruction given to pupils in the public
schools of the city or district in which such pupils reside.
 3. The regents shall determine the subjects to be included in such
courses of instruction in patriotism, citizenship, civic education and
values, our shared history of diversity, the role of history of
diversity, the role of religious tolerance in this country, and human
rights issues, with particular attention to the study of the inhumanity
of genocide, slavery (including the freedom trail and underground
railroad), the Holocaust, and the mass starvation in Ireland from 1845
to 1850, and in the history, meaning, significance and effect of the
provisions of the constitution of the United States, the amendments
thereto, the declaration of independence, the constitution of the state
of New York and the amendments thereto, and the period of instruction in
each of the grades in such subjects. They shall adopt rules providing
for attendance upon such instruction and for such other matters as are
required for carrying into effect the objects and purposes of this
section. The commissioner shall be responsible for the enforcement of
such section and shall cause to be inspected and supervise the
instruction to be given in such subjects. The commissioner may, in his
discretion, cause all or a portion of the public school money to be
apportioned to a district or city to be withheld for failure of the
school authorities of such district or city to provide instruction in
such courses and to compel attendance upon such instruction, as herein
prescribed, and for a non-compliance with the rules of the regents
adopted as herein provided.
 4. The regents shall designate a week during each year and prescribe a
uniform course of exercises in the public schools of the state suitable
for pupils of various ages to instill into the minds of such pupils the
purpose, meaning and importance of the bill of rights articles in the
federal and state constitutions. Such exercises shall be in addition to
any prescribed courses of study in the schools.
 5. The regents shall make available to all elementary schools in the
state suitable curriculum materials to aid in the instruction of pupils
in grades kindergarten through six in the understanding and acceptance
of children with disabilities as defined in section forty-four hundred
one of this chapter.
 § 801-a. Instruction in civility, citizenship and character education.
The regents shall ensure that the course of instruction in grades
kindergarten through twelve includes a component on civility,
citizenship and character education. Such component shall instruct
students on the principles of honesty, tolerance, personal
responsibility, respect for others, with an emphasis on discouraging
acts of harassment, bullying, discrimination, observance of laws and
rules, courtesy, dignity and other traits which will enhance the quality
of their experiences in, and contributions to, the community. Such
component shall include instruction of safe, responsible use of the
internet and electronic communications. The regents shall determine how
to incorporate such component in existing curricula and the commissioner
shall promulgate any regulations needed to carry out such determination
of the regents. For the purposes of this section, "tolerance," "respect
for others" and "dignity" shall include awareness and sensitivity to
harassment, bullying, discrimination and civility in the relations of
people of different races, weights, national origins, ethnic groups,
religions, religious practices, mental or physical abilities, sexual
orientations, genders, and sexes.
 § 802. Instruction relating to the flag; holidays. 1. It shall be the
duty of the commissioner to prepare, for the use of the public schools
of the state, a program providing for a salute to the flag and a daily
pledge of allegiance to the flag, and instruction in its correct use and
display which shall include, as a minimum, specific instruction
regarding respect for the flag of the United States of America, its
display and use as provided by federal statute and regulation and such
other patriotic exercises as may be deemed by him to be expedient, under
such regulations and instructions as may best meet the varied
requirements of the different grades in such schools. However, such
instruction shall include, as a minimum, the provisions of sections one
hundred seventy through one hundred seventy-seven of title thirty-six of
the United States Code.
 2. a. It shall also be the duty of the commissioner to make special
provision for the observance in the public schools of Lincoln's
birthday, Washington's birthday, Memorial day and Flag day, and such
other legal holidays of like character as may be hereafter designated by
law when the legislature makes an appropriation therefor.
 b. It shall also be the duty of the commissioner to make special
provision for the observance of a brief period of silence for September
11th Remembrance Day.
 3. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to authorize military
instruction or drill in the public schools during school hours, except
that the board of education of any school district may offer during
school hours a junior reserve officer training program in conjunction
with the United States Department of Defense to those students in grades
nine through twelve who are at least fourteen years of age provided that
enrollment and participation in such program is voluntary on the part of
the student and written consent of a parent or guardian is submitted by
such student and further provided, that the conduct of instruction on or
the presence within any school of any type of current or future weaponry
as part of such program is prohibited.
 § 802-a. Instruction relating to general elections. Every school and
teacher or instructor shall utilize a sample or facsimile ballot,
provided by the appropriate board of elections pursuant to section 7-118
of the election law, when providing instruction in the electoral process
relating to an ongoing general election, for which a sample or facsimile
ballot has been created, or when holding mock elections.
 § 803. Instruction in physical education and kindred subjects. 1. All
pupils above the age of eight years in all elementary and secondary
schools, shall receive as part of the prescribed courses of instruction
therein such physical education under the direction of the commissioner
of education as the regents may determine. Such courses shall be
designed to aid in the well-rounded education of pupils and in the
development of character, citizenship, physical fitness, health and the
worthy use of leisure. Pupils above such age attending the public
schools shall be required to attend upon such prescribed courses of
instruction.
 2. The board of education or trustees of every school district
regularly employing twenty or more teachers shall employ a teacher or
teachers qualified and duly licensed under the regulations of the
regents to give such instruction; in every other district of the state,
they shall require such instruction to be given by the teacher or
teachers regularly employed to give instruction in other subjects or by
a teacher or teachers qualified and duly licensed under the regulations
of the regents.
 3. The boards of education or trustees of two or more contiguous
districts in the same supervisory district, however, may join in the
employment of a teacher qualified and duly licensed under the
regulations of the regents to give such instruction; and the salary of
such teacher and the expenses incurred on account of such instruction
shall be apportioned by the district superintendent among such districts
according to the assessed valuation thereof, and as so apportioned shall
be a charge upon each of such districts.
 4. Similar courses of instruction shall be prescribed and maintained
in private schools in the state and all pupils in such schools over
eight years of age shall attend upon such courses; and if such courses
are not so established and maintained in any private school, attendance
upon instruction in such school shall not be deemed substantially
equivalent to instruction given to children of like ages in the public
school or schools of the city or district in which the child resides.
 5. It shall be the duty of the regents to adopt rules determining the
subjects to be included in courses of physical education provided for in
this section, the period of instruction in each of such courses, the
qualifications of teachers, and the attendance upon such courses of
instruction.
 6. The physical education hereinbefore provided for, may be given,
when practicable, in any armory of the state where such armory is within
convenient distance from the school, and at such times and in such
manner as not to interfere with the regular military uses of such
armory. The commanding officer in charge of any such armory shall, upon
application made by any board of education or trustees of the several
cities and school districts within the state, permit access to any such
armory, for the purposes herein mentioned.
 § 803-a. Courses of study in prevention of child abduction. 1. All
pupils in grades K-8 in all public schools in the state shall receive
instruction designed to prevent the abduction of children. Such
instruction shall be provided by or under the direct supervision of
regular classroom teachers, provided, however, that such instruction may
be provided by any other agency, public or private.
 2. The commissioner, shall provide technical assistance to assist in
the development of curricula for such courses of study which shall be
age appropriate and developed according to the needs and abilities of
pupils at successive grade levels in order to provide awareness skills,
information, self-confidence and support to aid in the prevention of
child abduction.
 3. For purposes of developing such courses of study, the board of
education or trustees of every school district may establish local
advisory councils or utilize the school-based shared decision making and
planning committee established pursuant to regulations of the
commissioner to make recommendations concerning the content and
implementation of such courses. School districts may alternatively
utilize courses of instruction developed by consortia of school
district, boards of cooperative educational services, other school
districts or any other agency, public or private. Such advisory councils
shall consist of, but not be limited to, parents, school trustees and
board members, appropriate school personnel, business and community
representatives, and law enforcement personnel having experience in the
prevention of child abduction.
 4. The board of education or trustees of every school district shall
provide appropriate training and curriculum materials for the regular
teachers who provide such instruction.
 § 803-b. Courses of study in prevention of child sexual exploitation
and child sexual abuse. 1. All pupils in grades K-8 in all public
schools in the state shall receive instruction designed to prevent child
sexual exploitation and child sexual abuse. Such program shall be
defined by the commissioner in regulations after consultation with the
department of health and be designed to educate students, parents and
school personnel about the prevention of child sexual exploitation and
child sexual abuse in grades kindergarten through eight. Such program
shall include, but not be limited to students and parents. Nothing in
this section shall prevent the department from making model curriculum
and resource materials available on the department's website.
 2. The commissioner may provide technical assistance to assist in the
development of curricula for such courses of study which shall be age
appropriate and developed according to the needs and abilities of pupils
at successive grade levels in order to provide awareness, skills,
information, self-confidence and support to aid in the prevention of
child sexual exploitation and child sexual abuse.
 § 804. Health education regarding mental health, alcohol, drugs,
tobacco abuse and the prevention and detection of certain cancers. 1.
All schools shall ensure that their health education programs recognize
the multiple dimensions of health by including mental health and the
relation of physical and mental health so as to enhance student
understanding, attitudes and behaviors that promote health, well-being
and human dignity.
 2. All schools shall include, as an integral part of health education,
instruction so as to discourage the misuse and abuse of alcohol, tobacco
and other drugs and promote attitudes and behavior that enhance health,
well being, and human dignity.
 3. Instruction regarding alcohol, tobacco, and other drugs shall be
included in the health education provided for all elementary school
pupils and shall be taught by the regular classroom teachers or by
teachers certified to teach health education. Such instruction shall be
designed according to the needs and abilities of the pupils at
successive grade levels with the purpose of developing desirable health
behavior, attitudes, and knowledge as well as self-reliance and problem
solving capacity.
 4. Instruction regarding alcohol, tobacco, and other drugs, in
addition to continued health guidance in the junior high school grades
and the senior high schools, shall be an integral part of a required
health education course at each of these levels in the secondary schools
curriculum. Students shall be required to demonstrate knowledge in the
subject area through the use of a test, graded project or report, or any
other means prescribed by the school authorities regarding alcohol,
drugs, and tobacco. Any such course shall be taught by teachers holding
a certificate to teach health. Related courses in the secondary school
curriculum shall be taught in a manner supportive of health education
regarding alcohol, tobacco, and other drugs. In addition, instruction
regarding the dangers of driving while under the influence of alcohol or
drugs shall be an integral part of a required health education course in
the senior high schools. Such instruction shall be provided in all
senior high schools whether or not these schools also provide driver
education courses.
 5. Instruction regarding methods of prevention and detection of
certain cancers, including but not limited to breast cancer, skin
cancer, testicular cancer and other cancers where certain preventive
measures have become generally accepted and certain detection methods
have been adopted and recommended generally to the public. Such
instruction shall be an integral part of a required health education
course at the senior high school level, in addition to continued health
guidance in senior high schools. Any such course shall be taught by
teachers holding a certificate to teach health.
 6. a. The commissioner may prescribe in regulations such health
education courses which include instruction regarding alcohol, tobacco,
and other drugs as the commissioner may deem necessary and desirable for
the welfare of pupils and the community. The contents may be varied to
meet the needs of particular school districts, or portions thereof, and
need not be uniform throughout the state, provided, however, that school
districts shall utilize either the curriculum for health education
instruction regarding alcohol, tobacco and other drugs prescribed by the
commissioner or a course approved by the commissioner in accordance with
criteria established by the commissioner. The commissioner is authorized
to make recommendations to the board of regents beginning December
first, two thousand fourteen and every three years thereafter relating
to the modernization of such instruction required pursuant to
subdivision one of this section, to include the most up to date age
appropriate information available regarding the misuse and abuse of
alcohol, tobacco and other drugs, including but not limited to heroin
and opioids. Such instruction shall include, but not be limited to,
information regarding drugs and other substances that are more prevalent
among school aged youth. Such recommendations shall be the result of a
collaboration between the department, the office of alcoholism and
substance abuse services and the department of health. If the board of
regents adopts such curriculum, the curriculum requirement shall take
effect no later than the next school year after such curriculum has been
adopted.
 b. The commissioner shall make available an interpersonal violence
prevention education package for grades kindergarten through twelve,
which package may consist of student pamphlets, parent pamphlets,
videotapes and other informative materials to be distributed to school
districts, and shall encourage the use of such material as part of the
health or other related curricula or programs.
 c. The regents shall review the health curriculum requirements in
existence on the effective date of this paragraph for the purpose of
streamlining such curriculum and identifying any outdated components
that may be eliminated or consolidated in order to ensure that students
have sufficient time and instruction to develop skills to address issues
of violence prevention and mental health. To the extent appropriate, the
regents shall modify the existing curriculum to provide greater focus on
the development of skills, by no later than middle school, that are
needed to recognize, cope with and address potentially violent incidents
including an understanding of student roles in emergency situations and
other related skills designed to reduce the threat of violence in
schools.
 7. School authorities shall provide the needed facilities, time, and
place for the instruction set forth herein and shall provide learning
aids and curriculum resource materials which contribute to effective
teaching methods and learning in health education regarding alcohol,
tobacco, and other drugs.
 8. All pre-service training programs in the state for elementary
teachers shall include adequate preparation regarding the instruction in
alcohol, tobacco, and other drugs set forth herein, and no teacher shall
be licensed except upon satisfactory demonstration of the competencies
included in the institutional proposals approved by the department.
 9. Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to diminish or
impair the duties of the commissioner with respect to the continuing
program for critical health problems established by chapter seven
hundred eighty-seven of the laws of nineteen hundred sixty-seven as
amended. The commissioner shall coordinate actions taken under authority
of this section with the provisions of said chapter as they relate to
health education in schools, inservice training and training programs,
and curriculum or syllabus development regarding the deleterious effects
resulting from the use, misuse, and abuse of alcohol, tobacco, and other
drugs.
 § 804-a. Comprehensive school health education demonstration program.
1. Within the amounts appropriated, the commissioner is hereby
authorized to establish a demonstration program and to distribute state
funds to local school districts, boards of cooperative educational
services and in certain instances community school districts, for the
development, implementation, evaluation, validation, demonstration and
replication of exemplary comprehensive health education programs to
assist the public schools in developing curricula, training staff, and
addressing local health education needs of students, parents, and staff.
 2. School districts or BOCES may contract with appropriate agencies or
organizations to participate in such program. Such program shall be
limited to health education at the elementary level and shall be
designed on a multi-year basis. Such program shall include but not be
limited to the following components:
 a. Developer grants for comprehensive school health education
programs.
 (i) Such grants shall include the development, implementation, and
evaluation of a comprehensive health education program including such
activities as:
 (A) coordination of health instruction with other available programs
in the school and the community related to health education;
 (B) provision of inservice training and materials for elementary level
school teachers in comprehensive health education;
 (C) development and implementation of evaluation procedures to measure
students' knowledge, skills, behaviors, and attitudes prior to and after
project implementation; and
 (D) development and implementation of a mechanism for project
maintenance and long-range programming.
 (ii) Upon successful completion of the above activities and the
availability of funds, such grant recipients will assist other local
educational agencies with replication.
 b. Health education regional training centers. Regional training
centers for the purpose of developing materials and providing training
programs to meet the needs of teachers statewide in the implementation
of comprehensive school health education programs at the elementary
level will be established.
 c. Statewide advocacy for comprehensive health education. Development
and implementation of a statewide advocacy program to create an
awareness on the part of school administrators of the need to develop
strategies for implementing comprehensive school health education
programs at the elementary level.
 d. Replication of validated health education programs. Grants will be
awarded to local school districts or boards of cooperative educational
services for the replication of nationally or state-validated exemplary
health education programs.
 § 804-b. Education regarding child development. 1. All schools shall
be authorized to include, as an integral part of home economics or
health education, instruction regarding child development and parental
skills and responsibility.
 2. Instruction regarding child development and parental skills and
responsibility may be included in the home economics or health education
provided for all secondary school pupils and shall be taught by teachers
certified to teach home economics or health education. Related courses
in the secondary school curriculum may be taught in a manner supportive
of home economics education or health education regarding child
development and parental skills and responsibility.
 3. The commissioner shall promulgate rules and regulations to
establish a curriculum for instruction regarding child development and
parental skills and responsibility for the welfare of pupils and the
community to be available in school districts. The contents may be
varied to meet the needs of particular school districts, or portions
thereof, and need not be uniform throughout the state; such curriculum
may include instruction relating to the consequences and prevention of
shaken baby syndrome, which may include the viewing of a video
presentation for students in secondary schools.
 4. School authorities shall be authorized to provide the needed
facilities, time, and place for the instruction set forth herein and to
provide learning aids and curriculum resource materials which contribute
to effective teaching methods and learning in home economics education
or health education regarding child development and parental skills and
responsibility.
 § 804-c. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation instruction. 1. Instructions
regarding cardiopulmonary resuscitation may be offered for voluntary
admission as a part of the health education curriculum in all senior
high schools. In addition to the requirement that all teachers of health
education shall be certified to teach health, persons instructing pupils
in cardiopulmonary resuscitation shall possess valid certification by an
agency offering such certification in the performance of cardiopulmonary
resuscitation and in its instruction.
 2. The commissioner may prescribe regulations governing such health
education courses which shall include instruction in cardiopulmonary
resuscitation. Such regulations shall in no event prescribe a course of
study in cardiopulmonary resuscitation which sets forth standards for
instruction of a lesser quality than the requirements of the programs
adopted by the American Heart Association or the American Red Cross.
 3. School authorities that choose to offer such course shall provide
the needed facilities, time and place for the instruction set forth
herein and shall provide learning aids and curriculum resource materials
to support such course of study.
 § 804-d. Automated external defibrillator instruction. Instructions
regarding the correct use of an automated external defibrillator shall
be included as a part of the health education curriculum in all senior
high schools when cardiopulmonary resuscitation instruction is being
provided as authorized by section eight hundred four-c of this article.
In addition to the requirement that all teachers of health education
shall be certified to teach health, persons instructing pupils in the
correct use of automated external defibrillators shall possess valid
certification by a nationally recognized organization or the state
emergency medical services council offering certification in the
operation of an automated external defibrillator and in its instruction.
 * § 805. Asian American, Native Hawaiians and Pacific Islander history
advisory committee; appointment; powers and duties. 1. The commissioner
shall establish an Asian American, Native Hawaiians and Pacific Islander
(AANHPI) history advisory committee.
 2. (a) The committee shall be comprised of four members, to be
appointed as follows:
 (i) one member appointed by the governor;
 (ii) one member appointed by the temporary president of the senate;
 (iii) one member appointed by the speaker of the assembly; and
 (iv) one member appointed by the commissioner.
 (b) All members appointed to the committee shall be experts in Asian
American, Native Hawaiians and/or Pacific Islander studies and/or have a
background in educational instruction and/or educational administration.
 (c) All members of the committee shall be appointed within ninety days
of the effective date of this section.
 3. Vacancies in the membership of the committee shall be filled in the
same manner provided for original appointments.
 4. The committee shall meet no less than four times per year.
 5. The committee shall provide recommendations on the following:
 (a) high-quality K-12 curricular and instructional resources on AANHPI
history; and
 (b) strategies for strengthening and deepening public K-12 education
programs in the areas of AANHPI history, including analysis of the
survey referenced in section two of the chapter of the laws of two
thousand twenty-five that added this section.
 6. The committee shall submit their recommendations to the
commissioner no later than two years after the effective date of this
section and be disbanded thereafter.
 7. Committee members shall receive no compensation for their services,
but shall be allowed their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the
performance of their duties.
 8. To effectuate the purposes of this section, the committee may
request from any department, board, bureau, commission or other agency
of the state, and the same are authorized to provide, such cooperation
and assistance, services and data as will enable the committee to
properly carry out its functions pursuant to this section.
 * NB Repealed December 12, 2028
 § 806. Courses of instruction in highway safety and traffic
regulation; school safety patrols. 1. The regents of The University of
the State of New York shall prescribe courses of instruction in highway
safety and traffic regulation which shall include bicycle safety, to be
maintained and followed in all the schools of the state. The boards of
education and trustees of the several cities and school districts of the
state shall require instruction to be given in such courses, by the
teachers employed in the schools therein. All pupils attending such
schools shall attend upon such instruction.
 Similar courses of instruction shall be prescribed and maintained in
private schools in the state, and all pupils in such schools shall
attend upon such courses. If such courses are not so established and
maintained in a private school, attendance upon instruction in such
school shall not be deemed substantially equivalent to instruction given
to pupils of like grade in the public schools in the city or district in
which such pupils reside.
 2. The regents shall determine the subjects to be included in such
courses of instruction in highway safety and traffic regulation
including bicycle safety, and the period of instruction in each of the
grades in such subjects. They shall adopt rules providing for
attendance upon such instruction and for such other matters as are
required for carrying into effect the teaching of the courses of
instruction prescribed by this section. The commissioner of education
shall be responsible for the enforcement of such section and shall cause
to be inspected and supervise the instruction to be given in such
subjects. The commissioner may, in his discretion, cause all or a
portion of the public school money to be apportioned to a district or
city to be withheld for failure of the school authorities of such
district or city to provide instruction in such courses and to compel
attendance upon such instruction, as herein prescribed, and for a
noncompliance with the rules of the regents adopted as herein provided.
 3. Any board of education or school district board is empowered to
organize in the school over which it has control a school safety patrol
and, with the written consent of the parents, to appoint pupils as
members thereof for the purpose of influencing and encouraging the safe
use of highways and highway crossings and bicycles by the pupils of the
school. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to authorize or
permit the use of any safety patrol member for the purpose of directing
vehicular traffic nor shall any safety patrol member be stationed in
that portion of the highway intended for the use of vehicular traffic.
Such patrol shall function only under the direction and control of the
principal or teacher in charge of such school. No liability shall attach
either to the school district or any individual, trustee, board member,
superintendent, principal, teacher or other school authority by virtue
of the organization, maintenance or operation of a school safety patrol
organized, maintained and operated under authority of this section.
 § 806-a. Driver education. 1. Notwithstanding any other provision of
law, all school districts providing instruction in driver education
shall include in such instruction: (a) a driver safety component with an
emphasis on the effects of alcohol and drug use, (b) instruction in
motorcycle safety awareness. The commissioner, upon approval by the
commissioner of motor vehicles, shall establish a curriculum for the
alcohol and drug education component which shall include but not be
limited to: instruction describing the hazards of driving while impaired
or intoxicated; the penalties for alcohol related motor vehicle
violations including sanctions set forth in the penal law that apply to
homicides and assaults arising out of the operation of a motor vehicle
while intoxicated and those sanctions set forth in the vehicle and
traffic law relating to driving while intoxicated; and the medical,
biological and physiological effects of the consumption of alcohol and
their impact on the operation of a motor vehicle.
 2. The commissioner, upon approval of the commissioner of motor
vehicles, shall establish by regulation a certification process by
driver education courses of the amount of time a holder of a class DJ or
class MJ learner's permit has spent operating a motor vehicle while
under the immediate supervision of a driver education teacher. A
certificate issued pursuant to this subdivision shall be deemed to be
proof of all or a portion of the supervised driving experience required
under certification pursuant to paragraph (d) of subdivision two of
section five hundred two of the vehicle and traffic law.
 § 807. Fire and emergency drills. 1. It shall be the duty of the
principal or other person in charge of every public or private school or
educational institution within the state, other than colleges or
universities, to instruct and train the pupils by means of drills, so
that they may in a sudden emergency be able to respond appropriately in
the shortest possible time and without confusion or panic. Such drills
shall be held at least twelve times in each school year, eight of which
required drills shall be held between September first and December
thirty-first of each such year. Eight of all such drills shall be
evacuation drills, four of which shall be through use of the fire
escapes on buildings where fire escapes are provided or through the use
of identified secondary means of egress. Four of all such required
drills shall be lock-down drills. Drills shall be conducted at different
times of the school day. Pupils shall be instructed in the procedure to
be followed in the event that a fire occurs during the lunch period or
assembly, provided however, that such additional instruction may be
waived where a drill is held during the regular school lunch period or
assembly. Four additional drills shall be held in each school year
during the hours after sunset and before sunrise in school buildings in
which students are provided with sleeping accommodations. At least two
additional drills shall be held during summer school in buildings where
summer school is conducted, and one of such drills shall be held during
the first week of summer school.
 1-a. In the case of after-school programs, events or performances
which are conducted within a school building and which include persons
who do not regularly attend classes in such school building, the
principal or other person in charge of the building shall require the
teacher or person in charge of such after-school program, event or
performance to notify persons in attendance at the beginning of each
such program, event or performance, of the procedures to be followed in
the event of an emergency so that they may be able to respond in a
timely, orderly manner.
 2. It shall be the duty of the board of education or school board or
other body having control of the schools in any district or city to
cause a copy of this section to be printed in the manual or handbook
prepared for the guidance of teachers, where such manual or handbook is
in use or may hereafter come into use.
 3. It shall be the duty of the person in charge of every public or
private college or university within the state, to instruct and train
the students by means of drills, so that they may in a sudden emergency
be able to leave the college or university building in the shortest
possible time and without confusion or panic. Such drills shall be held
at least three times in each year, one of which required drills shall be
held between September first and December first of each such year. In
buildings where summer sessions are conducted, one of such required
drills shall be held during the first week of such summer session. At
least one of such required drills shall be through use of the fire
escapes on buildings where fire escapes are provided. At least one
additional drill shall be held in each year during the hours after
sunset and before sunrise in college or university buildings in which
students are provided with sleeping accommodations.
 4. Neglect by any principal or other person in charge of any public or
private school or educational institution to comply with the provisions
of this section shall be a misdemeanor punishable at the discretion of
the court by a fine not exceeding fifty dollars; such fine to be paid to
the pension fund of the local fire department where there is such a
fund.
 § 807-a. Fire inspections. 1. It shall be the duty of the school
authorities in general charge of the operation of any public or private
school to cause the buildings of such school containing classroom,
dormitory, laboratory, physical education, dining or recreational
facilities for student use to be inspected at least annually for fire
hazards which might endanger the lives of students, teachers and
employees therein.
 2. The annual fire inspection shall be made prior to the first day of
December of every school year and the report thereof shall be filed by
the school authorities in the places required by subdivision five of
this section no later than the sixteenth day of December of every such
year.
 3. a. The school authorities shall cause any fire inspection pursuant
to this section to be made by one of the following methods, or any
combination of such methods:
 (1) Requesting inspection by the fire department of any city, town,
village or fire district in which the building is located.
 (2) Requesting inspection by a fire corporation which is subject to
the provisions of section fourteen hundred two of the not-for-profit
corporation law, if such building is located within the area described
in the certificate of incorporation of any such corporation.
 (3) Requesting inspection by the county fire coordinator, or the
officer performing the powers and duties of a county fire coordinator
pursuant to a local law, of the county in which the building is located,
or by any deputy county fire coordinator or deputy of such other officer
so performing the powers and duties of a county fire coordinator
designated to make the inspection by the county fire coordinator or such
other officer so performing the powers and duties of a county fire
coordinator, if the building is located outside a city, town, village,
or fire district, which has its own fire department and outside the area
described in the certificate of incorporation of any fire corporation
which is subject to the provisions of section fourteen hundred two of
the not-for-profit corporation law.
 (4) Requesting inspection by a fire inspector, who holds a valid
certification.
 b. If any fire department, certified fire inspector or fire
corporation described in subparagraphs one, two, and four of paragraph a
of this subdivision shall fail or refuse to make a fire inspection
promptly after having been requested to do so by the school authorities,
the request shall be denied in writing to the school authorities with an
explanation of why such request was denied. In no event may an authority
who is otherwise required by law to conduct fire inspections in such
municipality or a county fire coordinator refuse a request by a school
authority for such inspection.
 c. Regardless of the method or methods used to accomplish the
inspection required by this section, the authority making the inspection
shall file the report thereof with the school authorities no later than
the first day of December.
 4. The state fire administrator shall prescribe the form of the fire
inspection report and the commissioner shall furnish a supply of such
form to school authorities annually, either by mail or electronically.
In prescribing such form the state fire administrator shall consider
standards for fire safety set forth in the state building construction
code, the state building conservation and fire prevention code, the
regulations of the commissioner and other safety standards.
 5. a. The report of any fire inspection shall be filed in the office
of the school authorities and with the commissioner. All such reports
filed in any public office shall be kept as public records for at least
three years after which period they may be destroyed.
 b. Within twenty days after the report is filed with the school
authorities, the school authorities shall cause public notice of the
filing of such report to be given in substantially the following form:
"Notice is hereby given that the annual inspection for (year) of
the school building (or of the
and school buildings) of (name of school district or private
school) for fire hazards which might endanger the lives of students,
teachers and employees therein, has been completed and the report
thereof is available at the office of (school district or private
school) at for inspection by all interested persons". If the
inspection was not made for the school authorities by the fire
department or fire company responsible for fire protection of the
building, such authorities shall cause a copy of such notice to be
mailed or electronically transmitted to the chief of such fire
department or company.
 c. The school authorities of public schools shall cause such notice to
be published on the school's website or at least once in the official
newspaper, or if there is no official newspaper, in a newspaper having
general circulation in the school district, and if there is no newspaper
having general circulation in the district, shall cause such notice to
be posted in ten conspicuous places in the district. Proof of
publication or posting of such notice and of the mailing of a copy of
such notice to the fire chief shall be filed in the office of the
district.
 d. The school authorities of private schools shall cause such notice
to be published on the school's website or at least once in a newspaper
having general circulation in the postal area in which the school
building is located, and if there is no newspaper having general
circulation in such postal area, shall cause such notice to be posted in
ten conspicuous places in such postal area. Proof of posting or
publication of such notice and of the mailing of a copy of such notice
to the fire chief shall be filed in the school office.
 e. If the report shows any alleged deficiencies, the school
authorities shall provide the details of such deficiencies and the
proposed actions to be taken to correct such deficiencies to the local
government that administers and enforces the uniform fire prevention and
building code for the municipality in which the building is located.
 6. a. It shall be the duty of the commissioner to ascertain annually
whether the inspections of school buildings required by this section
have been made and the reports of the inspection have been filed in
their respective offices. The commissioner shall review the reports of
inspection filed pursuant to this section and may make recommendations
to the school authorities with respect to any problems relating to
school fire safety noted in such reports. The commissioner shall require
a re-inspection of school buildings where a report of inspection
identified violations until it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of
the commissioner that said violations have been corrected. In the event
that a public school fails to correct violations following a
re-inspection, the commissioner may deny an annual certificate of
occupancy to such school building. The commissioner may inspect or cause
to be inspected at any reasonable time for fire prevention and fire
protection purposes the school buildings required to be inspected by
this section.
 b. In the event a private school has failed to file an annual fire
safety report with the department within ninety days of the sixteenth of
December, the commissioner shall inspect or request an appropriate local
authority, described in subdivision seven of this section, to inspect
the school. If a private school either refuses access for an inspection
pursuant to this paragraph, or does not correct violations identified in
such report in a timely manner, the commissioner shall immediately
notify, in writing, the local government who issues the certificate of
occupancy for the school of their failure to file a fire safety report.
 7. a. Every public or private school required to be inspected as
hereinabove provided may be inspected for fire prevention and fire
protection purposes at any reasonable time by:
 (1) the chief of the fire department of the city, town, village or
fire district in which the school is located,
 (2) the chief of a fire corporation having its headquarters outside a
village or fire district, if the school is located in the area described
in the certificate of incorporation of such company,
 (3) the chief of the fire department or fire company affording fire
protection to a fire district, fire protection district, or fire alarm
district pursuant to a contract, if the school is located in any such
district,
 (4) the member of any fire department or fire company listed in
subparagraph one, two or three of this paragraph assigned by the chief
thereof the duty of inspecting school buildings,
 (5) the fire inspector, who holds a valid certification, of any city,
town, village or fire district in which the building is located.
 b. In no event shall the school authorities of any public or private
school, required to be inspected as hereinabove provided, refuse access
at any reasonable time to any person described in subparagraphs one,
two, three, four or five of paragraph a of this subdivision, who appears
for the purpose of conducting an inspection for fire prevention or fire
protection purposes; provided, however, that the administrator or the
designee of the administrator of the school to be inspected shall be
given the opportunity to be present during the inspection.
 8. The term "school authorities", as used in this section, means, in
relation to public schools, the trustees, or board of education, or
corresponding officers, whether one or more, and by whatever name known
of a city school district, or other school district however created, or,
in relation to private schools, the board of trustees, board of
directors, or other governing board in general charge of the operation
of any such school.
 9. The term "private school", as used in this section, means:
 a. Any nursery school or kindergarten attended by six or more pupils
three years of age or older which may apply for registration by the New
York state education department pursuant to part one hundred twenty-five
of title eight of the official compilation of codes, rules and
regulations of the state of New York; provided, however, that this
section shall not apply to day care facilities possessing a valid permit
as required by section three hundred ninety of the social services law;
or
 b. Any establishment, other than a public school, attended by
twenty-five or more pupils for the purpose of receiving the instruction
of academic grade at the elementary or secondary level required by part
one of article sixty-five of this chapter.
 10. This section shall not apply to the school authorities in the
cities of New York, Buffalo, Rochester, Syracuse and Yonkers or to
colleges and universities.
 § 807-b. College fire inspections. 1. It shall be the duty of the
college authorities in general charge of the operation of any public or
independent college to cause the buildings under the jurisdiction of
such college containing classroom, dormitory, fraternities, sororities,
laboratory, physical education, dining or recreational facilities for
student use to be inspected at least annually for fire hazards which
might endanger the lives of students, teachers and employees therein.
Inspections of all public and independent college buildings, with the
exception of those within a city having a population of one million or
more, shall be conducted by the state office of fire prevention and
control or a designee of the state fire administrator. An inspection
report shall be produced by the inspecting agency for each building
inspected.
 2. The annual fire inspection for public and independent colleges
shall be made when the college is in session.
 3. The office of fire prevention and control is authorized to adopt
rules and regulations establishing minimum standards for the content and
frequency of such inspections in order to ensure compliance with
applicable fire safety standards. In the event violations of applicable
codes, rules and regulations pertaining to fire safety are found during
inspections, the office of fire prevention and control is authorized to
take appropriate actions to ensure that violations are promptly
remedied.
 4. The state fire administrator shall prescribe the format of the fire
inspection report. In prescribing such format the state fire
administrator shall consider standards for fire safety set forth in the
uniform fire prevention and building code and other applicable fire
safety standards.
 5. Within ninety days of completing such inspection, the office of
fire prevention and control or its designee shall file a copy of the
report with the office of the college authorities and with the
commissioner. All such reports so filed shall be kept as records for at
least three years after which period they may be destroyed. A copy of
such report shall also be filed with the chief, or other comparable
officer, of any fire department or fire corporation which has the
regular duty of fighting fire in the building inspected.
 6. The office of fire prevention and control or its designee shall
make recommendations to the college authorities with respect to any
problems relating to building fire safety noted in such reports. The
commissioner may inspect or cause to be inspected at any reasonable time
for fire prevention and fire protection purposes the buildings required
to be inspected by this section. The commissioner may impose a fine of
up to five hundred dollars per day upon any public or independent
college which fails to remedy, to the satisfaction of the office of fire
prevention and control, any violation noted in a report within thirty
days of receiving a copy of such report.
 7. Every public or independent college building required to be
inspected by the office of fire prevention and control or its designee
may also be examined for fire protection purposes at any reasonable time
by
 a. the chief of the fire department of the city, town, village or fire
district in which the college building is located,
 b. the chief of a fire corporation having its headquarters outside a
village or fire district, if the college building is located in the area
described in the certificate of incorporation of such company,
 c. the chief of the fire department or fire company affording fire
protection to a fire district, fire protection district, or fire alarm
district pursuant to a contract, if the college building is located in
any such district,
 d. the member of any fire department or fire company listed in
paragraphs a, b or c of this subdivision assigned by the chief.
 8. Any person, or any public or other corporation for which any such
persons acts, shall not be liable for any error, omission or lack of
thoroughness in the making of the inspection and report required or
permitted by this section.
 9. The term "college authorities", as used in this section, means the
board of trustees, board of directors, or other governing board in
general charge of the operation of any such college.
 10. The term "public college" shall mean and include "state-operated
institutions", "statutory or contract colleges" and "community colleges"
as defined in section three hundred fifty of this chapter.
 11. The term "independent college" shall mean colleges other than
those included within subdivision ten of this section.
 § 807-c. Transmission of fire alarm to fire department. 1. The school
authorities designated in subdivision eight of section eight hundred
seven-a of this article in charge of the operation of any public school
or of any private school designated in subdivision nine of such section,
located in an area within which a fire department or fire company is
responsible for fire protection and within which there is no
electrically or electronically operated fire alarm reporting system
provided for public use may cause the internal fire alarm, fire
detection, or fire extinguishing system of each building in which is
contained classroom, dormitory, laboratory, physical education, dining
or recreational facilities for student use to be interconnected with the
fire alarm reporting location or system which is provided for such fire
department or fire company to receive alarms from the public so that
upon activation of such internal fire alarm, fire detection, or fire
extinguishing system a signal will be automatically transmitted to such
fire alarm reporting location or system.
 2. School authorities and the governing body having jurisdiction of
any fire department or fire company are hereby authorized, by agreement
between them, to apportion the costs of installing and maintaining any
such interconnection, and such costs are hereby deemed appropriate
expenditures from the funds of such school authorities and governing
bodies.
 § 807-d. Locating source of fires in schools. 1. In all public and
private school buildings having a central annunciator panel or fire
alarm cabinet which displays a visual signal identifying any heat
detector, smoke detector, or manually operated fire alarm box within the
building which has been activated, there shall be provided as a part of
or immediately adjacent to such panel or cabinet a chart or plan showing
the specific location within the building of each such device.
 2. In the case of school buildings and additions to existing school
buildings, the construction of which is commenced after September first,
nineteen hundred seventy-three, any such panel or cabinet and such chart
or plan within such building or addition shall be so located that the
same may be read without entering the building.
 § 808. Instruction in fire and arson prevention. 1. The commissioner
is hereby directed to provide and prescribe a course of instruction in
fire and arson prevention, injury prevention and life safety education
relating to the protection against injury or death and protection of
property against loss or damage as a result of criminally initiated or
other preventable fire, for use in the schools of the state, as
prescribed by this section. Such course of instruction shall include
materials to educate children on the dangers of falsely reporting a
criminal incident, an impending explosion or fire emergency involving
danger to life or property, an impending catastrophe, or a life safety
emergency.
 2. The board of education, trustees, principal or other person in
charge of every public, private and parochial school in the state shall
arrange for giving such course of instruction in every school under its
or his control or direction. Such instruction shall be given to all of
the pupils in every such school for a period of not less than forty-five
minutes in each month during which such school is in session.
 § 809. Instruction in the humane treatment of animals. 1. The officer,
board or commission authorized or required to prescribe courses of
instruction shall cause instruction to be given in every elementary
school under state control or supported wholly or partly by public money
of the state, in the humane treatment and protection of animals and the
importance of the part they play in the economy of nature as well as the
necessity of controlling the proliferation of animals which are
subsequently abandoned and caused to suffer extreme cruelty. Such
instruction shall be for such period of time during each school year as
the board of regents may prescribe and may be joined with work in
literature, reading, language, nature study or ethnology. Such weekly
instruction may be divided into two or more periods. A school district
shall not be entitled to participate in the public school money on
account of any school or the attendance at any school subject to the
provisions of this section, if the instruction required hereby is not
given therein.
 2. Study and care of live animals. Any school which cares for or uses
animals for study shall ensure that each animal in such school be
afforded the following: appropriate quarters; sufficient space for the
normal behavior and postural requirements of the species; proper
ventilation, lighting, and temperature control; adequate food and clean
drinking water; and quarters which shall be cleaned on a regular basis
and located in an area where undue stress and disturbance are minimized.
 3. Application. The provisions of this section shall not be construed
to prohibit or constrain vocational instruction in the normal practice
of animal husbandry, or prohibit or constrain instruction in
environmental education activities as established by the department of
environmental conservation.
 4. Dissection of animals. Any student expressing a moral or religious
objection to the performance or witnessing of the dissection of an
animal, either wholly or in part, shall be provided the opportunity to
undertake and complete an alternative project that shall be approved by
such student's teacher; provided, however, that such objection is
substantiated in writing by the student's parent or legal guardian.
Students who perform alternative projects who do not perform or witness
the dissection of animals shall not be penalized. The board of education
or trustees of a school district shall develop a policy to give
reasonable notice to all students enrolled in a course that includes the
dissection of an animal and students' parents or legal guardians about
their rights under this subdivision. Such notice shall be made available
upon request at the school and distributed to parents and students
enrolled in a course that includes dissection at least once at the
beginning of the school year.
 5. Treatment of live vertebrate animals. a. Except as provided for in
this subdivision, no school district, school principal, administrator,
or teacher shall require or permit the performance of a lesson or
experimental study on a live vertebrate animal in any such school or
during any activity conducted under the auspices of such school whether
or not the activity takes place on the premises of such school where
such lesson or experimental study employs: (i) micro-organisms which
cause disease in humans or animals, (ii) ionizing radiation, (iii) known
cancer producing agents, (iv) chemicals at toxic levels, (v) drugs
producing pain or deformity, (vi) severe extremes of temperature, (vii)
electric or other shock, (viii) excessive noise, (ix) noxious fumes, (x)
exercise to exhaustion, (xi) overcrowding, (xii) paralysis by muscle
relaxants or other means, (xiii) deprivation or excess of food, water or
other essential nutrients, (xiv) surgery or other invasive procedures,
(xv) other extreme stimuli, or (xvi) termination of life.
 b. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of this section, the
commissioner may, upon the submission of a written program plan, issue
to such school a written waiver of such restrictions for students
subject to the following provisions: (i) the student shall be in grade
ten, eleven, or twelve; and (ii) the student shall be under the
supervision of one or more teachers certified in science; and (iii) the
student shall be pursuing an accelerated course of study in the sciences
as defined by the commissioner in preparation for taking a state or
national advanced placement examination. The commissioner shall issue a
waiver of such restrictions for any teacher certified in science
instructing such student. The written program plan shall include, but
not be limited to: (i) the educational basis for requesting a waiver;
(ii) the objective of the lesson or experiment; (iii) the methods and
techniques to be used; and (iv) any other information required by the
commissioner.
 6. Report. On or before the first day of January next succeeding the
effective date of this amended section, the commissioner shall annually
submit a report to the governor and the legislature which shall include,
but not be limited to, the number of written program plan proposals
submitted by schools and the number of such proposals subsequently
approved by the commissioner. In those cases where a program plan
proposal has been approved by the commissioner, such plan shall be
appended to and become a part of the commissioner's annual report.
 § 809-a. Instruction in the safe use of firearms and in the game laws.
The officer, board, or commission authorized or required to prescribe
courses of instructions in any school under state control, may authorize
instructions to be given in the safe and proper use of firearms allowed
by law to be used in the taking of wild game, and may also authorize
instructions to be given in the study of game laws and of proper hunting
and conservation practices. Such courses of instruction shall be
approved by both the education department and the department of
environmental conservation.
 § 810. Conservation day. 1. The last Friday in April each year is
hereby made and declared to be known as Conservation day, and observed
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, except that for the
year nineteen hundred seventy-eight, Conservation day shall be May
third.
 2. It shall be the duty of the authorities of every public school in
this state to assemble the pupils in their charge on that day in the
school building, or elsewhere, as they may deem proper, and to provide
for and conduct (1) such exercises as shall tend to encourage the
planting, protection and preservation of trees and shrubs, and an
acquaintance with the best methods to be adopted to accomplish such
results, and (2) such lectures, pictures or tours, as shall tend to
increase the interest and knowledge of such pupils in the fish and wild
life, soil and water of the state.
 3. The commissioner of education may prescribe from time to time a
course of exercises and instruction in the subjects hereinbefore
mentioned, which shall be adopted and observed by the public school
authorities on Conservation day. Upon receipt of copies of such course
sufficient in number to supply all the schools under their supervision,
the school authorities aforesaid shall promptly provide each of the
schools under their charge with a copy, and cause it to be observed.
 § 811. Procurement, use and possession of hypodermic syringes and
needles by school personnel for educational purposes. 1.
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 220.45 of the penal law, it
shall be lawful for authorized persons under the jurisdiction of the
public school authorities in a public school; or of the state education
department; or of the governing board of any other educational
institution, the curriculum of which is registered by the department, to
purchase, acquire, have under control, possess and use hypodermic
syringes and needles for instructional or other educational purposes
provided such school authorities in the case of a school district, the
appropriate superior officer in the case of the department, or such
governing board in the case of other institutions, has filed with the
commissioner of education and with the state department of health a
certificate of need for such hypodermic needles which shall set forth
the following:
 a. The legal designation and address of the school district, if a
public school or if another school or institution, the name and address
thereof, and the exact location where such hypodermic syringes and
needles will be used and stored.
 b. The name and address of the chief administrative officer of the
school or institution.
 c. The use proposed to be made of such hypodermic needles.
 d. The names of persons employed in the school, the department, or
other institution authorized to have custody and/or use of such
hypodermic needles.
 e. The safeguards to be taken to prevent such instruments from falling
into the hands of unauthorized persons.
 f. The disposition which will be made of unwanted or broken syringes
and needles. In the case of the department such certificate shall be
made and filed by the assistant commissioner under whose supervision the
work involving the use of such hypodermic syringes or needles is done,
and a duplicate thereof shall be filed with the state department of
health.
 2. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to require the
filing of such names by medical institutions, including but not limited
to, public health centers, industrial clinics, diagnostic, treatment or
research centers, rehabilitation facilities, nursing homes, medical
schools or colleges, tuberculosis, mental, chronic disease and other
types of hospitals, clinical laboratories, outpatient departments,
nurses training facilities and central service facilities operated in
conjunction with medical institutions.
 3. The commissioner, after consultation with the commissioner of
health, shall make regulations for the administration of this section.
 § 812. Health training program for secondary school students. 1. The
commissioner, in cooperation with the board of regents, is authorized
and directed to establish and develop a program of credit for health
training for those secondary school students evidencing an interest to
pursue a health care services career. Such program may be instituted by
any school district seeking to provide its secondary school students
with an opportunity to participate in a health care facility or agency
training program wherein its secondary school students shall receive
academic credit for work related training received at health care
facilities or agencies.
 2. The board of regents shall establish criteria to be used by school
districts participating in such program for the selection of eligible
secondary school students seeking placement in a health training program
subject to availability of placement openings.
 § 813. School lunch period; scheduling. Each school shall schedule a
reasonable time for each full day pupil attending pre-kindergarten
through grade twelve to consume lunch.
 § 814. Courses of study in internet safety. 1. Any school district in
the state may provide, to pupils in grades kindergarten through twelve,
instruction designed to promote the proper and safe use of the internet.
 2. The commissioner shall provide technical assistance to assist in
the development of curricula for such courses of study which shall be
age appropriate and developed according to the needs and abilities of
pupils at successive grade levels in order to provide awareness, skills,
information and support to aid in the safe usage of the internet.
 3. The commissioner shall develop age-appropriate resources and
technical assistance for schools to provide to students in grades three
through twelve and their parents or legal guardians concerning the safe
and responsible use of the internet. The resources shall include, but
not be limited to, information regarding how child predators may use the
internet to lure and exploit children, protecting personal information,
internet scams and cyber-bullying.
 § 815. State seal of biliteracy. 1. (a) The state seal of biliteracy
is established to recognize high school graduates who have attained a
high level of proficiency in listening, speaking, reading, and writing
in one or more languages in addition to English. The state seal of
biliteracy shall be awarded by the commissioner. School district
participation in this program is voluntary.
 (b) The purposes of the state seal of biliteracy are as follows:
 (1) To encourage pupils to study languages.
 (2) To certify attainment of biliteracy.
 (3) To provide employers with a method of identifying people with
language and biliteracy skills.
 (4) To provide universities with an additional method to recognize
applicants seeking admission.
 (5) To prepare pupils with twenty-first century skills.
 (6) To recognize the value of foreign language and native language
instruction in public schools. For the purpose of this section foreign
language means any language other than English (LOTE) including all
modern languages, Latin, American Sign Language, Native American
languages and native languages.
 (7) To strengthen intergroup relationships, affirm the value of
diversity, and honor the multiple cultures and languages of a community.
 2. (a) The state seal of biliteracy certifies attainment of a high
level of proficiency by a graduating high school pupil in one or more
languages, in addition to English.
 (b) The board of regents shall promulgate such regulations of the
commissioner as may be necessary to establish the criteria that students
must achieve to earn a state seal of biliteracy, which may include, but
is not limited to attainment of units of credit in English language arts
and languages other than English, passage of state assessments in
English language arts and language other than English, and passage of
such additional assessments of foreign language proficiency as may be
approved by the commissioner for this purpose.
 (c) For purposes of this section, foreign language means any language
other than English (LOTE) including all modern languages, Latin,
American Sign Language, Native American languages and native languages.
 3. The commissioner shall do both of the following:
 (a) Prepare and deliver to participating school districts an
appropriate insignia to be affixed to the diploma and transcript of the
pupil indicating that the pupil has been awarded a state seal of
biliteracy by the commissioner.
 (b) Provide other information he or she deems necessary for school
districts to successfully participate in the program.
 4. A school district that participates in the program under this
section shall do both of the following:
 (a) Maintain appropriate records in order to identify pupils who have
earned a state seal of biliteracy.
 (b) Affix the appropriate insignia to the diploma and transcript of
each pupil who earns a state seal of biliteracy.
 5. No fee shall be charged to a pupil pursuant to this section.
 § 816. Local library and school partnerships. 1. Legislative intent.
In order to promote and encourage children to read and learn outside the
classroom, this law seeks to encourage local libraries and schools to
work together to promote the availability of library services and
resources.
 2. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms
shall be defined as follows:
 a. "School district" shall mean any public school district in the
state of New York that contains one or more schools with any combination
of grades from and including kindergarten through grade twelve.
 b. "Public library" shall mean any public or association library as
defined in section two hundred fifty-three of this title.
 3. Upon the request of a public library that is located within the
boundaries of a school district, the district shall disseminate
informational materials provided by the library regarding the public
library and applications for public library cards to students enrolled
in the school district. Such materials shall be distributed to any or
all of the following, as requested by the public library:
 a. annually to every student of such school district upon his or her
entry into kindergarten, grade six and grade nine, except that a library
and school may agree to alternate or additional grades;
 b. to every student upon his or her enrollment as a new student; and
 c. available at all times in the school library in each school within
the school district for students and parents who wish to obtain such
materials.
 4. The director of each participating public library shall consult
annually with the school district in order to coordinate the provision
of materials containing information regarding the library, instructions
on how students may obtain a library card and an application for a
library card.
 5. Each public library that is located in the school district shall
provide sufficient copies of such materials to the school district for
distribution as described in subdivision three of this section so that
each school may satisfy the requirements of this section.
 6. In the event there is no public library located within the
boundaries of a school district, such school district shall not be
required to comply with this section.
 7. The commissioner shall have the authority to establish rules and
regulations to implement the provisions of this section.
 8. Nothing in this act shall require a school district to expend
additional funds in order to comply with the provisions of this section.
 9. This section shall not apply to a school district or a library in a
city of one million or more where such district or library are subject
to a local law which was adopted prior to the enactment of this section
and which provides for the distribution of library materials in public
schools.
 * § 817. Expanding access to advanced courses to improve educational
equity. 1. Each school district and charter school shall annually
provide notification to parents and students of the benefits and the
opportunities within the district or charter school of participating in
advanced courses.
 2. Such notification shall include:
 a. the benefits of participating in advanced courses;
 b. a description of the advanced courses offered by the school
district or charter school in middle and high school and how to prepare
for and enroll in them;
 c. a description of the advanced courses to be offered by the school
district or charter school in the following school year; and
 d. a description of the academic and non-academic support the school
district or charter school provides to help students succeed in advanced
courses, as well as any financial assistance available to reduce or
eliminate any costs associated with participation in advanced courses,
including but not limited to related fees, supplies, and assessments.
 3. Notification shall be provided electronically or by mail and be
posted on the website of the school district or charter school.
 * NB There are 2 § 817's
 * § 817. Student government. The board of education or trustees of
every school district serving high school students in grades nine
through twelve with no districtwide or school building peer selected
student government shall establish at least one student government
organization within such district or school building with the goal of
ensuring all eligible students have the opportunity to participate in
such student government.
 * NB There are 2 § 817's
 § 818. Evidence-based and scientifically based reading instruction. 1.
(a) On or before January first, two thousand twenty-five, the
commissioner shall provide school districts with the instructional best
practices for the teaching of reading to students in prekindergarten
through grade three. Instructional best practices for the teaching of
reading shall be evidence-based and scientifically based, focusing on
reading competency in the areas of phonemic awareness, phonics,
vocabulary development, reading fluency, comprehension, including
background knowledge, oral language and writing, oral skill development,
and align with the department's culturally responsive-sustaining
framework. Such instructional best practices shall be periodically
updated by the commissioner where appropriate.
 (b) Every school district shall annually review their curriculum and
instructional practices in the subject of reading for students in
prekindergarten through grade three to ensure that they align with the
reading instructional best practices provided by the commissioner, and
that all early reading instructional practices and interventions are
part of an aligned plan designed to improve student reading outcomes in
prekindergarten through grade three.
 2. For the purpose of this section, "evidence-based and scientifically
based", "phonemic awareness", "comprehension", "reading fluency",
"vocabulary development", "culturally responsive-sustaining framework",
and such other terms necessary to implement this section shall be as
defined by the commissioner in regulations.
 3. On or before September first, two thousand twenty-five, every
school district shall verify to the commissioner that their curriculum
and instructional practices in the subject of reading in prekindergarten
through grade three align with all of the elements of the instructional
best practices provided by the commissioner pursuant to this section.
 ARTICLE 19
 MEDICAL AND HEALTH SERVICE
Section 901. School health services to be provided.
 902. Employment of health professionals.
 902-a. Treatment of students diagnosed with diabetes by school
 personnel.
 902-b. Treatment by licensed school personnel of students
 diagnosed with allergies.
 903. Students to furnish health certificates; and dental
 health certificates.
 904. Examinations by health appraisal.
 905. Record of screening examinations for vision, hearing and
 scoliosis.
 906. Existence of communicable diseases; return after illness.
 907. Use of sunscreen.
 908. Prohibition against meal shaming.
 909. School hygiene districts.
 910. Choice of method of treatment.
 911. Enforcement.
 912. Health and welfare services to all children.
 912-a. Urine analysis; drug detection.
 912-b. Speech and language improvement services.
 913. Medical examinations of teachers and other employees.
 914. Immunization of children.
 915. Prohibiting the sale of certain sweetened foods.
 915-a. Universal free school meals.
 916. Pupils with asthma or another respiratory disease
 requiring rescue inhaler treatment.
 916-a. Pupils with allergies.
 916-b. Pupils with diabetes.
 917. On-site cardiac automated external defibrillator.
 917-a. On-site cardiac automated external defibrillator in
 nonpublic schools.
 918. School district nutrition advisory committees.
 919. On-site nebulizers.
 920. Public schools; infestation of bedbugs (Cimex
 lectularius).
 921. Training of unlicensed school personnel to administer
 certain medications.
 921-a. On-site epinephrine device.
 922. Opioid overdose prevention.
 923. Sudden cardiac arrest.
 924. Ingredient and nutritional information requirements.
 926. Water safety information.
 § 901. School health services to be provided. 1. School health
services, as defined in subdivision two of this section, shall be
provided by each school district for all students attending the public
schools in this state, except in the city school district of the city of
New York, as provided in this article. School health services shall
include the services of a registered professional nurse, if one is
employed, and shall also include such services as may be rendered as
provided in this article in examining students for the existence of
disease or disability and in testing the eyes and ears of such students.
 2. School health services for the purposes of this article shall mean
the several procedures, including, but not limited to, medical
examinations, dental inspection and/or screening, scoliosis screening,
vision screening and audiometer tests, designed to determine the health
status of the child; to inform parents or other persons in parental
relation to the child, pupils and teachers of the individual child's
health condition subject to federal and state confidentiality laws; to
guide parents, children and teachers in procedures for preventing and
correcting defects and diseases; to instruct the school personnel in
procedures to take in case of accident or illness; to survey and make
necessary recommendations concerning the health and safety aspects of
school facilities and the provision of health information.
 § 902. Employment of health professionals. 1. As used in this article
"health professionals" means persons duly licensed or otherwise
authorized to practice a health profession pursuant to applicable law,
including, but not limited to, physicians, registered professional
nurses, nurse practitioners, physicians assistants, optometrists,
dentists, dental hygienists, dietitians and nutritionists, and
audiologists.
 2. a. The board of education, and the trustee or board of trustees of
each school district, shall employ, at a compensation to be agreed upon
by the parties, a qualified physician, or a nurse practitioner to the
extent authorized by the nurse practice act and consistent with
subdivision three of section six thousand nine hundred two of this
chapter, to perform the duties of the director of school health
services, including any duties conferred on the school physician or
school medical inspector under any provision of law, to perform and
coordinate the provision of health services in the public schools and to
provide health appraisals of students attending the public schools in
the city or district. The physicians or nurse practitioners so employed
shall be duly licensed pursuant to applicable law.
 b. Any such board or trustees may employ one or more school nurses,
who shall be registered professional nurses, as well as other health
professionals, as may be required. Such registered professional nurses
and other health professionals shall aid the director of school health
services of the district and shall perform such duties, including health
instruction for the benefit of the public schools as may be prescribed
by such board or trustees, in compliance with each such health
professional's practice act.
 3. Health professionals may be employed by the trustees or boards of
education of two or more school districts, and the compensation of such
health professionals, and the expenses incurred in providing school
health services for students as provided in this article, shall be borne
jointly by such districts, and be apportioned among them in any manner
agreed to by such districts in a sharing agreement entered pursuant to
section one hundred nineteen-o of the general municipal law. The
trustees or boards of education of two or more school districts in a
supervisory district may enter into an agreement, or agreements as may
be required, with a board of cooperative educational services for the
provision of the services of one or more registered professional nurses,
and other health professionals to perform health services, including
health instruction in such districts.
 § 902-a. Treatment of students diagnosed with diabetes by school
personnel. 1. Licensed nurses, nurse practitioners, physician
assistants, or physicians employed by school districts or boards of
cooperative educational services are authorized to calculate prescribed
insulin dosages, administer prescribed insulin, program the prescribed
insulin pump, refill the reservoir in the insulin pump, change the
infusion site, inject prescribed glucagon, teach an unlicensed person to
administer glucagon to an individual, and perform other authorized
services pursuant to the scope of practice of the licensed individual
under title VIII of this chapter, to pupils who have received written
permission by a physician or other licensed health care provider, and
written parental consent to carry and use insulin and glucagon pursuant
to section nine hundred sixteen-b of this article, during the school day
on school property and at any school function as such terms are defined,
respectively, by subdivisions one and two of section eleven of this
chapter. Nothing in this section shall authorize unlicensed persons to
perform these services except as otherwise permitted by section nine
hundred twenty-one of this article.
 2. A school district, board of cooperative educational services and/or
their agents or employees shall incur no legal or financial liability as
a result of any harm or injury sustained by a pupil or other person
caused by reasonable and good faith compliance with this section.
 § 902-b. Treatment by licensed school personnel of students diagnosed
with allergies. 1. (a) Licensed nurses, nurse practitioners, physician
assistants, or physicians employed by schools are authorized to
administer prescribed epinephrine pursuant to the scope of practice of
the licensed individual under title VIII of this chapter, to pupils
diagnosed by a physician or other duly authorized health care provider
with an allergy who have the written permission of a physician or other
duly authorized health care provider for the administration of emergency
epinephrine and written parental consent to carry and use an epinephrine
device pursuant to section nine hundred sixteen-a of this article,
during the school day on school property and at any school function as
such terms are defined, respectively, by subdivisions one and two of
section eleven of this chapter.
 (b) For the purposes of this subdivision, the term "epinephrine
device" shall have the same meaning as set forth in paragraph (b) of
subdivision one of section three thousand-c of the public health law.
 2. A school district, board of cooperative educational services and/or
their agents or employees shall incur no legal or financial liability as
a result of any harm or injury sustained by a pupil or other person
caused by reasonable and good faith compliance with this section.
 § 903. Students to furnish health certificates; and dental health
certificates. 1. A health certificate shall be furnished by each
student in the public schools upon his or her entrance in such schools
and upon his or her entry into the grades prescribed by the commissioner
in regulations, provided that such regulations shall require such
certificates at least twice during the elementary grades and twice in
the secondary grades. An examination and health history of any child may
be required by the local school authorities at any time in their
discretion to promote the educational interests of such child. Each
certificate shall be signed by a duly licensed physician, physician
assistant, or nurse practitioner, who is authorized by law to practice
in this state, and consistent with subdivision three of section six
thousand nine hundred two of this chapter, or by a duly licensed
physician, physician assistant, or nurse practitioner, who is authorized
to practice in the jurisdiction in which the examination was given,
provided that the commissioner has determined that such jurisdiction has
standards of licensure and practice comparable to those of New York.
Each such certificate shall describe the condition of the student when
the examination was made, which shall not be more than twelve months
prior to the commencement of the school year in which the examination is
required, and shall state whether such student is in a fit condition of
health to permit his or her attendance at the public schools. The
examination may include a diabetes risk analysis. Each such certificate
shall also state the student's body mass index (BMI) and weight status
category. For purposes of this section, BMI is computed as the weight in
kilograms divided by the square of height in meters or the weight in
pounds divided by the square of height in inches multiplied by a
conversion factor of 703. Weight status categories for children and
adolescents shall be as defined by the commissioner of health. In all
school districts such physician, physician assistant or nurse
practitioner shall determine whether a one-time test for sickle cell
anemia is necessary or desirable and he or she shall conduct such a test
and the certificate shall state the results.
 2. a. A dental health certificate shall be requested from each
student. Each student is requested to furnish a dental health
certificate at the same time that health certificates are required. An
assessment and dental health history of any child may be requested by
the local school authorities at any time in their discretion to promote
the educational interests of such child. Each certificate shall be
signed by a duly licensed dentist, or a registered dental hygienist who
is authorized by law to practice in this state, and consistent with any
applicable written practice agreement, or by a duly licensed dentist or
registered dental hygienist who is authorized to practice in the
jurisdiction in which the assessment was given, provided that the
commissioner has determined that such jurisdiction has standards of
licensure and practice comparable to those of New York. Each such
certificate shall describe the dental health condition of the student
when the assessment was made, which shall not be more than twelve months
prior to the commencement of the school year in which the assessment is
requested, and shall state whether such student is in fit condition of
dental health to permit his or her attendance at the public schools.
 b. A notice of request for dental health certificates shall be
distributed at the same time that parents or person in parental
relationship to students are notified of health examination requirements
and shall state that a list of dental practices, dentists and registered
dental hygienists to which children may be referred for dental services
on a free or reduced cost basis is available upon request at the child's
school. The department shall, in collaboration with the department of
health, compile and maintain a list of dental practices, dentists and
registered dental hygienists to which children may be referred for
dental services on a free or reduced cost basis. Such list shall be made
available to all public schools and be made available to parents or
person in parental relationship upon request. The department shall
promulgate regulations to ensure the gathering and dissemination of the
proper information to interested parties.
 3. a. Within thirty days after the student's entrance in such schools
or grades, the health certificate shall be submitted to the principal or
his or her designee and shall be filed in the student's cumulative
health record. If such student does not present a health certificate as
required in this section, unless he or she has been accommodated on
religious grounds, the principal or the principal's designee shall cause
a notice to be sent to the parents or person in parental relationship to
such student that if the required health certificate is not furnished
within thirty days from the date of such notice, an examination will be
made of such student, as provided in this article. Each school and
school district chosen as part of an appropriate sampling methodology
shall participate in surveys directed by the commissioner of health
pursuant to the public health law in relation to students' BMI and
weight status categories as reported on the school health certificate
and which shall be subject to audit by the commissioner of health. Such
surveys shall contain the information required pursuant to subdivision
one of this section in relation to students' BMI and weight status
categories in aggregate. Parents or other persons in parental relation
to a student may refuse to have the student's BMI and weight status
category included in such survey. Each school and school district shall
provide the commissioner of health with any information, records and
reports he or she may require for the purpose of such audit. The BMI and
weight status survey and audit as described in this subdivision shall be
conducted consistent with confidentiality requirements imposed by
federal law.
 b. Within thirty days after the student's entrance in such schools or
grades, the dental health certificate, if obtained, shall be filed in
the student's cumulative health record.
 4. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivisions one, two and three
of this section, no examinations for a health certificate or health
history shall be required or dental certificate requested, and no
screening examinations for sickle cell anemia shall be required where a
student or the parent or person in parental relation to such student
objects thereto on the grounds that such examinations or health history
conflict with their genuine and sincere religious beliefs.
 § 904. Examinations by health appraisal. 1. Each principal of a public
school, or his or her designee, shall report to the director of school
health services having jurisdiction over such school, the names of all
students who have not furnished health certificates as provided in
section nine hundred three of this article, or who are children with
disabilities, as defined by article eighty-nine of this chapter, and the
director of school health services shall cause such students to be
separately and carefully examined and tested to ascertain whether any
student has defective sight or hearing, or any other physical disability
which may tend to prevent him or her from receiving the full benefit of
school work, or from requiring a modification of such work to prevent
injury to the student or from receiving the best educational results.
Each examination shall also include a calculation of the student's body
mass index (BMI) and weight status category. For purposes of this
section, BMI is computed as the weight in kilograms divided by the
square of height in meters or the weight in pounds divided by the square
of height in inches multiplied by a conversion factor of 703. Weight
status categories for children and adolescents shall be as defined by
the commissioner of health. In all school districts, such physician,
physician assistant or nurse practitioner shall determine whether a
one-time test for sickle cell anemia is necessary or desirable and he or
she shall conduct such tests and the certificate shall state the
results. If it should be ascertained, upon such test or examination,
that any of such students have defective sight or hearing, or other
physical disability, including sickle cell anemia, as above described,
the principal or his or her designee shall notify the parents of, or
other persons in parental relation to, the child as to the existence of
such disability. If the parents or other persons in parental relation
are unable or unwilling to provide the necessary relief and treatment
for such students, such fact shall be reported by the principal or his
or her designee to the director of school health services, whose duty it
shall be to provide relief for such students. Each school and school
district chosen as part of an appropriate sampling methodology shall
participate in surveys directed by the commissioner of health pursuant
to the public health law in relation to students' BMI and weight status
categories as determined by the examination conducted pursuant to this
section and which shall be subject to audit by the commissioner of
health. Such surveys shall contain the information required pursuant to
this subdivision in relation to students' BMI and weight status
categories in aggregate. Parents or other persons in parental relation
to a student may refuse to have the student's BMI and weight status
category included in such survey. Each school and school district shall
provide the commissioner of health with any information, records and
reports he or she may require for the purpose of such audit. The BMI and
weight status survey and audit as described in this section shall be
conducted consistent with confidentiality requirements imposed by
federal law. Data collection for such surveys shall commence on a
voluntary basis at the beginning of the two thousand seven academic
school year, and by all schools chosen as part of the sampling
methodology at the beginning of the two thousand eight academic school
year. The department shall also utilize the collected data to develop a
report of child obesity and obesity related diseases.
 2. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision one of this section,
no examinations shall be required pursuant to this section where a
student or the parent or person in parental relation to such student
objects thereto on the grounds that such examinations conflict with
their genuine and sincere religious beliefs.
 § 905. Record of screening examinations for vision, hearing and
scoliosis. 1. The director of school health services of each school
district in this state that is required to provide school health
services, or the health department or agency otherwise responsible to
provide such services, shall conduct screening examinations of vision,
hearing, and scoliosis of all students at such times and as defined in
the regulations of the commissioner, and at any time deemed necessary.
 2. Notwithstanding any other provisions of any general, special or
local law, the school authorities charged with the duty of making such
screening examinations of students for the presence of scoliosis
pursuant to this section shall not suffer any liability to any person as
a result of making such screening examination, which liability would not
have existed by any provision of law, statutory or otherwise, in the
absence of this section. The positive results of any such screening
examinations of students for the presence of scoliosis shall be in
writing and the parent of, or person in parental relation to, any child
in whom the presence of scoliosis is found shall be advised of such
results by the school authorities within ninety days after the finding
of the presence of scoliosis is made.
 3. The provisions of this section relative to examination for
scoliosis shall be waived by the commissioner upon the filing, in
accordance with rules and regulations to be established and promulgated
by the commissioner, of a resolution, duly adopted by a board of
education, stating that the school district does not have the capability
to comply with this section relative to the examination for scoliosis
and that such compliance would place a financial cost upon the school
district, provided, however, that such resolution may not be adopted
prior to the holding of a public hearing on such proposed resolution.
Such rules and regulations to be established and promulgated by the
commissioner in accordance with this section shall include, but not be
limited to, the date for filing such resolution by a board of education
and to the dates for filing subsequent resolutions.
 4. Vision screening examinations of students in the schools of this
state made pursuant to subdivision one of this section, or made pursuant
to the by-laws, regulations or practices of the board of education of
the city school district of the city of New York, shall be subject to
the provisions of this subdivision, and where inconsistent herewith, the
provisions of this subdivision shall prevail. In addition to any vision
screening examinations otherwise required by the provisions or practices
cited in this subdivision, all students who enroll in a school of this
state shall be tested for color perception, distance acuity and near
vision within six months of admission to the school, or by such other
date as may be prescribed in the regulations of the commissioner. The
results of any such vision screening examinations, whether made pursuant
to this subdivision or pursuant to the provisions or practices cited in
this subdivision, shall be in writing and shall be made available to the
student's parent or person in parental relation and to any teacher of
the student within the school while the student is enrolled in the
school, and shall be kept in a permanent file of the school for at least
as long as the minimum retention period for such records, as prescribed
by the commissioner pursuant to article fifty-seven-A of the arts and
cultural affairs law.
 5. Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, no
screening examinations for vision, hearing, or scoliosis condition shall
be required where a student or the parent or person in parental relation
to such student objects thereto on the grounds that such examinations
conflict with their genuine and sincere religious beliefs.
 § 906. Existence of communicable diseases; return after illness. 1.
Whenever, upon investigation and evaluation by the director of school
health services or other health professionals acting upon direction or
referral of such director for care and treatment, a student in the
public schools shows symptoms of any communicable or infectious disease
reportable under the public health law that imposes a significant risk
of infection of others in the school, he or she shall be excluded from
the school and sent home immediately, in a safe and proper conveyance.
The director of school health services shall immediately notify a local
public health agency of any disease reportable under the public health
law.
 2. Following absence on account of illness or from unknown cause, the
director of school health services may examine each student returning to
a school without a certificate from a local public health officer, a
duly licensed physician, physician assistant, or nurse practitioner.
 3. The director of school health services, or other health
professionals acting upon direction or referral of such director, may
make such evaluations of teachers and any other school employees, school
buildings and premises as, in their discretion, they may deem necessary
to protect the health of the students and staff.
 § 907. Use of sunscreen. The board of education or trustees of each
school district and board of cooperative educational services, and the
governing body of each private elementary, middle and secondary school,
shall allow students to carry and use topical sunscreen products
approved by the federal Food and Drug Administration for
over-the-counter use for the purpose of avoiding overexposure to the sun
and not for medical treatment of an injury or illness, with the written
permission of the parent or guardian of the student. A record of such
permission shall be maintained by the school. A student who is unable to
physically apply sunscreen may be assisted by unlicensed personnel when
directed to do so by the student, if permitted by a parent or guardian
and authorized by the school.
 § 908. Prohibition against meal shaming. All public school districts,
charter schools and non-public schools in the state that participate in
the national school lunch program or school breakfast program in which
there is a school at which all pupils are not eligible to be served
breakfast and lunch under the community eligibility provision or
provision two of the federal national school lunch act, 42 U.S.C. Sec.
1751 et seq., shall develop a plan to ensure that a pupil whose parent
or guardian has unpaid school meal fees is not shamed or treated
differently than a pupil whose parent or guardian does not have unpaid
school meal fees. The plan shall be submitted to the commissioner by
July first, two thousand eighteen, or sixty days from the effective date
of this section after enactment in conformance with regulations of the
commissioner. After submission of such plan, the school or school
district shall adopt and post the plan on its website. The plan shall
include, but not be limited to, the following elements:
 a. A statement that the school or school district shall provide the
student with the student's meal of choice for that school day of the
available reimbursable meal choices for such school day, if the student
requests one, unless the student's parent or guardian has specifically
provided written permission to the school to withhold a meal, provided
that the school or school district shall only be required to provide
access to reimbursable meals, not a la carte items, adult meals, or
other similar items;
 b. An explanation of how staff will be trained to ensure that the
school or school district's procedures are carried out correctly and how
the affected parents and guardians will be provided with assistance in
establishing eligibility for free or reduced-price meals for their
children;
 c. Procedures requiring the school or school district to notify the
student's parent or guardian that the student's meal card or account
balance is exhausted and unpaid meal charges are due. The notification
procedures may include a repayment schedule, but the school or school
district may not charge any interest or fees in connection with any
meals charged;
 d. A communication procedure designed to support eligible families
enrolling in the national free and reduced price meal program. Such
communication procedures shall also include a process for determining
eligibility when a student owes money for five or more meals, wherein
the school or school district shall:
 i. make every attempt to determine if a student is directly certified
to be eligible for free meals;
 ii. make at least two attempts, not including the application or
instructions included in a school enrollment packet, to reach the
student's parent or guardian and have the parent or guardian fill out a
meal application; and
 iii. require a school or school district to contact the parent or
guardian to offer assistance with a meal application, determine if there
are other issues within the household that have caused the child to have
insufficient funds to purchase a school meal and offer any other
assistance that is appropriate;
 e. A clear explanation of procedures designed to decrease student
distress or embarrassment, provided that, no school or school district
shall:
 i. publicly identify or stigmatize a student who cannot pay for a meal
or who owes a meal debt by any means including, but not limited to,
requiring that a student wear a wristband or hand stamp;
 ii. require a student who cannot pay for a meal or who owes a meal
debt to do chores or other work to pay for meals;
 iii. require that a student throw away a meal after it has been served
because of the student's inability to pay for the meal or because money
is owed for earlier meals;
 iv. take any action directed at a pupil to collect unpaid school meal
fees. A school or school district may attempt to collect unpaid school
meal fees from a student's parent or guardian, but shall not use a debt
collector, as defined in section eight hundred three of the federal
consumer credit protection act, 15 U.S.C. Sec. 1692a or file a lawsuit
against such student's parent or guardian; or
 v. discuss any outstanding meal debt in the presence of other
students;
 f. A clear explanation of the procedure to handle unpaid meal charges,
provided that nothing in this section is intended to allow for the
unlimited accrual of debt;
 g. Procedures to enroll in the free and reduced price lunch program,
provided that such procedures shall include that, at the beginning of
each school year, a school or school district shall provide a free,
printed meal application in every school enrollment packet, or if the
school or school district chooses to use an electronic meal application,
provide in school enrollment packets an explanation of the electronic
meal application process and instructions for how parents or guardians
may request a paper application at no cost;
 h. If a school or school district becomes aware that a student who has
not submitted a meal application is eligible for free or reduced-fee
meals, the school or school district shall complete and file an
application for the student pursuant to title seven, section 245.6(d) of
the code of federal regulations; and
 i. School liaisons required for homeless, foster, and migrant students
shall coordinate with the nutrition department to make sure such
students receive free school meals, in accordance with federal law.
 § 909. School hygiene districts. 1. The board of supervisors of any
county, with the approval of the commissioner of education, shall have
power to establish in such county a school hygiene district which shall
include the supervisory district or districts in such county, as defined
in this chapter. The board of education of any union free school
district of four thousand five hundred or more population, which employs
a superintendent of schools, or of any city having a population of less
than fifty thousand, within such county, may at any time adopt a
resolution requesting that such union free school district or city be
included within such school hygiene district, and after the approval of
such request by the district committee on school hygiene, herein-below
mentioned, and by the commissioner of education, and upon the subsequent
filing by the clerk of such board of education of a certified copy of
such resolution and of a certified copy of such approvals with the clerk
of the board of supervisors, such union free school district or city
shall be included within such school hygiene district.
 2. When such a school hygiene district is established, as hereinabove
provided, the board of supervisors shall appropriate funds for the
salary and necessary expenses of a district director of school hygiene.
Funds may also be appropriated for assistants to the director of school
hygiene. Within thirty days after such appropriation is made the
chairman of the board of supervisors shall call a meeting, to be held at
a date as early as practicable, of the district superintendents and
school superintendents in such school hygiene district together with the
chairman of the board of supervisors, at which meeting such persons
shall organize themselves into a district committee on school hygiene
and shall elect a chairman thereof. In any school hygiene district which
includes part or all of a county health district, as defined in the
public health law, the district health officer of such county health
district shall be a member of such committee. The district director of
school hygiene and assistants shall be appointed by and work under the
direction of such district committee on school hygiene. They shall meet
the qualifications established by the commissioner of education and be
certificated as supervisors of teachers. Any person appointed as such
district director of school hygiene shall be a physician duly licensed
and registered to practice in this state and shall have practiced as a
physician, or been engaged in public health work, for at least two
years.
 3. It shall be the duty of the district director of school hygiene to
advise, assist, and exercise general supervision over, medical
inspectors, dentists and school nurses in the public schools in such
school hygiene district; to keep informed as to their work and require
such reports from them as he may deem necessary; to see that suitable
recommendations based on the findings of the medical inspectors in their
examinations of pupils are brought to the attention of their teachers
and of those in parental relation to such pupils; to aid, and keep
informed as to the work of, oral hygienists, nutrition workers, and
other school employees engaged in health work in such schools; to
inspect, and report to the proper authorities on, the sanitary
conditions of school buildings, and in other ways to promote the
physical welfare and health education of pupils. Whenever the board of
supervisors, or, in a county constituting, in whole or in part, a county
health district, the district health officer thereof, shall, under any
provisions of law now in force or hereafter enacted, assign any public
health nurse to the duties of a school nurse in any school or schools
within a school hygiene district, she may be assigned to perform such
duties under the direct control of the district director of school
hygiene of such school hygiene district. Such district director of
school hygiene shall be subject to supervision by the state medical
inspector of schools.
 4. If it be ascertained upon any test or examination held by a medical
inspector under the provisions of section nine hundred four of this
article in any of the school districts within a school hygiene district
that any of the pupils are afflicted with defective sight or hearing or
other physical disability and the parents have been duly notified as to
the existence of such defects and physical disability and are unable to
provide the necessary relief and treatment for such pupils and such fact
is reported by said medical inspector to the district director of school
hygiene, such district director shall have power and it shall be his
duty to provide relief for such pupils within the amount appropriated
for such purpose by the board of supervisors.
 5. The board of supervisors, after determining the amount of the
appropriation necessary for the salary and expenses of such district
director of school hygiene and assistants, shall levy one-half of such
amount by tax on the towns, union free school districts and cities, if
any, included within such school hygiene district, and shall apportion
such amount, so levied, among such towns, union free school districts
and cities, according to the assessed valuation of the taxable property
therein. Whenever a board of supervisors shall make such an
appropriation and levy such a tax, the commissioner of education shall
apportion to each such town, union free school district and city, an
amount equal to that so levied upon each such respective town, union
free school district or city. The board of supervisors shall likewise,
after determining the amount of the appropriation necessary for expenses
incurred for the relief of pupils under subdivision four of this
section, levy the total amount by tax upon the towns, union free school
districts and cities, if any, included within such school hygiene
district, and shall apportion such amount so levied among such towns,
union free school districts and cities according to the assessed
valuation of the taxable property therein. The sums collected from the
taxes so levied, and the amount apportioned by the commissioner of
education, shall be paid to the county treasurer of such county, who
shall expend such moneys for the purposes hereinabove provided and in
the same manner as other county charges are paid.
 § 910. Choice of method of treatment. Whenever affected by the
requirements of this article, the school employee so affected, and, in
the case of a child, the parent of, or person in parental relation to,
such child, shall have the right to determine the form or manner of
treatment or remedial care to be prescribed or applied, but the
treatment or remedial care must be in accordance with and as allowed
under the provisions of article one hundred thirty-one of this chapter.
 § 911. Enforcement. 1. It shall be the duty of the commissioner to
enforce the provisions of this article, and the commissioner may adopt
rules and regulations not inconsistent herewith, after consultation with
the state commissioner of health, for the purpose of carrying into full
force and effect the objects and intent of this article.
 2. The commissioner may, in his or her discretion, withhold the public
money from a district which willfully refuses or neglects to comply with
this article and the rules and regulations made under this article.
 § 912. Health and welfare services to all children. The voters and/or
trustees or board of education of every school district shall, upon
request of the authorities of a school other than public, provide
resident children who attend such school with any or all of the health
and welfare services and facilities which are made available by such
voters and/or trustees or board of education to or for children
attending the public schools of the district. Such services may include,
but are not limited to all services performed by a physician, physician
assistant, dentist, dental hygienist, registered professional nurse,
nurse practitioner, school psychologist, school social worker or school
speech therapist, and may also include dental prophylaxis, vision and
hearing screening examinations, the taking of medical histories and the
administration of health screening tests, the maintenance of cumulative
health records and the administration of emergency care programs for ill
or injured students. Any such services or facilities shall be so
provided notwithstanding any provision of any charter or other provision
of law inconsistent herewith. Where children residing in one school
district attend a school other than public located in another school
district, the school authorities of the district of residence shall
contract with the school authorities of the district where such
nonpublic school is located, for the provision of such health and
welfare services and facilities to such children by the school district
where such nonpublic school is located, for a consideration to be agreed
upon between the school authorities of such districts, subject to the
approval of the qualified voters of the district of residence when
required under the provisions of this chapter. Every such contract shall
be in writing and in the form prescribed by the commissioner, and before
such contract is executed the same shall be submitted for approval to
the superintendent of schools having jurisdiction over such district of
residence and such contract shall not become effective until approved by
such superintendent.
 § 912-a. Urine analysis; drug detection. 1. The school authorities of
each school district within the state may cause all children attending
grades seven through twelve, inclusive, in the public and private
schools located within such districts, to be separately and carefully
examined in order to ascertain whether any such children are making use
of dangerous drugs.
 2. Such examination may be made only upon the written request or
consent of a parent of, or person in parental relation to, a child. Such
examination shall be conducted without notice to the child and shall
include the supervised taking of a urine sample which shall be analyzed
for such drugs and in accordance with such standards as shall be
acceptable to the New York state office of alcoholism and substance
abuse services, or its successor agency. The results of such examination
shall be promptly forwarded to the school authorities. If it should be
ascertained, upon such test or examination, that any child is making use
of dangerous drugs, the school authorities shall report same to the
social services department for the social services district wherein such
school is located and to the parent of, or person in parental relation
to, such child together with a statement to such parent or person in
parental relation as to available programs and facilities to combat such
dangerous drug usage. The local social services department shall be
empowered, in an appropriate case, to take such action and offer such
protective social services as are prescribed by title six of article six
of the social services law.
 3. Except as required in this section, information resulting from an
examination conducted pursuant to this section shall be kept
confidential and shall not be used for law enforcement purposes but may
be utilized only for statistical, epidemiological or research purposes.
 4. Any record or information compiled from such examination which
identifies an individual student as a user of dangerous drugs shall be
maintained separate and apart from such student's other educational
records and in appropriate confidence and shall be destroyed upon such
student's graduation or final severance from the secondary educational
school system in this state.
 Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, no such
examination shall be required where a student objects thereto on the
grounds that such examinations conflict with their genuine and sincere
religious beliefs.
 § 912-b. Speech and language improvement services. 1. The board of
education or trustees of each school district and the city school
district of the city of New York may provide speech and language
improvement services to students in grades kindergarten through six with
speech impairments of a severity that does not adversely affect the
student's educational performance but does present a barrier to
communication.
 2. Any student, who is determined to be in need of such speech and
language improvement services, shall receive such upon the
recommendation of the building administrator.
 3. A student, whose speech impairment adversely affects the student's
educational performance shall be referred to the committee on special
education for further evaluation and recommendation for special
education services and programs, pursuant to article eighty-nine of this
chapter.
 § 913. Medical examinations of teachers and other employees. In order
to safeguard the health of children attending the public schools, the
board of education or trustees of any school district or a board of
cooperative educational services shall be empowered to require any
person employed by the board of education or trustees or board of
cooperative educational services to submit to a medical examination by a
physician or other health care provider of his or her choice or the
director of school health services of the board of education or trustees
or board of cooperative educational services, in order to determine the
physical or mental capacity of such person to perform his or her duties.
The person required to submit to such medical examination shall be
entitled to be accompanied by a physician or other person of his or her
choice. The determination based upon such examination as to the physical
or mental capacity of such person to perform his or her duties shall be
reported to the board of education or trustees or board of cooperative
educational services and may be referred to and considered for the
evaluation of service of the person examined or for disability
retirement.
 § 914. Immunization of children. 1. Each school shall require of every
child entering or attending such school proof of immunization in
accordance with the provisions of section twenty-one hundred sixty-four
of the public health law.
 2. Each school district shall assist and cooperate with the
municipality in the development of a plan required by section six
hundred thirteen of the public health law.
 3. Each school district shall participate in the surveys directed by
the state commissioner of health pursuant to section six hundred
thirteen of the public health law of the immunization level of the
children entering and attending school within such district, and which
shall be subject to audit by the state commissioner of health. Each
school and school district shall provide the state commissioner of
health with any records and reports required for the purpose of such
audit. In no event shall the state commissioner of health disclose a
student's identity.
 § 915. Prohibiting the sale of certain sweetened foods. From the
beginning of the school day until the end of the last scheduled meal
period, no sweetened soda water, no chewing gum, no candy including hard
candy, jellies, gums, marshmallow candies, fondant, licorice, spun candy
and candy coated popcorn, and no water ices except those which contain
fruit or fruit juices, shall be sold in any public school within the
state.
 § 915-a. Universal free school meals. 1. The department shall require
all school districts, charter schools and non-public schools in the
state that participate in the national school lunch program or school
breakfast program as provided in the Richard B. Russell National School
Lunch Act and the Child Nutrition Act, as amended, to serve breakfast
and lunch at no cost to the student. School districts, charter schools
and non-public schools shall maximize federal reimbursement for school
breakfast and lunch programs by adopting Provision 2, the federal
Community Eligibility Provision, or any other provision under such Act,
the National School Lunch Act or the National Child Nutrition Act that,
in the opinion of the department, maximizes federal funding for meals
served in such programs. Provided that school food authorities that do
not qualify as a single entity to participate in the community
eligibility provision shall be required to group schools within the
school food authority, to the extent possible, for purposes of
maximizing participation in the community eligibility provision, and
provided further that school food authorities shall reapply annually for
the community eligibility provision program in the event that doing so
would result in a higher percentage of meals being reimbursed at the
federal reimbursement rate for a free meal.
 2. Notwithstanding any provision of law, rule or regulation to the
contrary, for the two thousand twenty-five--two thousand twenty-six
school year and each school year thereafter, for each breakfast and
lunch meal served, the department shall reimburse the school food
authority the difference between (a) the combined state and federal
reimbursement rate for a reduced-price or paid meal, respectively, for
the current school year and (b) the combined state and federal
reimbursement rate for a free meal for the current school year, provided
that the total reimbursement rate for each meal served shall equal the
combined state and federal reimbursement rate for a free meal for the
current school year.
 3. The department, in consultation with the office of temporary and
disability assistance, shall promulgate any rule or regulation needed
for school districts, charter schools and non-public schools to promote
the supplemental nutrition assistance program to a student or person in
parental relation to a student by providing either application
assistance or a direct referral to an outreach partner identified to the
department by the office of temporary and disability assistance to
maximize the number of students directly certified for free school
meals.
 4. In addition to fulfilling any other applicable state and federal
requirements, the department shall provide technical assistance to
assist school districts, charter schools, and non-public schools in the
transition to universal school meals to ensure successful program
operations and to maximize federal funding, including but not limited to
the following:
 (a) Assisting school food authorities with one or more schools
qualifying for the community eligibility provision in meeting any state
and federal requirements necessary in order to maximize reimbursement
through the community eligibility provision, including assisting such
school food authorities in maximizing participation in the community
eligibility provision.
 (b) If a school food authority is ineligible to participate in and
receive reimbursement through the community eligibility provision,
assisting the school food authority in achieving and maximizing
eligibility and, if that is not feasible, assisting the school food
authority in determining the viability of using Provision 2 or other
special federal provisions available to schools to maximize federal
reimbursement.
 5. School districts, charter schools, and non-public schools shall
maximize the number of students eligible for free meals by conducting
the Direct Certification Matching Process at a minimum of three times
per year, designating children as "Other Source Categorically Eligible",
as defined by federal regulations, or, for schools not participating in
the Community Eligibility Provision or Provision 2, by annually
collecting the free and reduced-price meal application.
 § 916. Pupils with asthma or another respiratory disease requiring
rescue inhaler treatment. 1. The board of education or trustees of each
school district and board of cooperative educational services shall
allow pupils who have been diagnosed by a physician or other duly
authorized health care provider with an asthmatic condition or another
respiratory disease to carry and use a prescribed inhaler and
self-administer inhaled rescue medications to alleviate respiratory
symptoms or to prevent the onset of exercise induced asthmatic symptoms
during the school day on school property and at any school function as
such terms are defined, respectively, by subdivisions one and two of
section eleven of this chapter, with the written permission of a
physician or other duly authorized health care provider, and written
parental consent. The written permission shall include an attestation by
the physician or the health care provider confirming the following: (a)
the pupil is diagnosed with asthma or another respiratory disease for
which inhaled rescue medications are prescribed to alleviate respiratory
symptoms or to prevent the onset of exercise induced asthmatic symptoms;
and (b) that the pupil has demonstrated that he or she can
self-administer the prescribed inhaled rescue medication effectively.
The written permission shall also include the name of the prescribed
inhaled rescue medication, the dose, the times when the medication is to
be taken, the circumstances which may warrant the use of the medication
and the length of time for which the inhaler is prescribed. A record of
such consent and permission shall be maintained in the student's
cumulative health record. In addition, upon the written request of a
parent or person in parental relation, the board of education or
trustees of a school district and board of cooperative educational
services shall allow such pupils to maintain an extra such inhaler in
the care and custody of a licensed nurse, nurse practitioner, physician
assistant, or physician employed by such district or board of
cooperative educational services, and shall be readily accessible to
such pupil. Nothing in this section shall require a school district or
board of cooperative educational services to retain a licensed nurse,
nurse practitioner, physician assistant, or physician solely for the
purpose of taking custody of a spare inhaler for the treatment of asthma
or a respiratory disease requiring rescue medication treatment, or
require that a licensed nurse, nurse practitioner, physician assistant,
or physician be available at all times in a school building for the
purpose of taking custody of the inhaler. In addition, the medication
provided by the pupil's parents or persons in parental relation shall be
made available to the pupil as needed in accordance with the school
district's or board of cooperative educational services' policy and the
orders prescribed in the written permission of the physician or other
authorized health care provider.
 2. A school district, board of cooperative educational services and/or
their agents or employees shall incur no legal or financial liability as
a result of any harm or injury sustained by a pupil or other person
caused by reasonable and good faith compliance with this section.
 § 916-a. Pupils with allergies. 1. (a) The board of education or
trustees of each school district and board of cooperative educational
services shall allow pupils who have been diagnosed by a physician or
other duly authorized health care provider with an allergy to carry and
use a prescribed epinephrine device for the emergency treatment of
allergic reactions during the school day on school property and at any
school function as such terms are defined, respectively, by subdivisions
one and two of section eleven of this chapter, with the written
permission of a physician or other duly authorized health provider, and
written parental consent. The written permission shall include an
attestation by the physician or the health care provider confirming the
following: (i) the pupil's diagnosis of an allergy for which an
epinephrine device is needed; and (ii) that the pupil has demonstrated
that such pupil can self-administer the prescribed epinephrine device
effectively. The written permission shall also include the circumstances
which may warrant the use of the epinephrine device. A record of such
consent and permission shall be maintained in the student's cumulative
health record. In addition, upon the written request of a parent or
person in parental relation, the board of education or trustees of a
school district and board of cooperative educational services shall
allow such pupils to maintain an extra epinephrine device for the
emergency treatment of allergies in the care and custody of a licensed
nurse, nurse practitioner, physician assistant, or physician employed by
such district or board of cooperative educational services, and shall be
readily accessible to such pupil. Nothing in this section shall require
a school district or board of cooperative educational services to retain
a licensed nurse, nurse practitioner, physician assistant, or physician
solely for the purpose of taking custody of a spare epinephrine device
for the emergency treatment of allergic reactions, or require that a
licensed nurse, nurse practitioner, physician assistant, or physician be
available at all times in a school building for taking custody of the
epinephrine device. In addition, the epinephrine device provided by the
pupil's parents or persons in parental relation will be made available
to the pupil as needed in accordance with the school district's or board
of cooperative educational services' policy and the orders prescribed in
the written permission of the physician or other authorized health care
provider.
 (b) For the purposes of this subdivision, the term "epinephrine
device" shall have the same meaning as set forth in paragraph (b) of
subdivision one of section three thousand-c of the public health law.
 2. A school district, board of cooperative educational services and/or
their agents or employees shall incur no legal or financial liability as
a result of any harm or injury sustained by a pupil or other person
caused by reasonable and good faith compliance with this section.
 § 916-b. Pupils with diabetes. 1. The board of education or trustees
of each school district and board of cooperative educational services
shall allow pupils who have been diagnosed with diabetes to carry
glucagon and carry and use insulin through appropriate medication
delivery devices and equipment and/or to carry and use equipment and
supplies necessary to check blood glucose levels and ketone levels, as
prescribed by a physician or other duly authorized healthcare provider,
during the school day on school property and at any school function as
such terms are defined, respectively, by subdivisions one and two of
section eleven of this chapter, with parental consent and the written
permission of a physician or other duly authorized health care provider.
The written permission shall include an attestation by the physician or
the health care provider confirming the following: (a) the pupil's
diagnosis of diabetes makes the delivery of insulin and glucagon through
appropriate medication delivery devices during the school day on school
property or at any school function necessary and/or makes the use of
equipment and supplies to check blood glucose levels and ketone levels
necessary; and (b) that the pupil has demonstrated that he or she can
self-administer the prescribed insulin effectively and can self check
glucose or ketone levels and can independently follow the treatment
orders prescribed by the physician or other authorized health care
provider in the written permission. The written permission shall
identify prescribed blood glucose tests, ketone tests, insulin and
glucagon to be used by the pupil at school and/or during school
functions. If insulin or glucagon is prescribed, the written permission
shall include the name of the type of insulin, the dose or dose range,
the times when the medication is to be taken, the type of insulin
delivery system and any other information prescribed by the commissioner
in regulation, after consultation with the commissioner of health. A
record of such consent and permission shall be maintained in the
student's cumulative health record. In addition, upon the written
request of a parent or person in parental relation, the board of
education or trustees of a school district and board of cooperative
educational services shall allow such pupils to maintain extra insulin
and an insulin delivery system, glucagon, blood glucose meters and
related supplies used to treat such pupil's diabetes in the care and
custody of a licensed nurse, nurse practitioner, physician assistant, or
physician employed by such district or board of cooperative educational
services, and shall be readily accessible to such pupil. Nothing in this
section shall require a school district or board of cooperative
educational services to retain a licensed nurse, nurse practitioner,
physician assistant, or physician solely for the purpose of taking
custody of extra insulin and an insulin delivery system, glucagon, blood
glucose meters and related supplies used to treat such pupil's diabetes,
or require that a licensed nurse, nurse practitioner, physician
assistant, or physician be available at all times in a school building
for the purpose of taking custody of extra insulin and an insulin
delivery system, glucagon, blood glucose meters and related supplies. In
addition, the medication and devices, equipment and supplies provided by
the pupil's parents or persons in parental relation shall be made
available to the pupil as needed in accordance with the school
district's or board of cooperative educational services' policy and the
orders prescribed in the written permission of the physician or other
authorized health care provider. Pupils with diabetes may also carry any
food necessary to treat hypoglycemia pursuant to the school district
policy, provided, however, such school district policy shall not
unreasonably interfere with a pupil's ability to treat hypoglycemia.
 2. A school district, board of cooperative educational services and/or
their agents or employees shall incur no legal or financial liability as
a result of any harm or injury sustained by a pupil or other person
caused by reasonable and good faith compliance with this section.
 § 917. On-site cardiac automated external defibrillator. 1. School
districts, boards of cooperative educational services, county vocational
education and extension boards and charter schools shall provide and
maintain on-site in each instructional school facility automated
external defibrillator (AED) equipment, as defined in paragraph (a) of
subdivision one of section three thousand-b of the public health law, in
quantities and types deemed by the commissioner in consultation with the
commissioner of health to be adequate to ensure ready and appropriate
access for use during emergencies. Such automated external
defibrillators shall be clearly marked, accessible, and maintained
consistent with guidelines set by the American Heart Association, or
other nationally recognized guidelines focused on emergency
cardiovascular care.
 2. Whenever public school facilities pursuant to subdivision one of
this section are used for school sponsored or school approved curricular
or extracurricular events or activities and whenever a school-sponsored
athletic contest is held at any location, the public school officials
and administrators responsible for such school facility or athletic
contest shall ensure the presence of at least one staff person who is
trained, pursuant to paragraph (a) of subdivision three of section three
thousand-b of the public health law, in the operation and use of an AED.
Where a school-sponsored competitive athletic event is held at a site
other than a public school facility, the public school officials shall
assure that automated external defibrillator equipment is provided
on-site.
 3. Public school facilities and staff pursuant to subdivisions one and
two of this section shall be deemed a "public access defibrillation
provider" as defined in paragraph (c) of subdivision one of section
three thousand-b of the public health law and shall be subject to the
requirements and limitations of such section.
 4. Pursuant to section three thousand-a and three thousand-b of the
public health law, any public access defibrillation provider, or any
employee or other agent of the provider who, in accordance with the
provisions of this section, voluntarily and without expectation of
monetary compensation renders emergency medical or first aid treatment
using an AED which has been made available pursuant to this section, to
a person who is unconscious, ill or injured, shall be liable only
pursuant to section three thousand-a of the public health law.
 * § 917-a. On-site cardiac automated external defibrillator in
nonpublic schools. 1. Nonpublic schools shall provide and maintain
on-site in each instructional school facility automated external
defibrillator (AED) equipment, as defined in paragraph (a) of
subdivision one of section three thousand-b of the public health law, in
quantities and types deemed by the commissioner in consultation with the
commissioner of health to be adequate to ensure ready and appropriate
access for use during emergencies. Nonpublic schools shall cause such
AED to be maintained and tested according to such applicable standards
of the manufacturer and any appropriate government agency.
 2. Whenever nonpublic school facilities pursuant to subdivision one of
this section are used for school-sponsored or school-approved curricular
or extracurricular events or activities and whenever a school-sponsored
athletic contest is held at any location, the nonpublic school officials
and administrators responsible for such school facility or athletic
contest shall ensure the presence of at least one staff person who is
trained, pursuant to subdivision three of this section in the operation
and use of an AED. Where a school-sponsored competitive athletic event
is held at a site other than a nonpublic school facility, the nonpublic
school officials shall ensure that AED equipment is provided on-site.
 3. No person may operate an AED in a nonpublic school facility unless
the person has successfully completed a training course in the operation
of an AED approved by a nationally-recognized organization as defined in
paragraph (d) of subdivision one of section three thousand-b of the
public health law or the state emergency medical services council.
However, this section shall not prohibit operation of an AED:
 (a) by a health care practitioner licensed or certified under title
eight of this chapter or a person certified under article thirty of the
public health law acting within their lawful scope of practice;
 (b) by a person acting pursuant to a lawful prescription; or
 (c) by a person who operates the AED other than as part of or
incidental to their employment or regular duties, who is acting in good
faith, with reasonable care, and without expectation of monetary
compensation, to provide first aid that includes operation of an AED;
nor shall this section limit any good samaritan protections provided in
section three thousand-a of the public health law.
 4. Every use of an AED on a patient in a nonpublic school shall be
immediately reported to the appropriate local emergency medical services
system, emergency communications center or emergency vehicle dispatch
center, as appropriate.
 5. Nonpublic schools shall notify the appropriate regional emergency
services council of the existence, location and type of any AED they
possess.
 6. A nonpublic school shall post a sign or notice at the main entrance
to the facility or building in which the automated external
defibrillator is stored, indicating the location where any such
automated external defibrillator is stored or maintained in such
building or facility on a regular basis.
 7. (a) Operation of an AED pursuant to this section in a nonpublic
school shall be considered first aid or emergency treatment for the
purpose of any statute relating to liability; and
 (b) Operation of an AED pursuant to this section in a nonpublic school
shall not constitute the unlawful practice of a profession under title
eight of this chapter.
 * NB Effective July 1, 2026
 § 918. School district nutrition advisory committees. 1. a. Every
school district is hereby authorized and encouraged to establish a child
nutrition advisory committee.
 b. The district advisory committee is encouraged to meet at least
quarterly.
 c. The committee is encouraged to include, but not be limited to, a
representative of the school board, the food preparation staff, the
physical education departments, the school nurse or health staff, a
registered dietitian, if available, the faculty of the district, the
parent teacher associations in the district, the students enrolled in
the district, and the parents or guardians of students enrolled in the
district.
 d. If, due to special circumstances of a district, it is impossible or
impracticable for all groups recommended to have members on the
committee to be represented, the district may approve a committee that,
to the greatest extent possible, represents the interests of the
aforementioned groups.
 2. The district is encouraged to give, in such newsletter, if any,
that precedes the commencement of school in the fall, written notice to
all parents or guardians of enrolled students of the existence of a
school district nutrition advisory committee and supply information as
to how such interested parents or guardians may participate on such
committee.
 3. The district is encouraged, to the extent practicable, to give
notice to all parents or guardians and students through its regular
newsletters or other regular forms of written communication as to the
scheduled dates of all meetings of the advisory committee.
 4. The committee is encouraged to study and make recommendations on
all facets of the current nutritional policies of the district
including, but not limited to, the goals of the district to promote
wellness and proper nutrition, vending machine sales; menu criteria;
educational curriculum teaching healthy nutrition; promote the
achievement and maintenance of healthy weight; educational information
provided to parents or guardians regarding healthy nutrition and the
health risks associated with obesity, asthma, chronic bronchitis and
other chronic respiratory disease; opportunities offered to parents or
guardians on how to encourage healthier eating habits to students; and
the education provided to teachers and other staff as to the importance
of healthy nutrition and the health risks associated with a student's
weight. In addition the committee shall consider recommendations and
practices of other districts and nutrition studies.
 5. The committee is encouraged to report periodically to the district
regarding practices that will educate teachers, parents or guardians and
children about healthy nutrition and raise awareness of the dangers of
obesity, asthma, chronic bronchitis and other chronic respiratory
diseases. The committee is encouraged also to provide any parent teacher
associations in the district with such findings and recommendations.
 6. Each June, the committee shall report to the board of the local
school district regarding the status of the implementation of the
district's programs to improve students' nutritional awareness and
healthy diet.
 * § 919. On-site nebulizers. 1. The board of education or trustees of
the school district responsible for providing health services in a
school, or the board of cooperative educational services in the case of
programs under its jurisdiction, shall make a nebulizer available
on-site in every public and private school building in which full or
part time nurse services are provided. Nebulizers in such school
buildings shall be made available to allow reasonable access to all
public and private school students with a patient specific order, who
require inhaled medications administered by a nebulizer, provided,
however, that nebulizers shall be administered by a school nurse or
physician pursuant to the student's patient specific order. Every
nebulizer shall be maintained in working order by the school district or
board of cooperative educational services that provides school health
services to the school building where the nebulizer is located.
 2. The commissioner shall be authorized to promulgate regulations for
the implementation of this section.
 * NB Not effective pursuant to confirmation from DOB stating no
funding has been provided for nebulizers (see ch. 672/2007).
Confirmation received 1/24/2012.
 § 920. Public schools; infestation of bedbugs (Cimex lectularius). 1.
In a city school district having a population of one million or more
inhabitants, the principal of each public school shall provide immediate
notification to parents, persons in parental relation or guardians of
potentially affected students attending the school, disclosing a finding
relating to the infestation of bedbugs (Cimex lectularius) in such
school; provided, however, that if pursuant to regulations of the
commissioner it is determined that any infestation is contained within a
discrete area, the principal may limit such notification to parents,
persons in parental relationship or guardians of all potentially
affected students within such area, and shall advise the parents'
association of the scope of such notification.
 2. Along with the notification required pursuant to subdivision one of
this section, the principal of such public school shall also include
information regarding proper procedures to prevent further infestations
at the school and to prevent the transfer of bedbugs from the school to
the residences of students. Such information shall be developed by the
board of education in consultation with other city agencies and shall be
available in various languages as deemed necessary.
 3. The principal shall ensure that the bedbug infestation at the
school is properly addressed in the most effective and safe manner.
 § 921. Training of unlicensed school personnel to administer certain
medications. 1. (a) The board of education or trustees of each school
district and board of cooperative educational services and nonpublic
schools are authorized, but not obligated to have licensed registered
professional nurses, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, and
physicians train unlicensed school personnel to administer prescribed
glucagon or epinephrine devices in emergency situations, where an
appropriately licensed health professional is not available, to pupils
who have the written permission of a physician or other duly authorized
health care provider for the administration of glucagon or an emergency
epinephrine device, along with written parental consent, during the
school day on school property and at any school function as such terms
are defined, respectively, by subdivisions one and two of section eleven
of this chapter. Training must be provided by a physician or other duly
authorized licensed health care professional in a competent manner and
must be completed in a form and manner prescribed by the commissioner in
regulation.
 (b) For the purposes of this subdivision, the term "epinephrine
device" shall have the same meaning as set forth in paragraph (b) of
subdivision one of section three thousand-c of the public health law.
 2. A school district, board of cooperative educational services,
nonpublic schools and/or their agents or employees shall incur no legal
or financial liability as a result of any harm or injury sustained by a
pupil or other person caused by reasonable and good faith compliance
with this section.
 § 921-a. On-site epinephrine device. 1. School districts, boards of
cooperative educational services, county vocational education and
extension boards, charter schools, and non-public elementary and
secondary schools in this state may provide and maintain on-site in each
instructional school facility epinephrine devices in quantities and
types deemed by the commissioner, in consultation with the commissioner
of health, to be adequate to ensure ready and appropriate access for use
during emergencies to any student or staff having anaphylactic symptoms
whether or not there is a previous history of severe allergic reaction.
 2. School districts, boards of cooperative educational services,
county vocational education and extension boards, charter schools, and
non-public elementary and secondary schools in this state, any person
employed by any such entity, or employed by a contractor of such an
entity while performing services for the entity may administer
epinephrine devices in the event of an emergency pursuant to the
requirements of section three thousand-c of the public health law.
 3. School districts, boards of cooperative educational services,
county vocational education and extension boards, charter schools, and
non-public elementary and secondary schools in this state that are
authorized to provide and maintain epinephrine devices on-site pursuant
to this section shall provide all teachers with written informational
material on the use of an epinephrine device that has been created and
approved by the commissioner of health.
 4. For the purposes of this section, the term "epinephrine device"
shall have the same meaning as set forth in paragraph (b) of subdivision
one of section three thousand-c of the public health law.
 § 922. Opioid overdose prevention. 1. School districts, public
libraries, boards of cooperative educational services, county vocational
education and extension boards, charter schools, and non-public
elementary and secondary schools in this state may provide and maintain
on-site in each instructional school facility or library, opioid
antagonists, as defined in section three thousand three hundred nine of
the public health law, in quantities and types deemed by the
commissioner, in consultation with the commissioner of health, to be
adequate to ensure ready and appropriate access for use during
emergencies to any student, individual on library premises or staff
suspected of having opioid overdose whether or not there is a previous
history of opioid abuse.
 2. School districts, public libraries, boards of cooperative
educational services, county vocational education and extension boards,
charter schools, and non-public elementary and secondary schools in this
state may elect to participate as an opioid antagonist recipient and any
person employed by any such entity that has elected to participate may
administer an opioid antagonist in the event of an emergency, provided
that such person shall have been trained by a program approved under
section three thousand three hundred nine of the public health law. Any
school district, public library, board of cooperative educational
services, county vocational education and extension board, charter
school, and non-public elementary and secondary school that has
employees trained in accordance with this section shall comply with the
requirements of section three thousand three hundred nine of the public
health law including, but not limited to, appropriate clinical
oversight, record keeping and reporting. No person shall be required to
participate in the program and any participation by an individual shall
be voluntary.
 § 923. Sudden cardiac arrest. a. The commissioner shall review the
information developed by the commissioner of health required by
subdivision thirty-one of section two hundred six of the public health
law to assist in the education and awareness of the signs and symptoms
of pending or increased risk of sudden cardiac arrest. Such information
shall be posted on the department's website. In addition, each school
shall be required to include such information developed by the
department of health, in conjunction with the department, in any
permission form or parent or person in parental relation consent form or
similar document that may be required for a student's participation in
interscholastic athletics and shall also include such information, or
reference how to obtain such information from the department and the
department of health's websites, on the school's website, if one exists.
 b. The commissioner shall promulgate rules and regulations requiring
that any student displaying signs or symptoms of pending or increased
risk of sudden cardiac arrest shall be immediately removed from athletic
activities and shall not resume athletic activity until he or she has
been evaluated by and received written and signed authorization from a
licensed physician. Such authorization shall be kept on file in the
pupil's permanent health record.
 § 924. Ingredient and nutritional information requirements. a. All
contracts entered into for the two thousand twenty-three--two thousand
twenty-four school year, and thereafter, to provide, maintain and
operate cafeteria or restaurant service by a private food service
management company shall include provisions requiring such private food
service management company to disclose ingredients lists and nutritional
information to school districts for all meals that such company
provides. The private food service management company shall be required
to consolidate nutritional information for any meal that is comprised of
separate individual ingredients. School districts and boards of
cooperative educational services shall have no responsibility to provide
nutritional information except pursuant to subdivision b of this
section.
 b. All ingredients lists and nutritional information provided to
school districts shall be published and publicly shared on such school
district's website.
 * § 926. Water safety information. 1. At the beginning of the two
thousand twenty-six--two thousand twenty-seven school year, each school
district shall provide, to the parent or guardian of each student
enrolled in such school district, information on drowning prevention,
water safety, and safe and healthy swimming. Each school year thereafter
such information shall be provided to the parent or guardian of a
student upon enrollment in the school district. If the student is
eighteen years of age or older, such information shall be provided to
the student. Such information may be provided electronically or in paper
form. Translation of such information into any of the twelve most common
non-English languages spoken by limited-English proficient individuals
in the state, based on the data in the most recent American community
survey published by the United States census bureau, shall be provided
upon request by a parent or guardian.
 2. The commissioner of health shall produce and update, as deemed
necessary, such information in consultation with the commissioner. The
commissioner shall provide such information to each school district.
Each school district shall publish such information on its website in a
clearly visible and accessible location.
 * NB Effective July 1, 2026
 ARTICLE 21
 VOCATIONAL REHABILITATION
Section 1001. Short title.
 1002. Definitions.
 1003. Application for vocational rehabilitation.
 1004. Powers and duties of the education department.
 1004-a. Sheltered workshops for individuals with developmental
 disabilities, mental illness or a severe physical
 handicap.
 1004-b. Integrated employment opportunities for individuals with
 severe disabilities.
 1005. Gifts and donations.
 1006. Acceptance of law of the United States.
 1007. Vocational rehabilitation records.
 1008. Use of appropriations.
 1009. Powers and duties of department of social services
 relating to vocational rehabilitation of blind
 persons.
 § 1001. Short title. This article shall be known and may be cited as
"The Vocational Rehabilitation Law."
 § 1002. Definitions. As used in this article:
 1. "Handicapped person" means any person who in the judgment of the
department is under a physical or mental disability which constitutes a
substantial handicap to employment but which is of such a nature that
vocational rehabilitation services may reasonably be expected to render
him fit to engage in gainful employment, and also any person under a
physical or mental disability which constitutes a substantial handicap
to employment and for whom vocational rehabilitation services are
necessary to ascertain his rehabilitation potential.
 2. "Person who is under a physical or mental disability" means an
individual who has a physical or mental condition which in the judgment
of the department limits, contributes to limiting, or, if not corrected,
will result in limiting his activities or functioning.
 3. "Substantial handicap to employment" means that a physical or
mental disability (in the light of attendant medical, psychological,
vocational, educational, cultural, social or environmental factors)
impedes an individual's occupational performance, by preventing his
obtaining, retaining, or preparing for a gainful occupation consistent
with his capacities and abilities.
 4. "Gainful occupation" includes any employment for which a
compensation is paid either in goods and/or in services; practice of a
profession; self-employment; homemaking, farm or family work (including
work for which payment is in kind rather than in cash); sheltered
employment; and home industries or other gainful homebound work.
 5. "Vocational rehabilitation services" means:
 a. Any goods and services necessary to render a handicapped person fit
to engage in a gainful occupation and includes:
 (1.) Evaluation, including diagnostic and related services;
 (2.) Counseling and Guidance;
 (3.) Training;
 (4.) Placement;
 (5.) Reader service where necessary for individuals who are visually
handicapped and interpreter services in the case of individuals who are
deaf;
 (6.) Attendants and amanuenses where required;
 (7.) Occupational and business licenses;
 (8.) Books, training supplies and fees;
 (9.) Transportation;
 (10.) Physical restoration services;
 (11.) Maintenance payments to cover the handicapped person's expenses
essential to achievement of his vocational rehabilitation objective;
 (12.) Tools, equipment, initial stocks and supplies;
 (13.) Training allowances which may be paid to individuals receiving
training and related services in public and other non-profit workshops
and rehabilitation facilities to the extent that funds may be made
available for this purpose;
 (14.) Other goods and services, not enumerated in this subdivision,
necessary to render a handicapped person fit to engage in a gainful
occupation.
 b. The establishment of public and other nonprofit rehabilitation
facilities for handicapped persons; the establishment of public and
other nonprofit workshops for the severely handicapped; and the staffing
of public and other nonprofit workshops for the severely handicapped so
that workshops may be established, extended, improved or continued.
 6. "Physical restoration services" mean those medical and medically
related services which are necessary to correct or substantially modify
within a reasonable period of time a physical or mental condition which
is stable or slowly progressive and which constitutes a substantial
handicap to employment, and includes (but is not limited to):
 a. corrective surgery or therapeutic treatment;
 b. necessary hospitalization in connection with surgery or treatment
specified in (a);
 c. prosthetic devices essential to obtaining or retaining employment;
and
 d. other necessary medical or medically related services.
 7. "Rehabilitation facility" means a facility, operated for the
principal purpose of assisting in the rehabilitation of handicapped
persons and
 a. provides one or more than one of the following types of services:
 1. prevocational or conditioning therapy;
 2. adjustment training;
 3. testing, fitting or training in the use of prosthetic devices;
 4. physical or occupational therapy;
 5. evaluation, treatment or control of special disabilities; or
 b. through which is provided an integrated program of medical,
psychological, social and vocational evaluation and services under
appropriate professional supervision, provided that the major portion of
such evaluation and services is furnished within the facility, and that
all medical and related health services are prescribed by and are under
the supervision of persons licensed to practice medicine in the state.
 8. "Workshop" means a place where any manufacture or handiwork is
carried on and which is operated for the principle purpose of providing
gainful employment to severely handicapped persons (a) as an interim
step in the rehabilitation process for those who cannot be absorbed in
the competitive labor market; or (b) during such time as employment
opportunities for them in the competitive labor market do not exist.
 9. "Establishment of a workshop" or "rehabilitation facility" means:
 a. In the case of a workshop, the expansion, remodeling, or alteration
of existing buildings, necessary to adapt such buildings to workshop
purposes or to increase the employment opportunities in workshops, and
the acquisition of initial equipment necessary for new workshops or to
increase the employment opportunities in workshops; and
 b. In the case of a rehabilitation facility, the expansion,
remodeling, or alteration of existing buildings, and initial equipment
of such buildings, necessary to adapt such buildings to rehabilitation
facility purposes or to increase their effectiveness for such purposes
and initial staffing thereof for a period not exceeding one year.
 10. With respect to the construction of workshops and rehabilitation
facilities, the following definitions shall apply:
 a. "Construction" includes construction of new buildings, acquisition
of existing buildings, and expansion, remodeling, alteration, and
renovation of existing buildings, and initial equipment of such new,
newly acquired, expanded, remodeled, altered or renovated buildings;
 b. The "cost" of construction may include the cost of architects' fees
and acquisition of land in connection with construction, but does not
include the cost of offsite improvements.
 c. A "project for construction of a workshop" may include provisions
for residential accommodations to be used by and in conjunction with the
rehabilitation of categories of handicapped individuals as may be
hereafter designated.
 11. "Supported employment" means paid competitive work performed by
individuals with severe disabilities who require intensive support
services to obtain such employment and extended support to sustain such
employment, and which is performed in an integrated setting which
provides regular interactions with individuals who do not have
disabilities, other than paid caregivers.
 12. "Supported employment services" means support services needed by
individuals with severe disabilities to obtain and sustain supported
employment. Such term shall also include transitional employment
services for individuals with severe and persistent mental illness, as
defined by the commissioner in consultation with the commissioner of the
office of mental health.
 13. "Paid competitive work", as used in the definition of supported
employment pursuant to subdivision eleven of this section means work
that is performed on a full-time or part-time basis, with a minimum
expectation of averaging at least twenty hours per week as an employment
goal, except that such requirement may be waived for good cause by the
commissioner, and for which an individual is compensated in accordance
with the federal fair labor standards act and the state department of
labor wage and hour regulations.
 14. "Individuals with severe disabilities" means persons for whom
competitive employment has either not traditionally occurred or has been
interrupted or intermittent as a result of having a permanent and
substantially disabling physical, sensory, or mental condition.
 § 1003. Application for vocational rehabilitation. a. Any handicapped
person available for vocational rehabilitation services may apply to the
department for advice and assistance regarding his vocational
rehabilitation.
 b. The state may, to the extent that funds are made available pursuant
to the federal social security act, furnish vocational rehabilitation
services to applicants for and beneficiaries of disability benefits
under the social security act as provided in the act and any rules or
regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
 § 1004. Powers and duties of the education department.
 The education department shall have the responsibility of and is
hereby authorized:
 1. To adopt and promulgate such rules and regulations and take such
action as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this article.
 2. To provide vocational rehabilitation services directly or through
public or private instrumentalities for handicapped persons (excepting
blind persons and, with respect to physical restoration services, those
persons who are entitled to such services pursuant to the workers'
compensation law and the volunteer firefighters' benefit law) whose
vocational rehabilitation the department determines after full
investigation may be satisfactorily achieved. In the course of its
investigation of an individual applicant's vocational rehabilitation
potential the department may conduct an extended evaluation program
including utilization of such vocational rehabilitation services as it
deems necessary.
 3. To enter into reciprocal agreements with other states to provide
for the vocational rehabilitation of handicapped persons.
 4. To engage in and contract for the making of studies,
investigations, demonstrations, research and reports, and the provision
of training and instruction (including the establishment and maintenance
of fellowships and traineeships with such stipends and allowances as may
be deemed necessary) the assessment of existing facilities and services
and the evaluation of present and future requirements, including plans
for the purposes enumerated above in matters relating to vocational
rehabilitation.
 5. To arrange and pay part of the cost of projects leading to the
construction of workshops and rehabilitation facilities and the
extension and improvement or the establishment of vocational
rehabilitation services for handicapped persons, including the
furnishing of equipment or the furnishing of funds for the purchase of
equipment and supplies, personnel and other necessary and proper
expenses in the construction, establishment, improvement, continuation
or extension of rehabilitation facilities and workshops operated by
public or nonprofit organizations and agencies.
 6. To cooperate in the operation of this article with the state agency
or agencies administering the state's public assistance program,
workmen's compensation program, the departments of health, mental
hygiene, the federal agencies charged with the administration of the
federal social security act and the federal fair labor standards act or
other appropriate federal legislation and with other public and private
agencies providing services related to vocational rehabilitation, and
with the state system of public employment offices in the state, making
maximum feasible utilization of the job placement and employment
counseling services and other services and facilities of such offices,
and to issue such certifications as are required or indicated thereby.
 7. Within its discretion, to consider financial need of handicapped
individuals for the purposes of determining the extent of their
respective participation in the costs of vocational rehabilitation
services and to promulgate rules and regulations establishing financial
need as a condition to the availability of any of the services specified
in paragraph a of subdivision five of section one thousand two of this
chapter except that no economic need test will be applied as a condition
for furnishing the following vocational rehabilitation services: (a)
evaluation, including diagnostic and related services; (b) counseling
and guidance; and (c) placement.
 8. To supervise and monitor service centers for independent living
pursuant to article twenty-three-A of this chapter.
 9. To contract with not-for-profit organizations for the provision of
supported employment services, as defined in subdivision twelve of
section ten hundred two of this article, to individuals having severe
disabilities defined in subdivision fourteen of section one thousand two
of this article in integrated work settings. The commissioner shall
ensure that funds provided pursuant to this subdivision are not used for
the provision of services that are the responsibility of other state
agencies pursuant to the plan developed pursuant to subdivision two of
section one thousand four-b of this article. Services shall be provided
at a cost not to exceed that which is necessary and reasonable, and
shall include short-term intensive and extended support mechanisms
within an integrated work setting. The commissioner shall require
service providers to develop appropriate policies and procedures for
directing their supported employment programs, and to provide such
reports as the commissioner deems to be appropriate.
 § 1004-a. Sheltered workshops for individuals with developmental
disabilities, mental illness or a severe physical handicap. 1.
Declaration of purpose. The conditions associated with a developmental
disability, mental illness and severe physical handicap are such that
many young people, after laborious training in the schools and
otherwise, reach the point in their lives where they can and should,
under proper and continued guidance, engage in sheltered employment. The
effects of such employment are salutary in many ways. The affected
individual is helped to become a contributing member of society. The
state is saved the expense of his or her institutionalization in already
overcrowded state schools and facilities. The family retains closer
contact with him or her and is spared the anxieties naturally attaching
to separation and institutionalization. All of these factors have also
been shown to reflect tangible benefit upon individuals with
developmental disabilities, mental illness or a severe physical handicap
in improving his or her overall condition. The purpose of this measure
is to specifically encourage the development, improvement and expansion
of such sheltered employment facilities by non-profit agencies, so that
the salutary effects mentioned can be expediently accomplished.
 2. Special provisions relating to individuals with a developmental
disabilities, mental illness or a severe physical handicap in extended
sheltered employment in workshops. Notwithstanding any other provision
of this article, when it shall appear to the satisfaction of the
department that an individual with a developmental disability, mental
illness or a severe physical handicap over the chronological age of
seventeen years can reasonably be expected to benefit from, or in his or
her best interests reasonably requires extended sheltered employment in
a workshop as defined in subdivision eight of section ten hundred two of
this article, furnished by an approved non-profit organization, the
department is authorized to contract with such organization for the
furnishing of such sheltered employment to such individual with a
developmental disability, mental illness or a severe physical handicap;
and the department is further authorized to expend for such purpose a
sum or sums not less than one thousand five hundred dollars per annum
for each such individual with a developmental disability, mental illness
or a severe physical handicap, for or towards the cost of providing such
sheltered employment for each such individual with a developmental
disability, mental illness or a severe physical handicap.
 The department shall pay at least quarterly during the state fiscal
year such sums as are authorized to such organizations for such
sheltered employment immediately upon the completion of evaluation and
personal adjustment services under the sponsorship of the department.
 3. The department shall maintain a register of such nonprofit
organizations which, after inspection of the facilities for sheltered
employment provided by them, it deems qualified to meet the needs of
such individuals with developmental disabilities, mental illness or a
severe physical handicap. Such inspection shall also determine the
eligibility of such organization to receive the funds hereinbefore
specified.
 4. The department is authorized to contract with such nonprofit
organizations for the provision of vocational rehabilitation services
which lead to sheltered employment.
 5. The department shall assure that individuals in long-term sheltered
employment operated by not-for-profit agencies are periodically reviewed
to determine the feasibility of their employment, or training for
employment, in integrated work settings and that maximum efforts toward
such employment occur, whenever it is determined to be feasible.
 6. The commissioner is authorized to promulgate such reasonable rules
and regulations as he may deem necessary or proper to carry out the
provisions of this section.
 § 1004-b. Integrated employment opportunities for individuals with
severe disabilities. 1. The department shall have the responsibility to
stimulate the development of programs intended to furnish opportunities
for integrated employment including but not limited to, supported
employment and paid competitive work, to individuals with severe
disabilities, and to coordinate with state agencies responsible for
furnishing necessary services to individuals with severe disabilities
related to such opportunities.
 2. State integrated employment implementation plan. a. The
commissioner, in consultation with and with the agreement of the
commissioners of mental health, the office for people with developmental
disabilities and social services shall develop a state interagency plan
for the implementation of integrated employment opportunities for
individuals with severe disabilities, including supported employment.
Such plan shall be designed so as to ensure that the state's integrated
employment efforts, including the supported employment program, are
planned, developed and implemented comprehensively, with roles and
responsibilities of the respective agencies well-defined. Such plan
shall reflect the department's primary responsibility for the
development of integrated employment opportunities for individuals with
severe disabilities, including short-term and intensive supported
employment services, as well as appropriate responsibilities for long
term extended support services. Such plan shall specify the role and
responsibilities of each such agency in assuring that:
 (i) services are provided fully and equitably;
 (ii) an array of services is established and appropriate procedures
are developed to allow persons with severe disabilities timely access to
appropriate support services;
 (iii) compatible definitions, program evaluation and accounting
standards and reporting documents are implemented;
 (iv) services and eligibility requirements are integrated and
coordinated between agencies, including the manner in which appropriate
responsibilities for funding and administering both short-term intensive
and long-term extended support services for supported employment are to
be implemented;
 (v) funding sources are clearly defined and amounts are adequate to
support persons with short-term intensive and long-term extended support
needs;
 (vi) all necessary steps are taken to maximize the success and cost
effectiveness of such programs and the potential of persons served by
such programs;
 (vii) continuity of support services is not broken for individuals
placed in an integrated employment setting in the event such placement
is interrupted; and
 (viii) eligibility standards are consistent regarding the placement of
individuals in integrated work settings, including supported employment
and other competitive work placements.
 b. In addition, the plan shall address the manner in which continued
support for current programs will be maintained; and establishment
grants will be provided. Such establishment grants shall include, but
not be limited to, special projects which enhance the provision of
supported employment and new integrated employment program initiatives
which would target individuals who have severe disabilities who have
aged-out or have otherwise exited the school system. In addition, such
grants may be used to provide additional resources to existing programs
for the purposes of increasing the numbers of persons served who have
been determined by the commissioner to have been unserved or
underserved. Such grants may also be used for new programs for these
populations.
 c. The commissioner, in consultation with the commissioners of the
office of mental health, the office for people with developmental
disabilities and the department of social services, shall develop an
audit protocol to verify the actual costs of providing such programs.
 3. Reporting. a. It shall be the primary responsibility of the
commissioner to provide annual reports on the progress of achieving the
components of the implementation plan as contained in subdivision two of
this section. In addition, such reports shall include:
 (i) a current description of individuals served, and services and
technical assistance provided;
 (ii) employment status of persons transitioned from sheltered
workshops, special education programs, day treatment centers, and day
services programs into integrated employment programs, including
supported employment programs and other competitive work placements;
 (iii) incidence of persons in reverse transition between integrated
employment programs, including supported employment programs and paid
competitive work, and sheltered workshops, day treatment programs and
day services programs; and
 (iv) number of persons for whom employment in an integrated work
setting has been requested and who are waiting for placement.
 The commissioners of the office of mental health, the office for
people with developmental disabilities, and the department of social
services shall provide any information required to assist the
commissioner in making such report.
 b. The implementation plan shall be transmitted to the state's board
of regents, the governor, the temporary president of the senate, the
speaker of the assembly and the senate committee on finance, the
assembly committee on ways and means, the senate committee on education
and the assembly committee on education on or before October first,
nineteen hundred ninety-three with a report on the status of the
implementation plan transmitted on or before October first of each
succeeding year.
 § 1005. Gifts and donations. The department is authorized to receive,
accept and use gifts and donations for the purpose of this article which
may be offered, conditionally or unconditionally, notwithstanding
section eleven of the state finance law or any other provision of law.
All money received as gifts or donations shall be paid to the
commissioner of taxation and finance, who together with the state
comptroller is hereby constituted and appointed the joint custodian
thereof and shall constitute a special fund to be used under the
direction of the department for the purpose of this article. A full
report of all such gifts and donations, together with the names of the
donors, the amounts contributed by each and all disbursements therefrom
shall be submitted annually to the legislature as part of the report of
the department.
 § 1006. Acceptance of law of the United States. The state of New
York, through its legislative authority:
 1. Accepts the provisions of any law of the United States making
appropriation to be apportioned among the states for vocational
rehabilitation of disabled persons, and accepts the provisions of any
law of the United States making appropriation for apportionment or
grants among the states for services for disabled persons.
 2. Empowers and directs the board of regents of the university, hereby
designated the New York state board for vocational education, to
cooperate with such agency as the federal government shall designate to
carry out the purposes of such law.
 3. Appoints the commissioner of taxation and finance and the state
comptroller as joint custodians of all money given to the state by the
United States under the authority of such law, and such money shall be
paid out in the manner provided by such act for the purposes therein
specified.
 § 1007. Vocational rehabilitation records. 1. It shall be unlawful,
except for purposes directly connected with the administration of the
vocational rehabilitation program, for any person or persons to solicit,
disclose, receive, or make use of, or authorize, knowingly permit,
participate in, or acquiesce in the use of any list of, or names of, or
any information concerning, persons applying for or receiving vocational
rehabilitation, directly or indirectly derived from the record, papers,
files, communications of the state or subdivisions or agencies thereof,
or acquired in the course of the performance of official duties without
the consent of each such applicant or recipient. Such records, papers,
files and communications shall be regarded as confidential information
and privileged within the meaning of section forty-five hundred four of
the civil practice law and rules.
 2. Wage reporting information obtained by the office of vocational and
educational services for individuals with disabilities of the department
from the state department of taxation and finance pursuant to the tax
law shall be considered confidential and shall not be disclosed to
persons or agencies other than those considered entitled to such
information when such disclosure is necessary for the proper
administration of the department's vocational rehabilitation program.
 § 1008. Use of appropriations. Any appropriation made to carry out the
provisions of this article, in addition to any moneys allotted to the
state for a similar purpose by the government of the United States may
be used for the payment of salaries, travel, maintenance and operation,
and other administrative expenses including the purchase of necessary
office furniture, supplies, et cetera, the necessary costs for persons
being evaluated for or undergoing vocational rehabilitation including
tuition, fees, books and other training supplies, maintenance and
traveling expenses, occupational examinations and license fees, medical,
psychiatric and psychological examinations and other diagnostic and
related services, tools and equipment, initial stocks and supplies,
surgical fees, hospitalization, therapeutic treatment and prosthetic
appliances, the establishment and construction of public and other
nonprofit rehabilitation facilities to provide services for handicapped
individuals and the establishment and construction of public and other
nonprofit workshops for the severely handicapped, including the
furnishing of equipment or the providing of grants of funds to such
public and other nonprofit rehabilitation facilities and workshops to be
utilized for the acquisition of equipment, supplies, personnel and other
necessary and proper items to be utilized in such facilities.
 § 1009. Powers and duties of department of social services relating to
vocational rehabilitation of blind persons. 1. The board of social
services, the department of social services and the New York state
commission for the visually handicapped shall retain, and shall continue
to exercise, all the powers and duties relating to blind persons
conferred on them by the provisions of any other law.
 2. The department of social services is empowered to perform any and
all acts that may be required to be performed by it by any law of the
United States in order to obtain funds through the New York state board
for vocational education, or otherwise, from any federal department or
agency, for use in the vocational rehabilitation of blind persons; such
department is further empowered to use and expend such funds for the
purpose herein mentioned in accordance with the provisions of any law of
the United States making such funds available to the state.
 3. (a) Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of this article,
funds made available to the state by the United States to be used for
vocational rehabilitation of blind persons shall be accepted and used by
the state for such purposes provided the department of social services
shall determine to accept and to use the same in accordance with the
provisions of any law of the United States.
 (b) Provided the federal government shall make funds available, the
department of social services and its commission for the visually
handicapped are empowered to accept gifts for the extension and
improvement of non-profit facilities and workshops for the training and
rehabilitation of blind persons, and to match the value of such gifts
made to such department or commission for such purposes by or on behalf
of such non-profit facilities or workshops. The department may utilize
such federal funds and gifts for such purposes and may make appropriate
agreements therefor with suitable non-profit agencies serving the blind.
 ARTICLE 23
 CAREER EDUCATION IN COUNTIES
 PART I
 VOCATIONAL EDUCATION AND EXTENSION BOARDS
Section 1101. Establishment of county vocational education and extension
 boards.
 1102. Powers and duties of vocational education and extension
 boards.
 1103. Courses of study and qualifications of teachers.
 1104. State aid.
 1105. Exemption of certain districts.
 1106. Transportation.
 1107. County bonds for land and buildings.
 PART II
 COUNTY COMMISSION FOR SPECIAL EDUCATION IN WESTCHESTER COUNTY
Section 1110. Establishment of a special education district.
 1111. Powers and duties of county commission for special
 education.
 1112. Courses of study and qualifications of teachers.
 1113. State aid.
 1114. Appropriations by board of supervisors.
 1115. Indebtedness of special education district.
 1116. County treasurer to act as treasurer of the county
 commission for special education.
 PART I
 VOCATIONAL EDUCATION AND EXTENSION BOARDS
 § 1101. Establishment of county vocational education and extension
boards.
 1. The board of supervisors or other governing elective body of any
county may adopt a resolution by a majority vote of the members of the
board establishing a county vocational education and extension board for
the purpose of giving instruction in agriculture and home economics and
such other special subjects as may be approved by the commissioner of
education.
 2. Upon the adoption of the resolution as provided in the preceding
subdivision the board of supervisors or other governing elective body
shall appoint a board which shall be known as "The Vocational Education
and Extension Board of the County of .................... " (insert here
the name of the county). Such board shall consist of nine members who
shall serve for a period of nine years each except that members first
appointed shall be appointed for such terms that the term of one member
will expire each year, and their successors shall thereafter each be
appointed for a full term of nine years respectively. At least three
members of this board shall be appointed upon recommendations made by
the farm and home bureau associations of the county and at least three
members upon recommendations made by the district superintendents of the
county. Vacancies occurring in such office shall be filled by the board
of supervisors or other governing elective body for the unexpired term.
 3. The fiscal year of the vocational education and extension board of
each county shall begin on July first and end on June thirtieth.
 4. A county vocational education and extension board established
pursuant to this section is hereby created a body corporate. All
property which is now vested in, or shall hereafter be transferred to, a
county vocational education and extension board shall be held by it as a
corporation.
 § 1102. Powers and duties of vocational education and extension
boards. A vocational education and extension board shall, subject to
the provisions of part one of this article, have the following powers
and duties:
 1. It may make or cause to be made a survey to determine the career
education and extension needs of the county.
 2. It may make and establish and from time to time alter and amend
rules and regulations for the transaction of its business and for the
administration of the work under its charge.
 3. It shall have full power and authority to employ supervisors and
teachers and all other persons necessary to carry on career education
and extension work and to determine the salaries to be paid. Members of
the teaching and supervisory staff shall be appointed by a majority vote
of the vocational education and extension board upon recommendation of
the director for a probationary period not to exceed three years except
that no recommendation shall require for the appointment of a director
of career education. Services of members of the teaching and
supervisory staff so employed may be discontinued at any time during the
probationary period, upon the recommendation of the director, by
majority action of such board. On or before the expiration of the
probationary period such board, upon recommendation of the director, may
appoint on tenure those persons who have been found competent, efficient
and satisfactory. Such persons shall hold their respective positions
during good behavior and competent and efficient service and shall not
be removed except for any of the following causes, after a hearing, as
provided by section three thousand twenty-a of this chapter: (a)
insubordination, immoral character or conduct unbecoming a teacher; (b)
inefficiency, incompetency, physical or mental disability or neglect of
duty.
 4. It shall make an annual report in writing to the regents of The
University of the State of New York and to the board of supervisors or
other governing elective body on or before the first day of October. It
shall also make such other reports as may be required by the
commissioner of education or by the board of supervisors or other
governing elective body.
 5. It may appoint any advisory committees deemed necessary.
 6. It shall cooperate with existing public agencies in conducting
career education and extension work in the county.
 7. It shall have such other powers and shall perform such other duties
as may be necessary to carry into effect the purposes of part one of
this article.
 8. It may request the board of supervisors to contribute the use of or
lease land, buildings and other facilities to it, and to contribute to
the cost of operating and maintaining the program of the county
vocational education and extension board, and a board of supervisors
shall have power to make appropriations toward such cost and to
contribute the use of or lease land, buildings, and other facilities to
it.
 9. It shall appoint one of its members as president, one of its
members or another qualified school district voter in the county as
clerk and another qualified school district voter in the county as
treasurer. All moneys accruing or appropriated to the board shall be
paid to the treasurer of the board. The clerk and treasurer may be paid
such compensation as may be fixed by the board. The treasurer shall
furnish a surety bond of a surety company authorized to do business in
the state of New York. The form and amount of such bond shall be
approved by the board and the cost thereof shall be a charge against the
funds of said board.
 10. It shall designate a bank or banks for the deposit of money. Such
designation shall be made of a bank within the county unless no bank
exists in the county. It shall notify the treasurer of all bank
designations and require him to deposit all money in such designated
banks. Accruing funds, balances, resources and assets shall become the
property of any succeeding agency or, in the event of termination of the
program of shared services, such accruing funds, balances, resources and
assets shall be prorated among the districts having been served during
the last year of operation and the county in proportion to the amount
which each paid to the vocational education and extension board.
 11. All accounting procedures shall be in accordance with regulations
that apply to union free school districts.
 12. It shall have the authority to make contracts with the school
authorities of school districts within the county, or without the county
where such contract will result in no additional expense being incurred
by such county, for services to be rendered by it to such school
districts, and such school authorities shall have the authority to enter
into such contracts. Payments shall be made by the school districts at
least as often as quarterly. Any amount so paid to the board by a school
district shall not be included in computing the apportionment of state
aid to such district.
 13. It may transport pupils under twenty-one years of age to and from
schools and classes maintained by such vocational education and
extension board for instruction in career education. In providing such
transportation, the board may transport pupils residing outside the
county who are attending such schools and classes maintained by such
board pursuant to subdivision twelve of this section.
 14. It may purchase and maintain a motor vehicle or vehicles to be
used for the transportation of school children under twenty-one years of
age to schools and classes maintained by the county vocational education
and extension board. Such motor vehicle or vehicles may be leased to a
school district when not needed for such transportation. When such
motor vehicle shall be leased as provided in this subdivision, public
liability and property damage insurance, fire insurance and compensation
insurance of drivers shall be provided in the amount stated in section
thirty-six hundred twenty-seven of this chapter and collision insurance
shall be provided in the amount of value of the vehicle to protect the
lessor. No part of the cost and expenses resulting from operation,
maintenance and repair of such vehicles during the leasing thereof shall
be included in determining the amount of any form of state aid received
by such county vocational education and extension board.
 15. It may lease land, buildings, and other facilities as may be
necessary to carry into effect the purposes of part one of this article.
 § 1103. Courses of study and qualifications of teachers. The courses
of instruction to accomplish the purposes of part one of this article
are to be approved by the commissioner of education. Such courses when
conducted in elementary or secondary schools are to be approved by the
superintendent in whose jurisdiction such instruction is given. The
qualifications of the teachers, directors, assistants and supervisors
employed by a vocational education and extension board must conform to
the regulations of the regents of the university and the commissioner of
education.
 § 1104. State aid. 1. The commissioner of education in the annual
apportionment of public moneys shall apportion therefrom to each county
maintaining approved vocational education and extension work, a quota
amounting to one-half of the salary paid each teacher, director,
assistant, and supervisor, but not to exceed ten thousand five hundred
dollars on account of the employment of such teacher, director,
assistant or supervisor.
 2. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision one of this section
or chapters fifty-three and three hundred ninety-one of the laws of
nineteen hundred eighty-nine or any other provision of law to the
contrary, aid payable to county vocational education and extension
boards in the spring of nineteen hundred ninety shall be reduced by an
amount equal to the amount that would have been paid pursuant to section
five hundred twenty-one of this chapter to the New York state teachers'
retirement system on behalf of such board.
 § 1105. Exemption of certain districts. Upon the recommendation of
the county vocational education and extension board, the board of
supervisors or other governing elective body of any county may exempt
any city or union free school district from the raising of moneys for
the purpose of paying the cost of operating and maintaining the program
of the county vocational education and extension board.
 § 1106. Transportation. 1. In a county which has a vocational
education and extension board which does not furnish transportation to
pupils pursuant to subdivision thirteen of section eleven hundred two of
this chapter the cost of the transportation of pupils under twenty-one
years of age to schools and classes maintained by such county vocational
education and extension board shall be a charge upon the district in
which such pupils reside, or are attending as non-resident pupils. Such
transportation shall be considered as other transportation of school
pupils in accordance with the provisions of part two of article
seventy-three of the education law and the district of residence, or the
district in which non-resident pupils are attending, shall be entitled
to a transportation quota.
 2. In a county which has a vocational education and extension board
which furnishes transportation to pupils pursuant to subdivision
thirteen of section eleven hundred two of this chapter, such vocational
education and extension board shall receive a transportation quota which
shall be one-half of the cost of the transportation of pupils under
twenty-one years of age to schools and classes maintained by such
vocational education and extension board.
 § 1107. County bonds for land and buildings. A county vocational
education and extension board established by a board of supervisors
pursuant to the provisions of part one of this article shall be deemed
to be a department of the county for the purposes of this section, and
the board of supervisors of such county may acquire land, construct
buildings and other facilities for the use of the vocational education
and extension board of the county and shall have the power to expend
moneys for and make appropriations to pay the cost thereof and to
finance the cost thereof pursuant to the local finance law.
 PART II
 COUNTY COMMISSION FOR SPECIAL EDUCATION IN WESTCHESTER COUNTY
 § 1110. Establishment of a special education district.
 1. The board of supervisors or other governing elective body of
Westchester county shall have power to adopt a resolution by a majority
vote of the members of such board to establish within the county a
special education district which shall include all the territory within
the county. A city school district in such county having a population of
fifty thousand or more inhabitants shall be excluded from such special
education district provided the board of education of such city shall
adopt a resolution requesting that such city school district be so
excluded and file such resolution with the board of supervisors or other
governing elective body within sixty days after the establishment of
such special education district. With the approval of the county
commission for special education to be appointed as hereinafter
provided, a city school district so excluded may later become a part of
such special education district upon the written application by the
board of education of such city school district.
 2. Upon the establishment of such special education district the board
of supervisors or other governing elective body shall appoint a board
which shall be known as the county commission for special education.
Such commission shall consist of five members who shall serve for a
period of five years each, except that members first appointed shall be
appointed for such terms that the term of one member will expire each
year, and their successors shall thereafter each be appointed for a full
term of five years, respectively. Vacancies occurring in such office
shall be filled by the board of supervisors or other governing elective
body for the unexpired term.
 3. Members of such commission shall serve without compensation except
their actual and necessary travelling expenses incurred in the
performance of their official duties.
 § 1111. Powers and duties of county commission for special education.
The county commission for special education shall have power:
 1. To make or cause to be made a survey to determine the special
educational needs of the district.
 2. To establish schools or classes for physically handicapped children
and to provide other necessary educational services, including
transportation and home teaching.
 3. To establish and maintain vocational schools and classes for the
purpose of providing instruction in agricultural, industrial,
commercial, technical and home making subjects.
 4. To provide vocational and educational guidance service.
 5. To establish such other special educational services as may meet
the approval of the commissioner of education.
 6. To employ a director of special education, who shall be the
executive officer and secretary of the commission, and upon the
recommendation of such director to employ directors, supervisors and
teachers and all other persons necessary to carry on such special
education projects as it may establish, and to determine the salaries to
be paid.
 7. To purchase, lease, rent, improve or sell land, and build, repair,
improve, lease, rent, buy and sell buildings.
 8. To acquire real property by condemnation for the purposes of such
special education district. Such condemnation proceedings shall be
instituted and conducted by such commission in the name of the district,
under the provisions of the statutes relating to the condemnation of
real property.
 9. To purchase all necessary furniture, implements, books, materials,
equipment and supplies.
 10. To make contracts with cities, villages, school districts or other
agencies for carrying out the purposes of part two of this article.
 11. To appoint advisory committees.
 12. To make and establish, and from time to time alter and amend,
rules and regulations for the transaction of its business and for the
administration of the work under its charge.
 13. It shall be the duty of the commission to make an itemized
estimate of the money needed for the ensuing year for the purposes of
part two of this article and file the same with the clerk of the board
of supervisors or other governing elective body at least sixty days
before the annual meeting of such board.
 14. It shall be the duty of the commission to make an annual report in
writing to the regents of The University of the State of New York and to
the board of supervisors or other governing elective body on or before
the first day of October in each year. It shall also be its duty to make
such other reports as may be required by the commissioner of education
and by such board or body.
 15. It shall have such other powers and shall perform such other
duties as may be necessary to carry into effect the purposes of part two
of this article.
 16. It shall not incur liabilities against county funds in excess of
the amounts appropriated by the board of supervisors or other governing
elective body.
 § 1112. Courses of study and qualifications of teachers. The courses
of instruction to accomplish the purposes of part two of this article
are to be approved by the commissioner of education. The qualifications
of the teachers, directors, assistants and supervisors employed by the
county commission for special education must conform to the regulations
of the regents of the university and the commissioner of education.
 § 1113. State aid. The commissioner of education in the annual
apportionment of public moneys shall apportion therefrom to such county
the quotas provided in section eleven hundred four of this chapter.
 § 1114. Appropriations by board of supervisors. The board of
supervisors or other governing elective body may make appropriations and
levy taxes upon all the taxable property included within the boundaries
of the special education district to carry out the purposes of part two
of this article, and such taxes shall be assessed, levied and collected
at the same time and in the same manner as county taxes are assessed,
levied and collected within the boundaries of such special education
district.
 § 1115. Indebtedness of special education district. For the purpose
of giving effect to the provisions of part two of this article the board
of supervisors or other governing elective body of such county may issue
obligations of the county pursuant to the provisions of the local
finance law, which obligations shall be a charge upon the special
education district. Whenever at the time of its enlargement the special
education district shall have an outstanding bonded indebtedness, such
outstanding indebtedness shall become a charge against the enlarged
district.
 § 1116. County treasurer to act as treasurer of the county commission
for special education. All moneys collected from taxes levied in
accordance with the provisions of part two of this article and all
moneys apportioned by the commissioner of education, and any and all
moneys received from any and all sources whatsoever for carrying out the
provisions of part two of this article, shall be paid to the county
treasurer. Such funds shall be disbursed by such county treasurer upon
audit by the special education commission.
 ARTICLE 23-A
 SERVICE CENTERS FOR INDEPENDENT LIVING
Section 1120. Declaration of intent.
 1121. Service centers for independent living; purpose and
 duties.
 1122. Education department; responsibilities.
 1123. Regulations.
 1124. Distribution of funds.
 § 1120. Declaration of intent. Persons with disabilities comprise a
large percentage of New York's total population. The legislature hereby
finds and declares that action is necessary to assist these individuals
to integrate and live more independently in the community. Since their
inception, service centers for independent living have enhanced the
ability of persons with disabilities to pursue an independent and active
lifestyle within their community. In order to achieve this, it is
necessary for the state to provide funding to maintain existing service
centers designed to promote independent living and to encourage the
establishment of new centers. In addition, the office of vocational
rehabilitation should have the responsibility and authority for the
encouragement of the planning, development, funding, evaluation and
monitoring of such service centers.
 § 1121. Service centers for independent living; purpose and duties.
1. A service center for independent living shall be a community based
non-residential program designed to promote independent living for
persons with disabilities.
 (a) Such center shall:
 (i) be a private not-for-profit corporation, pursuant to subdivision
five of paragraph a of section one hundred two of the not-for-profit
corporation law; provided, however, that persons with disabilities
comprise at least fifty-one percent of the membership of the board of
directors;
 (ii) be staffed by persons experienced in assisting persons with
disabilities;
 (iii) provide services designed to meet the needs of persons with
disabilities, including such services as assisting persons with
disabilities to obtain housing, employment referral, transportation
referral, attendant care, independent living skills, peer counseling,
advocacy services, job training, health care, homemaker services, and
other such services as approved by the commissioner;
 (iv) train personnel for the purpose of attendant care in assisting
and serving persons with disabilities; and
 (v) serve persons with disabilities.
 (b) Such center may also, but need not limit itself to, provide
disability awareness programs, peer counseling, role modeling and any
other appropriate services within elementary and secondary schools.
 2. Such service centers shall not be established or operated as a
residential or housing facility.
 3. Such service centers shall make maximum use of existing resources
available to persons with disabilities and shall not duplicate any
existing services or programs, to the extent that such services or
programs are available through other state sources to meet the needs of
persons with disabilities. Such centers shall however provide necessary
information and referral to assist a person with a disability in
obtaining such services and coordinate where possible the delivery of
such services to persons with disabilities.
 4. Such service centers shall be in compliance with all applicable
local laws and ordinances.
 § 1122. Education department; responsibilities. The department shall
assist individuals and organizations in the planning and establishment
of such service centers. The department shall ensure program
accountability and shall monitor and evaluate such centers.
 § 1123. Regulations. The commissioner shall promulgate rules and
regulations necessary for the implementation of this article.
 § 1124. Distribution of funds. 1. Service centers for independent
living shall be funded out of appropriations available for such purposes
to the extent of the entire approved budget of such centers.
 2. Budgets submitted by service centers shall be approved in
accordance with regulations of the commissioner, subject to approval of
the director of the budget.
 3. Service centers shall be located in the cities of Albany, Buffalo,
Rochester, Syracuse, Utica, White Plains, Binghamton, Kingston,
Poughkeepsie, Jamestown, Yonkers, the counties of Queens, Kings, Nassau,
Bronx, Richmond, New York and Suffolk.
 4. Additional service centers shall be located in the cities of
Niagara Falls, Olean, Troy, Amsterdam, Newburgh, Corning, Ithaca,
Cortland, Auburn, Watertown, Plattsburgh, Batavia, Massena and Glens
Falls, the counties of Delaware and Rockland, the county of Orange, in
either the city of Middletown or Port Jervis or in the town of Deerpark,
Greenville, Mount Hope, Warwick or Wawayanda or in the village of
Goshen, in the county of New York to serve the Harlem community, and in
the counties of Putnam, Sullivan and Herkimer.
 ARTICLE 23-B
 CHILD ABUSE IN AN EDUCATIONAL SETTING
Section 1125. Definitions.
 1126. Duties of employees specifically enumerated in this
 section upon receipt of an allegation of child abuse
 in an educational setting.
 1127. Confidentiality of records.
 1128. Duties of school administrators and superintendents upon
 receipt of a written report alleging child abuse in an
 educational setting.
 1128-a. Additional duties of school administrators and
 superintendents.
 1129. Penalties for failure to comply.
 1130. Notification by district attorney.
 1131. Actions upon criminal conviction of a licensed or
 certified school employee.
 1132. Duties of the commissioner; child abuse in an
 educational setting.
 1133. Unreported resignation against public policy.
 1134. Reporting to the vulnerable persons' central register
 and the statewide central register of child abuse and
 maltreatment.
 § 1125. Definitions. For the purposes of this article the following
terms shall have the following meanings:
 1. "Child abuse" shall mean any of the following acts committed in an
educational setting by an employee or volunteer against a child: (a)
intentionally or recklessly inflicting physical injury, serious physical
injury or death, or (b) intentionally or recklessly engaging in conduct
which creates a substantial risk of such physical injury, serious
physical injury or death, or (c) any child sexual abuse as defined in
this section, or (d) the commission or attempted commission against a
child of the crime of disseminating indecent materials to minors
pursuant to article two hundred thirty-five of the penal law, or (e)
using corporal punishment as defined by the commissioner.
 2. "Child" shall mean a person under the age of twenty-one years
enrolled in a school.
 3. "Employee" shall mean any person: (i) who is receiving compensation
from a school or (ii) whose duties involve direct student contact and
(a) who is receiving compensation from any person or entity that
contracts with a school to provide transportation services to children,
or (b) who is an employee of a contracted service provider or worker
placed within the school under a public assistance employment program,
pursuant to title nine-B of article five of the social services law, and
consistent with the provisions of such title for the provision of
services to such school, its students or employees, directly or through
contract.
 4. "Volunteer" shall mean any person, other than an employee, who has
direct student contact and: (i) provides services to a school, or (ii)
provides services to any person or entity that contracts with a school
to provide transportation services to children.
 5. "Educational setting" shall mean the building and grounds of a
school, the vehicles provided directly or by contract by the school for
the transportation of students to and from school buildings, field
trips, co-curricular and extra-curricular activities both on and off
school grounds, all co-curricular and extra-curricular activity sites,
and any other location where direct contact between an employee or
volunteer and a child has allegedly occurred.
 6. "Administrator" or "school administrator" shall mean a principal,
or the equivalent title, in a school, or other chief school officer.
 7. "Law enforcement authorities" shall mean a municipal police
department, sheriff's department, the division of state police or any
officer thereof. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, law
enforcement authorities shall not include any child protective service
or any society for the prevention of cruelty to children as such terms
are defined in section four hundred twenty-three of the social services
law.
 8. "Parent" shall mean either or both of a child's parents or other
persons legally responsible for the child.
 9. "Child sexual abuse" shall mean conduct prohibited by article one
hundred thirty or two hundred sixty-three of the penal law.
 10. "School" shall include a school district, public school, charter
school, nonpublic school, board of cooperative educational services,
special act school district as defined in section four thousand one of
this chapter, approved preschool special education program pursuant to
section forty-four hundred ten of this chapter, approved private
residential or non-residential school for the education of students with
disabilities including private schools established under chapter eight
hundred fifty-three of the laws of nineteen hundred seventy-six, or
state-operated or state-supported school in accordance with article
eighty-five, eighty-seven or eighty-eight of this chapter.
 § 1126. Duties of employees specifically enumerated in this section
upon receipt of an allegation of child abuse in an educational setting.
1. In any case where an oral or written allegation is made to a teacher,
school nurse, school guidance counselor, school psychologist, school
social worker, school administrator, school board member or other school
personnel required to hold a teaching or administrative license or
certificate, as well as a licensed and registered physical therapist,
licensed and registered occupational therapist, licensed and registered
speech-language pathologist, teacher aide or school resource officer,
that a child has been subjected to child abuse by an employee or
volunteer in an educational setting, such person shall upon receipt of
such allegation:
 (a) promptly complete a written report of such allegation including
the full name of the child alleged to be abused; the name of the child's
parent; the identity of the person making the allegation and their
relationship to the alleged child victim; the name of the employee or
volunteer against whom the allegation was made; and a listing of the
specific allegations of child abuse in an educational setting. Such
written report shall be upon a form as prescribed in section eleven
hundred thirty-two of this article.
 (b) except where the school administrator is the person receiving such
oral or written allegation, promptly personally deliver a copy of such
written report to the school administrator of the school in which the
child abuse allegedly occurred.
 1-a. (i) In any case where an oral or written allegation is made to a
school bus driver employed by a school or a person or entity that
contracts with a school to provide transportation services to children
that a child has been subjected to child abuse by an employee or
volunteer in an educational setting, such driver shall upon receipt of
such allegation, promptly report or cause a report to be made to his or
her supervisor employed by such school or contracting person or entity.
 (ii) In any case where an oral or written report or allegation is made
to a supervisor who is employed by a school or a person or entity that
contracts with a school to provide transportation services to children
from a person employed by the school or the contracted person or entity,
that a child in such school has been subjected to child abuse by an
employee or volunteer in an educational setting, such supervisor shall
upon receipt of such allegation promptly complete a written report of
such allegation including the full name of the child alleged to be
abused; the name of the child's parent or guardian; the identity of the
person making the allegation and their relationship to the alleged child
victim; the name of the employee or volunteer against whom the
allegation was made; and a listing of the specific allegations of child
abuse in an educational setting. Such written report shall be upon a
form as prescribed in section eleven hundred thirty-two of this article,
and shall be personally delivered to the school district superintendent
employed by the school district where the child abuse occurred or, for a
school other than a school district or public school, the school
administrator employed by the school where the child abuse occurred.
 2. In any case where it is alleged that a child was abused by an
employee or volunteer of a school other than a school within the school
district of the child's attendance, the report of such allegations shall
be promptly forwarded to the superintendent of schools of the school
district of the child's attendance and the school district where the
abuse allegedly occurred, whereupon both school superintendents shall
comply with sections eleven hundred twenty-eight and eleven hundred
twenty-eight-a of this article. If such case involves a school that is
not a school district or public school, the appropriate school
administrator or administrators, in addition to any appropriate
superintendent of schools, shall be notified whereupon all such
individuals shall comply with sections eleven hundred twenty-eight and
eleven hundred twenty-eight-a of this article.
 3. Any employee, volunteer, or supervisor who is employed by a person
or entity that contracts with a school to provide transportation
services to children who reasonably and in good faith makes a report of
allegations of child abuse in an educational setting to a person and in
a manner described in this section shall have immunity from civil
liability which might otherwise result by reason of such actions.
 4. In any case where the employee against whom the allegation is made
is the superintendent or the administrator, the report of such
allegations shall be made to another administrator designated by the
school.
 § 1127. Confidentiality of records. Reports and other written material
submitted pursuant to this article, and photographs taken concerning
such reports in the possession of any person authorized to receive such
information, pursuant to this article, shall be confidential and shall
not be redisclosed except to law enforcement authorities involved in an
investigation of child abuse in an educational setting or as expressly
authorized by law or pursuant to a court-ordered subpoena. A school
administrator or a school superintendent shall exercise reasonable care
in preventing such unauthorized disclosure. Willful disclosure of a
written record required to be kept confidential pursuant to this section
to a person not authorized to receive or review such record is a class A
misdemeanor.
 § 1128. Duties of school administrators and superintendents upon
receipt of a written report alleging child abuse in an educational
setting. Upon receipt of a written report described in paragraph (a) of
subdivision one or subdivision one-a of section eleven hundred
twenty-six of this article alleging that a child has been abused in an
educational setting, a school administrator or superintendent shall
where there is a reasonable suspicion to believe that an act of child
abuse has occurred:
 1. Where the subject child has made the allegation: (a) promptly
notify the parent of such child that an allegation of child abuse in an
educational setting has been made regarding such child and promptly
provide the parent with a written statement prepared pursuant to
regulations of the commissioner setting forth parental rights,
responsibilities and procedures under this article; (b) where a school
administrator receives a written report, promptly provide a copy of such
report to the superintendent; and (c) promptly forward such report to
appropriate law enforcement authorities. In no event shall reporting to
law enforcement be delayed by reason of an inability to contact the
superintendent.
 2. Where a parent of the child has made the allegation: (a) promptly
provide the parent of such child with a written statement prepared
pursuant to regulations of the commissioner setting forth parental
rights, responsibilities and procedures under this article; (b) where a
school administrator receives a written report, promptly provide a copy
of such report to the superintendent; and (c) promptly forward such
report to appropriate law enforcement authorities. In no event shall
reporting to law enforcement be delayed by reason of an inability to
contact the superintendent.
 3. Where a person other than the subject child or the parent of a
subject child has made the allegation: (a) promptly notify the parent of
the subject child that an allegation of child abuse in an educational
setting has been made regarding his or her child and promptly provide
the parent with a written statement prepared pursuant to regulations of
the commissioner setting forth parental rights, responsibilities and
procedures under this article; (b) ascertain from the person making such
report the source and basis for such allegation; (c) where a school
administrator receives a written report, promptly provide a copy of such
report to the superintendent; and (d) promptly forward such report to
appropriate law enforcement authorities. In no event shall reporting to
law enforcement be delayed by reason of an inability to contact the
superintendent.
 4. Any school administrator or superintendent who reasonably and in
good faith makes a report of allegations of child abuse in an
educational setting or reasonably and in good faith transmits such a
report to a person or agency as required by this article and in a manner
described in section eleven hundred twenty-six of this article and this
section shall have immunity from civil liability which might otherwise
result by reason of such actions.
 § 1128-a. Additional duties of school administrators and
superintendents.
 1. Where a superintendent of schools or, in a school other than a
school district or public school, the school administrator forwards to
law enforcement a report as described in paragraph (a) of subdivision
one or subdivision one-a of section eleven hundred twenty-six of this
article, he or she shall refer such report to the commissioner where the
employee or volunteer alleged to have committed an act of child abuse as
defined in this article holds a certification or license issued by the
department.
 2. A report which is made pursuant to this article and does not, after
investigation, result in a criminal conviction shall be expunged from
any record which may be kept by a school or school district with respect
to the subject of such a report after a period of five years from the
date of the making of such report or at such earlier time as such
school, or school district, as the case may be, determines.
 § 1129. Penalties for failure to comply. 1. Willful failure of an
employee to prepare and submit a written report of an allegation of
child abuse as required by this article shall be a class A misdemeanor.
 2. (a) Willful failure of a school administrator or superintendent to
submit a written report of child abuse to an appropriate law enforcement
authority, as required by this article, shall be a class A misdemeanor.
 (b) Notwithstanding paragraph (a) of this subdivision, any failure to
submit a written report of child abuse to an appropriate law enforcement
authority as required by this article, shall be punishable by a civil
penalty not to exceed five thousand dollars upon an administrative
determination by the commissioner.
 § 1130. Notification by district attorney. Where a criminal
investigation of an allegation of child abuse by an employee or
volunteer is undertaken in response to a report forwarded by a school
administrator or superintendent to law enforcement authorities pursuant
to section eleven hundred twenty-eight of this article, and where law
enforcement authorities have provided such report to the district
attorney and have requested assistance, as soon as practicable, it shall
be the responsibility of the district attorney to notify the
superintendent of schools of the district where the acts of child abuse
allegedly occurred and of the school district where the child is
attending, if different, of an indictment or the filing of an accusatory
instrument against the employee or volunteer against whom an allegation
of child abuse in an educational setting was made. The district attorney
shall notify the superintendent of schools of the district where the
acts of child abuse allegedly occurred and of the school district, if
different, where the child is attending of the disposition of the
criminal case against such employee or volunteer or the suspension or
termination of the criminal investigation of such employee or volunteer.
The aforementioned notifications to the superintendent of schools shall
be made to the appropriate school administrator where the acts of child
abuse allegedly occurred in a school other than a school district or
public school.
 § 1131. Actions upon criminal conviction of a licensed or certified
school employee. 1. In the event that a licensed or certified school
employee against whom an allegation of child abuse in an educational
setting has been made, is convicted of any crime involving child abuse
in an educational setting, the district attorney shall provide notice
thereof to the commissioner and the superintendent of schools of the
district or, in a school other than a school district or public school,
the school administrator where the acts of child abuse occurred and to
the school where the child is attending, if different.
 2. Upon receiving notice of a conviction from a district attorney
pursuant to subdivision one of this section, the commissioner shall,
without delay, proceed to determine whether the individual possesses
good moral character, in accordance with the regulations of the
commissioner governing such a determination.
 3. Nothing in this article shall be construed as creating any
authority to take an adverse action against an employee or volunteer by
virtue of a report pursuant to this article which has not been
substantiated.
 4. An employee or volunteer who has adverse action taken against him
or her by virtue of or in connection with any report made pursuant to
this article shall be entitled to receive a copy of such report and
respond to the allegations of child abuse made therein. Any employee or
volunteer shall, in addition, be entitled to seek disclosure of such
report pursuant to article six of the public officers law.
 § 1132. Duties of the commissioner; child abuse in an educational
setting. 1. The commissioner shall prepare a form for the recording and
transmitting of allegations of child abuse in an educational setting.
Such form shall include: (i) all definitions set out in section eleven
hundred twenty-five of this article; and (ii) adequate space for the
inclusion of any other information which the person making or filing the
report believes would be helpful in describing or explaining the
circumstances surrounding an allegation of child abuse in an educational
setting in accordance with the provisions of this article.
 2. The commissioner shall promulgate rules and regulations for
training necessary for the implementation of this article provided all
employees specifically described in section eleven hundred twenty-six of
this article shall be required to complete training pursuant to such
rules and regulations. Such training shall include, at a minimum,
information regarding the physical and behavioral indicators of child
abuse and maltreatment and the statutory reporting requirements set out
in sections four hundred thirteen, four hundred fourteen, four hundred
fifteen, four hundred sixteen, four hundred seventeen, four hundred
eighteen, four hundred nineteen and four hundred twenty of the social
services law, including but not limited to, when and how a report must
be made, what other actions the reporter is mandated or authorized to
take, the legal protections afforded reporters, and the consequences for
failing to report.
 3. All persons employed on or after July first, two thousand nineteen
by a school, other than a school district or public school, in titles
equivalent to a teacher or administrator as defined in the regulations
of the commissioner, and any school bus driver employed by a school or
any person or entity that contracts with a school to provide
transportation services to children shall be required to complete two
hours of coursework or training regarding the identification and
reporting of child abuse and maltreatment. The coursework or training
shall be obtained from an institution or provider that has been approved
by the department to provide such coursework or training. The coursework
or training shall include information regarding the physical and
behavioral indicators of child abuse and maltreatment and the statutory
reporting requirements set out in sections four hundred thirteen through
four hundred twenty of the social services law, including but not
limited to, when and how a report must be made, what other actions the
reporter is mandated or authorized to take, the legal protections
afforded reporters, and the consequences for failing to report. Each
employee in such titles shall provide the school administrator of the
school with documentation showing that he or she completed the required
training. In addition, each school bus driver shall provide such school
or contracting person or entity with documentation showing that he or
she completed the required training. The department shall be authorized
to request such records on a periodic basis and may publish a list of
any persons or schools who are not in compliance with this subdivision
on its website.
 4. The coursework or training required by this section shall not apply
to those persons already required to undergo coursework or training
regarding the identification and reporting of child abuse and
maltreatment pursuant to sections three thousand three and three
thousand four of this chapter.
 § 1133. Unreported resignation against public policy. 1. A school
administrator or superintendent shall not make any agreement to withhold
from law enforcement authorities, the superintendent or the
commissioner, where appropriate, the fact that an allegation of child
abuse in an educational setting on the part of any employee or volunteer
as required by this article in return for the resignation or voluntary
suspension from his or her position of such person, against whom the
allegation is made.
 2. Each violation of subdivision one of this section shall constitute
a class E felony, and shall also be punishable by a civil penalty not to
exceed twenty thousand dollars.
 3. Any superintendent of schools or school administrator who
reasonably and in good faith reports to law enforcement officials
information regarding allegations of child abuse or a resignation as
required by this article shall have immunity from any liability, civil
or criminal, which might otherwise result by reason of such actions.
 § 1134. Reporting to the vulnerable persons' central register and the
statewide central register of child abuse and maltreatment. Where a
person employed by a school is required to report an incident of child
abuse in an educational setting to the vulnerable persons' central
register pursuant to article eleven of the social services law or the
statewide central register of child abuse and maltreatment pursuant to
article six of the social services law and he or she reports such
incident thereto, such person shall have been deemed to have complied
with the reporting requirements of this article.