 TITLE IV
 TEACHERS AND PUPILS
Article 61 Teachers and supervisory and administrative staff
 (§§ 3001-3036).
 63 Salaries of teachers and supervisors (§§ 3101--3109-A).
 65 Compulsory education and school census (§§ 3201-3243).
 Part I--Compulsory education (§§ 3201-3234).
 Part II--School census (§§ 3240-3243).
 66 Interstate compact on educational opportunity for military
 children (§§ 3300-3318).
 ARTICLE 61
 TEACHERS AND SUPERVISORY AND ADMINISTRATIVE STAFF
Section 3001. Qualifications of teachers.
 3001-a. Temporary teaching permit, person not a citizen.
 3001-b. First aid instruction mandatory for coaches of
 extra-class public school athletic activities.
 3001-c. First aid instruction mandatory for coaches of high
 school extra-class nonpublic school athletic
 activities.
 3001-d. Criminal history record checks and conditional
 appointments; nonpublic and private schools.
 3002. Oath to support federal and state constitutions.
 3003. Qualifications of superintendents.
 3004. Regulations governing certification of teachers.
 3004-a. National board for professional teaching standards
 certification grant program.
 3004-b. Special procedures for certification.
 3004-c. Denial of application for certification.
 3005. Leave of absence to teachers for teaching in foreign
 countries, other states and territories and other
 school districts.
 3005-a. Leave of absence for teaching purposes.
 3005-b. Leave of absence for personal illness.
 3006. Commissioner of education to issue certificates.
 3006-a. Registration and continuing teacher and leader education
 requirements for holders of professional certificates
 in the classroom teaching service, holders of level
 III teaching assistant certificates, holders of
 professional certificates in the educational
 leadership service.
 3007. Endorsement of foreign certificates and diplomas.
 3008. Certification of teachers by local authorities.
 3009. Unqualified teachers shall not be paid from school
 moneys.
 3010. Penalty for payment of unqualified teacher.
 3011. Contract with teacher.
 3012. Tenure: certain school districts.
 3012-a. Elementary tenure area.
 3012-c. Annual professional performance review of classroom
 teachers and building principals.
 3012-d. Annual teacher and principal evaluations.
 3012-e. Teacher and principal performance review plans.
 3013. Abolition of office or position.
 3014. Tenure: boards of cooperative educational services.
 3014-a. Teachers' rights as a result of a board or boards of
 cooperative educational services taking over a program
 formerly operated by a school district or districts or
 by a county vocational education and extension board.
 3014-b. Teachers' rights as a result of a school district taking
 over a program formerly operated by a board of
 cooperative educational services.
 3014-c. Teachers' rights as a result of a school district taking
 back tuition students.
 3014-d. Teachers' rights as a result of a school district
 sending students to another district on a tuition
 basis pursuant to section two thousand forty of this
 chapter.
 3015. Teacher's salary when payable.
 3016. Contract when teacher is related to trustee or member of
 board of education.
 3017. Individual liability of trustees.
 3018. Revocation of certificate by district superintendent.
 3019. Penalty for teacher's failure to complete contract.
 3019-a. Notice of termination of service by teachers.
 3020. Discipline of teachers.
 3020-a. Disciplinary procedures and penalties.
 3021. Removal of superintendents, teachers and employees for
 treasonable or seditious acts or utterances.
 3021-a. Notification of accusatory instrument alleging a sex
 offense.
 3022. Elimination of subversive persons from the public school
 system.
 3023. Liability of a board of education, trustee, trustees or
 board of cooperative educational services.
 3024. Teachers responsible for record books.
 3025. Verification of school register.
 3026. Discriminations based on sex prohibited.
 3027. Discrimination based on age prohibited.
 3028. Liability of school district for cost and attorney's
 fees of action against, or prosecutions of, teachers,
 members of supervisory and administrative staff or
 employees, and school volunteers.
 3028-a. Students under twenty-one years of age suspected of
 alcohol abuse or narcotic addiction.
 3028-b. Notification of teachers' duty to provide information
 and immunity from liability.
 3028-c. Protection of school employees who report acts of
 violence and weapons possession.
 3028-d. Protection of school employees who report information
 regarding illegal or inappropriate financial
 practices.
 3029. Hours of continuous duty for full time teachers.
 3029-a. Silent meditation in public schools.
 3030. Interstate agreement on qualifications of educational
 personnel.
 3031. Procedure when tenure not to be granted at conclusion of
 probationary period or when services to be
 discontinued.
 3032. Teacher summer business training and employment program;
 and employer specific skill training grant program.
 3033. New York state mentor teacher-internship program.
 3034. Teacher career recruitment clearinghouse.
 3035. Duties of commissioner; submission of fingerprints.
 3036. Coursework for reporting child abuse and maltreatment
 for those with coaching licenses or coaching
 certificates.
 3037. Grants for hiring teachers.
 3038. (Enacted without section heading).
 § 3001. Qualifications of teachers. No person shall be employed or
authorized to teach in the public schools of the state who is:
 1. Under the age of eighteen years.
 2. Not in possession of a teacher's certificate issued under the
authority of this chapter or a diploma issued on the completion of a
course in state college for teachers or state teachers college of this
state.
 The provisions of this subdivision shall not prohibit a certified
teacher from permitting a practice or cadet teacher enrolled in an
approved teacher education program from teaching a class without the
presence of the certified teacher in the classroom provided the
classroom certified teacher is available at all times and retains
supervision of the practice or cadet teacher. The number of certified
teachers shall not be diminished by reason of the presence of cadet
teachers.
 3. Not a citizen. The provisions of this subdivision shall not apply,
however, to a noncitizen teacher now or hereafter employed, provided
such teacher shall make due application to become a citizen and
thereafter within the time prescribed by law shall become a citizen. The
provisions of this subdivision shall not apply, after July first,
nineteen hundred sixty-seven, to a noncitizen teacher employed pursuant
to regulations adopted by the commissioner of education permitting such
employment. The citizenship requirements of this subdivision shall not
apply to a noncitizen teacher now or hereafter employed whose
immigration status is that of a lawful permanent resident of the United
States and who would otherwise be eligible to serve as a teacher, or to
apply for or receive permanent certification as a teacher, but for the
foregoing requirements of this subdivision.
 § 3001-a. Temporary teaching permit, person not a citizen. A person,
not a citizen, who files with the department satisfactory proof that he
has filed with the attorney general of the United States a first
preference petition pursuant to section two hundred three (a) (1) of the
immigration and nationality act and that said petition has been approved
by such attorney general upon certification by the department of
justice, immigration and naturalization service, that he is unable to
adjust his status to that of a lawful permanent resident of the United
States solely because of an over-subscribed quota to which he is
chargeable may receive from the commissioner of education,
notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision three of section three
thousand one of this chapter, a temporary permit validating his
employment in a teaching capacity in the public schools of the state.
Such temporary permit shall be valid for one year from the date of issue
and may, upon proper application to the commissioner, be once renewed
for a further period of one year. Such application shall be in the form
required by the commissioner. Such applicant shall not be employed
until he shall have taken and subscribed the following oath or
affirmation:
 "I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support the constitution
of the United States of America and the constitution of the State of New
York, and that I will faithfully discharge, according to the best of my
ability, the duties of the position of.......................(title of
position and name or designation of school, college, university or
institution to be here inserted), to which I am now assigned." The
affidavit and oath required by this section shall be administered by the
superintendent of schools having jurisdiction over the school district
in which such person is to be employed or his duly authorized
representative and shall be filed with the commissioner of education.
Copies thereof shall be filed with the superintendent of schools.
 § 3001-b. First aid instruction mandatory for coaches of extra-class
public school athletic activities. 1. On and after the effective date of
this section, in addition to any provision of law or rule or regulation
of the department related to the requirements necessary for teachers
within the public school systems, whether certified in physical
education or not, to coach any extra-class athletic activity, it shall
be required of such teachers, except as provided in subdivision two or
three of this section, to hold a valid certificate of completion of a
course of study in first aid knowledge and skills offered by a
nationally recognized organization, as defined in paragraph (d) of
subdivision one of section three thousand-b of the public health law and
approved by the commissioner, or to meet equivalent requirements as
certified by the commissioner. Any such course of study or equivalent
requirements must include instruction in recognizing signs and symptoms
of cardiac arrest and sudden cardiac arrest and the administration of
adult cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Prior to the start of each sports
season, coaches must provide valid evidence to their chief school
officer that their first aid and adult cardiopulmonary resuscitation
knowledge and skills are current pursuant to the requirements
established by a nationally recognized organization, as defined in
paragraph (d) of subdivision one of section three thousand-b of the
public health law and approved by the commissioner, or that they meet
equivalent requirements as certified by the commissioner.
 2. Except as provided in subdivision three of this section, persons
who have been employed as coaches of extra-class athletic activities in
a public school system on the effective date of this section who do not
hold a valid certificate of completion of a course of study in first aid
knowledge and skills pursuant to subdivision one of this section may
continue to coach such sports, provided, however, that such coaches do
receive such certification required in subdivision one of this section
as soon as practicable after the effective date of this section but not
later than twelve months thereafter, provided, however, that the
commissioner shall have the authority to establish by rule or regulation
an additional time schedule for compliance with this section.
 3. A teacher or person who is unable to hold a valid certificate of
completion of a course of study in first aid knowledge and skills
pursuant to subdivision one of this section due to a physical disability
may coach any extra-class athletic activity if there is another teacher
or person employed by the public school system who holds a valid
certificate of completion pursuant to subdivision one of this section
and is present with such teacher or person who is unable to hold such
certificate of completion at all times during the extra-class athletic
activities including but not limited to practices, scrimmages and during
competition.
 § 3001-c. First aid instruction mandatory for coaches of high school
extra-class nonpublic school athletic activities. 1. On and after the
effective date of this section, it shall be required of coaches of high
school extra-class athletic activities in a nonpublic school system,
except as provided in subdivision two or three of this section, to hold
a valid certificate of completion of a course of study in first aid
knowledge and skills offered by a nationally recognized organization, as
defined in paragraph (d) of subdivision one of section three thousand-b
of the public health law and approved by the commissioner, or to meet
equivalent requirements as certified by the commissioner. Any such
course of study or equivalent requirements must include instruction in
recognizing signs and symptoms of cardiac arrest and sudden cardiac
arrest and the administration of adult cardiopulmonary resuscitation.
Prior to the start of each sports season, coaches must provide valid
evidence to their chief school officer that their first aid and adult
cardiopulmonary resuscitation knowledge and skills are current pursuant
to the requirements established by a nationally recognized organization,
as defined in paragraph (d) of subdivision one of section three
thousand-b of the public health law and approved by the commissioner, or
that they meet equivalent requirements as certified by the commissioner.
 2. Except as provided in subdivision three of this section, persons
who have been employed as coaches of high school extra-class athletic
activities in a nonpublic school system on the effective date of this
section who do not hold a valid certificate of completion of a course of
study in first aid knowledge and skills pursuant to subdivision one of
this section may continue to coach such sports, provided, however, that
such coaches do receive such certification required in subdivision one
of this section as soon as practicable after the effective date of this
section but not later than twelve months thereafter, provided, however,
that the commissioner shall have the authority to establish by rule or
regulation an additional time schedule for compliance with this section.
 3. A teacher or person who is unable to hold a valid certificate of
completion of a course of study in first aid knowledge and skills
pursuant to subdivision one of this section due to a physical disability
may coach any high school extra-class athletic activities if there is
another teacher or person employed by the nonpublic school system who
holds a valid certificate of completion pursuant to subdivision one of
this section and is present with such teacher or person who is unable to
hold such certificate of completion at all times during the high school
extra-class athletic activities including but not limited to practices,
scrimmages and during competition.
 § 3001-d. Criminal history record checks and conditional appointments;
nonpublic and private schools. 1. a. "Employee" shall mean any
prospective employee of a nonpublic or private elementary or secondary
school which requires the fingerprinting of prospective employees
pursuant to this section, or employee of a contracted service provider
or worker placed within such school under a public assistance employment
program, pursuant to title nine-B of article five of the social services
law, and consistent with the provisions of such title for the provision
of services to such school, its students or employees, directly or
through contract, whereby such services performed by such person involve
direct student contact. Any nonpublic or private elementary or secondary
school which elects to submit for review criminal history information
concerning prospective employees must do so with respect to each such
prospective employee, as defined in this paragraph, in accordance with
this section.
 b. "Volunteer" shall mean any person, other than an employee, who
provides services to a nonpublic or private elementary or secondary
school which elects to require the fingerprinting of prospective
employees pursuant to this section, which involve direct student
contact.
 2. Any nonpublic or private elementary or secondary school may
require, for the purposes of a criminal history record check, the
fingerprinting of all prospective employees pursuant to section three
thousand thirty-five of this article, who do not hold valid clearance
pursuant to such section or pursuant to section three thousand four-b of
this article or section five hundred nine-cc or twelve hundred
twenty-nine-d of the vehicle and traffic law. Prior to initiating the
fingerprinting process, the prospective employer shall furnish the
applicant with the form described in paragraph (c) of subdivision thirty
of section three hundred five of this chapter and shall obtain the
applicant's consent to the criminal history record search. Every set of
fingerprints taken pursuant to this section shall be promptly submitted
to the commissioner for the purposes of clearance for employment.
 3. (a) Any nonpublic or private elementary or secondary school may
conditionally appoint a prospective employee. A request for conditional
clearance may be forwarded to the commissioner along with the
prospective employee's fingerprints. Such appointment may be delayed
until notification by the commissioner that the prospective employee has
been conditionally cleared for employment and shall terminate when the
prospective employer is notified of a determination by the commissioner
to grant or deny clearance, provided that if clearance is granted, the
appointment shall continue and the conditional status shall be removed.
Prior to commencement of such conditional appointment, the prospective
employer shall obtain a signed statement for conditional appointment
from the prospective employee, indicating whether, to the best of his or
her knowledge, he or she has a pending criminal charge or criminal
conviction in any jurisdiction outside the state.
 (b) Any nonpublic or private elementary or secondary school may make
an emergency conditional appointment when an unforeseen emergency
vacancy has occurred. When such appointment is made, the process for
conditional appointment pursuant to paragraph (a) of this subdivision
may also be initiated. Emergency conditional appointment may commence
prior to notification from the commissioner on conditional clearance and
shall terminate when the prospective employer is notified by the
commissioner regarding conditional clearance, provided that if
conditional clearance is granted, the appointment may continue as a
conditional appointment. Prior to the commencement of such appointment,
the prospective employer must obtain a signed statement for emergency
conditional appointment from the prospective employee, indicating
whether, to the best of his or her knowledge, he or she has a pending
criminal charge or criminal conviction in any jurisdiction. An
"unforeseen emergency vacancy" shall be defined as: (i) a vacancy that
occurred less than ten business days before the start of any school
session, including summer school, or during any school session,
including summer school, without sufficient notice to allow for
clearance or conditional clearance; (ii) when no other qualified person
is available to fill the vacancy temporarily; and (iii) when emergency
conditional appointment is necessary to maintain services which the
school is legally required to provide or services necessary to protect
the health, education or safety of students or staff.
 (c) Each nonpublic or private elementary or secondary school, which
elects to fingerprint prospective employees pursuant to subdivision two
of this section, shall develop a policy for the safety of the children
who have contact with an employee holding conditional appointment or
emergency conditional appointment.
 4. Fees. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary,
the commissioner is authorized to charge additional fees to applicants
for certificates pursuant to this section in an amount equal to the fees
established pursuant to law by the division of criminal justice services
and the federal bureau of investigation for the searches authorized by
this section.
 § 3002. Oath to support federal and state constitutions. It shall be
unlawful for any citizen of the United States to serve as teacher,
instructor or professor in any school or institution in the public
school system of the state or in any school, college, university or
other educational institution in this state, whose real property, in
whole or in part, is exempt from taxation under section four of the tax
law unless and until he or she shall have taken and subscribed the
following oath or affirmation: "I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I
will support the constitution of the United States of America and the
constitution of the State of New York, and that I will faithfully
discharge, according to the best of my ability, the duties of the
position of ........................(title of position and name or
designation of school, college, university or institution to be here
inserted), to which I am now assigned."
 The oath required by this section shall be administered by the
president or other head of such school, college, university or
institution, or by the officer or person, or in the case of a board or
body by a member of the board or body, having authority to employ such
person as a teacher, instructor or professor in such school, college,
university or institution, and each is hereby authorized to administer
it. The officer, person or member administering such oath shall cause a
record or notation of the fact to be made in the books or records of the
school, college, university or institution. In lieu of the oath
administered by an officer, person or member, an employee may comply
with the requirements of this section by subscribing and filing the
following statement: "I do hereby pledge and declare that I will support
the constitution of the United States and the constitution of the State
of New York, and that I will faithfully discharge the duties of the
position of ..........................according to the best of my
ability." Such oath or statement shall be filed with the clerk of a
school district or with such officer or employee of any such college,
university or other educational institution that shall be designated for
such purpose. Such oaths or statements shall be available for public
inspection and for transmittal to the commissioner of education upon his
request. It shall be unlawful for an officer, person or board having
control of the employment, dismissal or suspension of teachers,
instructors or professors in such a school, college, university or
institution, to permit a person to serve in any such capacity therein in
violation of the provisions of this section. This section shall not be
construed to require a person to take such oath or to execute such
statement more than once during the time he or she is employed in the
same school, college, university or institution, though there be a
change in the title or duties of the position.
 The provisions of section sixty-two of the civil service law shall not
apply to a person who is required to take the oath or execute the
statement prescribed by this section.
 An enrolled member of an Indian nation or an Indian individual having
an affiliation with an Indian nation recognized by the United States or
the state of New York may elect to comply with the requirements of this
section by instead subscribing and filing the following statement:
 "I do solemnly affirm that I will faithfully discharge the duties of
the position of according to the best of my
ability, and perform my duties in a manner consistent with the
constitution of the United States and the constitution of the state of
New York."
 § 3003. Qualifications of superintendents. 1. No person except one in
possession of a valid superintendent's certificate prior to July first,
nineteen hundred seventy-one shall hereafter be eligible to the position
of superintendent of schools, deputy superintendent of schools,
associate superintendent of schools, assistant superintendent of schools
or other superintendent of schools or member of a board of examiners in
a city school district or as a superintendent of schools in a union free
or central school district having a population of more than forty-five
hundred, or eligible to appointment to the office of district
superintendent of schools in this state, who is not eligible for a
superintendent's certificate issued by the commissioner in accordance
with the following requirements:
 a. He shall be a graduate of a college or university approved by the
commissioner and in addition shall have completed sixty semester hours
in graduate courses approved by the commissioner; and
 b. At the time of his appointment each shall have completed three
years of teaching experience satisfactory to the commissioner in public
or non-public schools.
 2. The commissioner of education shall issue a superintendent's
permanent certificate to any person who on March twenty-fifth, nineteen
hundred thirty-seven, held or was appointed to, a position of
superintendent of schools, deputy superintendent of schools, associate
superintendent of schools, assistant superintendent of schools or other
superintendent of schools or member of a board of examiners in a city or
as a superintendent of schools in a village having a population of more
than forty-five hundred, or district superintendent of schools.
 3. The commissioner, at the request of a board of education or board
of cooperative educational services, may provide for the issuance of a
certificate as superintendent of schools to exceptionally qualified
persons who do not meet all of the graduate course or teaching
requirements of subdivision one of this section, but whose exceptional
training and experience are the substantial equivalent of such
requirements and qualify such persons for the duties of a superintendent
of schools.
 4. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the commissioner shall
require that any person applying, on or after January first, nineteen
hundred ninety-one, for a superintendent's certificate shall, in
addition to all the other requirements, have completed two hours of
coursework or training regarding the identification and reporting of
child abuse and maltreatment. The coursework or training shall be
obtained from an institution or provider which has been approved by the
department to provide such coursework or training. The coursework or
training shall include information regarding the physical and behavioral
indicators of child abuse and maltreatment and the statutory reporting
requirements set out in sections four hundred thirteen through four
hundred twenty of the social services law, including but not limited to,
when and how a report must be made, what other actions the reporter is
mandated or authorized to take, the legal protections afforded
reporters, and the consequences for failing to report. Each applicant
shall provide the department with documentation showing that he or she
has completed the required training.
 5. The commissioner may provide for the issuance of a certificate as
deputy, associate or assistant superintendent for business to any
qualified person who meets all of the requirements of subdivision one of
this section, except those contained in paragraph b of subdivision one
of this section.
 § 3004. Regulations governing certification of teachers. 1. The
commissioner shall prescribe, subject to approval by the regents,
regulations governing the examination and certification of teachers
employed in all public schools of the state, except that no such
regulation affecting the examination, certification, license,
probationary periods, appointment, and tenure of position of persons
employed in the teaching, and supervising service in a city having a
population of four hundred thousand or more shall be prescribed which
may cause the discontinuance of the service of such persons who have
satisfactorily completed their probationary periods, or the removal of
such persons from their positions in a manner other than that provided
by section twenty-five hundred seventy-three of this chapter, but no
such regulations established by the commissioner or by any school
district, or pursuant to the provisions of section twenty-five hundred
fifty-four, twenty-five hundred sixty-six, twenty-five hundred
sixty-nine, twenty-five hundred seventy-three or three thousand eight of
this chapter or otherwise, shall hereafter prohibit, prevent or
disqualify any person, who is otherwise qualified, from competing,
participating and registering for such examination or from obtaining a
teacher's certificate or from qualifying for a position as a teacher
solely by reason of a disability provided such disability does not
interfere with such person's ability to perform teaching duties, nor
shall any person who is otherwise qualified be denied enrollment in any
teacher training, which provides for certification as a teacher in a
school or facility which conducts classes for children with disabilities
solely by reason of a disability.
 1-a. The commissioner shall waive fees paid by applicants for the
renewal of a temporary teaching certificate or license, as defined by
the commissioner, if such certificate or license lapsed while such
applicant was deployed by the United States armed forces and any of its
reserve components in a combat theater or combat zone of operations at
any time on or after the second day of August, nineteen hundred ninety.
 2. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the commissioner shall
prescribe regulations requiring that all persons applying, on or after
January first, nineteen hundred ninety-one, for a certificate or license
to be a teacher shall, in addition to all the other certification or
licensure requirements, have completed two hours of coursework or
training regarding the identification and reporting of child abuse and
maltreatment. The coursework or training shall be obtained from an
institution or provider which has been approved by the department to
provide such coursework or training. The coursework or training shall
include information regarding the physical and behavioral indicators of
child abuse and maltreatment and the statutory reporting requirements
set out in sections four hundred thirteen through four hundred twenty of
the social services law, including but not limited to, when and how a
report must be made, what other actions the reporter is mandated or
authorized to take, the legal protections afforded reporters, and the
consequences for failing to report. Each applicant shall provide the
department with documentation showing that he or she has completed the
required training.
 3. The commissioner shall prescribe regulations requiring that all
persons applying on or after February second, two thousand one for a
teaching certificate or license, including but not limited to a
certificate or license valid for service as a classroom teacher,
teaching assistant, pupil personnel service professional, school
administrator or supervisor or superintendent of schools, shall, in
addition to all the other certification or licensing requirements, have
completed two hours of course work or training in school violence
prevention and intervention. The course work or training shall be
obtained from an institution or provider which has been approved by the
department to provide such course work or training. Such regulations
shall also require that school districts and boards of cooperative
educational services include training for teachers and other certified
or licensed employees in school violence prevention and intervention in
their required professional development plans.
 4. a. The commissioner shall prescribe regulations requiring that all
persons applying on or after September second, two thousand nine for a
teaching certificate or license as a special education teacher for the
purposes pursuant to article eighty-nine of this chapter shall, in
addition to all the other certification or licensing requirements, have
completed enhanced course work or training in area of children with
autism. In addition, such regulations shall require that enhanced
training in the needs of autistic children be provided to each certified
school administrator or supervisor assigned on or after September
second, two thousand nine to serve as a special education administrator.
Such training shall be provided prior to, or as soon as practicable
following, assignment as a special education administrator. Individuals
serving as special education administrators as of September second, two
thousand nine shall complete such training by such date. The enhanced
course work or training shall be obtained from an institution or
provider which has been approved by the department to provide such
course work or training in the needs of autistic children, provided that
enhanced training for certified school administrators or supervisors
that meets standards prescribed by the commissioner may be included in
the professional development provided by the school district or board of
cooperative educational services to such administrators or supervisors.
 b. The commissioner shall assure that teacher preparation
institutions, in the two thousand eight--two thousand nine academic
year, include instruction in the needs of autistic children in all
programs leading to certification as a special education teacher.
 5. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the commissioner is
authorized and empowered to certify or require training of teachers,
administrators and instructors in the area of autistic needs. The
commissioner shall have the power to prescribe the necessary regulations
and establish such programs and training related to the needs of
autistic children. Such programs and training shall be obtained from an
institution or provider which has been approved by the department to
provide such programs and training, except that a school district or
board of cooperative educational services may provide such training as
part of its professional development program.
 6. The regents and the commissioner shall review the alternative
teacher preparation programs available to candidates for teaching
certificates under the regulations of the commissioner in the two
thousand seven--two thousand eight school year and shall consider means
of expanding the availability of such preparation in the future, while
maintaining teacher quality. The regents and the commissioner shall
develop programs to assist in the expansion of alternative teacher
preparation programs.
 § 3004-a. National board for professional teaching standards
certification grant program. 1. Notwithstanding any inconsistent
provision of law, the commissioner shall establish the Albert Shanker
national board for professional teaching standards certification grant
program, to be used by the department to defray any costs incurred by an
eligible teacher, as that term is described in subdivision two of this
section and his or her sponsoring school district, where such eligible
teacher seeks national board certification from the national board for
professional teacher standards.
 2. As used in this section, "eligible teacher" shall mean a New York
state tenured public school teacher who:
 (a) is currently teaching in New York state;
 (b) has graduated from an accredited college or university; and
 (c) holds a valid New York state teaching certificate.
 3. Under the provisions of this section and subject to the filing
requirement described in subdivision four of this section, a grant in an
amount of up to two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500) shall be made
available from the Albert Shanker national board for professional
teaching standards certification grant program to each eligible teacher
to defray the expenses of certification by the national board for
professional teaching standards. Such sum may include the direct
reimbursement by the department to the eligible teacher's sponsoring
school district from the total grant award to cover the cost of hiring a
substitute teacher for up to three days or the duration of such eligible
teacher's approved leave, whichever is less.
 4. The commissioner shall be responsible for promulgating any
regulations necessary to effectuate the provisions of this section,
including:
 (a) establishing within the department an application form and filing
deadline requirements to be utilized by eligible teachers applying for
the Albert Shanker national board for professional teaching standards
grant program;
 (b) establishing a mechanism for processing and approving applications
within the department;
 (c) establishing a mechanism to allocate grant awards to approved
eligible teachers; and
 (d) establishing a mechanism to reimburse sponsoring school districts
for up to three days of approved leave as described in subdivision three
of this section.
 5. An eligible teacher for whom the state pays a participation fee
shall be liable for repayment of the grant to the department if such
eligible teacher:
 (a) does not complete the process; or
 (b) completes the process, but does not teach in a New York state
public school for at least one full year after achieving national board
for professional teaching standards certification.
 6. Repayment of the grant is not required:
 (a) if the certification process is not completed or if the eligible
teacher fails to teach for one full year after completion due to his or
her death or disability or some other extenuating circumstances as may
be recognized by the board of regents; or
 (b) if the eligible teacher completes the process but does not achieve
certification.
 § 3004-b. Special procedures for certification. 1. Criminal history
records search. Upon receipt of an application for certification as a
superintendent of schools, teacher, administrator or supervisor,
teaching assistant or school personnel required to hold a teaching or
administrative license or certificate, the commissioner shall, subject
to the rules and regulations of the division of criminal justice
services, initiate a criminal history records search of the person
making application, except that nothing in this section shall be
construed to require a criminal history record check of an individual
who holds a valid provisional certificate on the effective date of this
section and applies for permanent certification in the same certificate
title, or of an individual who applies for a temporary license to serve
in the city school district of the city of New York and has been cleared
for licensure and/or employment by such city school district pursuant to
subdivision twenty of section twenty-five hundred ninety-h of this
chapter. Prior to initiating the fingerprinting process, the
commissioner shall furnish the applicant with the form described in
paragraph (c) of subdivision thirty of section three hundred five of
this chapter and shall obtain the applicant's consent to the criminal
history records search. The commissioner shall obtain from each
applicant two sets of fingerprints and the division of criminal justice
services processing fee imposed pursuant to subdivision eight-a of
section eight hundred thirty-seven of the executive law and any fee
imposed by the federal bureau of investigation. The commissioner shall
promptly transmit such fingerprints and fees to the division of criminal
justice services for its full search and retain processing. The division
of criminal justice services is authorized to submit the fingerprints
and the appropriate fee to the federal bureau of investigation for a
national criminal history record check. The division of criminal justice
services and the federal bureau of investigation shall forward such
criminal history record to the commissioner in a timely manner. For the
purposes of this section the term "criminal history record" shall mean a
record of all convictions of crimes and any pending criminal charges
maintained on an individual by the division of criminal justice services
and the federal bureau of investigation. In addition, upon request from
an applicant who has applied for employment with the city school
district of the city of New York, the commissioner shall have the
authority to forward a copy of such criminal history record to the city
school district of the city of New York by the most expeditious means
available. Furthermore, upon notification that such applicant is
employed by the city school district of the city of New York, the
division of criminal justice services shall have the authority to
provide subsequent criminal history notifications directly to the city
school district of the city of New York. Upon request from an applicant
who has already been cleared for licensure and/or employment by the city
school district of the city of New York, such school district shall have
the authority to forward a copy of the applicant's criminal history
record to the commissioner, by the most expeditious means available, for
the purposes of this section. Furthermore, upon notification that such
applicant has been certified, the division of criminal justice services
shall have the authority to provide subsequent criminal history
notifications directly to the commissioner. All such criminal history
records processed and sent pursuant to this subdivision shall be
confidential pursuant to the applicable federal and state laws, rules
and regulations, and shall not be published or in any way disclosed to
persons other than the commissioner, unless otherwise authorized by law.
No cause of action against the department or the division of criminal
justice services for damages related to the dissemination of criminal
history records pursuant to this subdivision shall exist when the
department or division of criminal justice services has reasonably and
in good faith relied upon the accuracy and completeness of criminal
history information furnished to it by qualified agencies. The provision
of such criminal history record by the division of criminal justice
services shall be subject to the provisions of subdivision sixteen of
section two hundred ninety-six of the executive law. The commissioner
shall consider such criminal history record pursuant to article
twenty-three-A of the correction law.
 2. Fees. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary,
the commissioner is authorized to charge additional fees to applicants
for teaching or administrative licenses or certificates in an amount
equal to the fees established pursuant to law by the division of
criminal justice services and the federal bureau of investigation for
the searches mandated by this section.
 § 3004-c. Denial of application for certification. When the
commissioner determines that a certification should be denied, the
applicant shall be afforded notice and the right to be heard and offer
proof in opposition to such determination in accordance with the
regulations of the commissioner.
 § 3005. Leave of absence to teachers for teaching in foreign
countries, other states and territories and other school districts. The
trustee, trustees or board of education of any school district may
permit any teacher having had at least five years service in the school
or schools of said district to apply for and receive a leave of absence
for a period not to exceed two years for teaching in the schools of a
foreign country, other states of the United States or any of its
territories or in any other school district within this state provided
such foreign country, other state or territory or other school district
shall have agreed to furnish a teacher of corresponding rank or school
level to fulfill the duties of the said teacher on leave of absence.
During the period of said leave of absence the said teacher shall
receive from the school district the same compensation that he would
have received had he been present and teaching in a school of the
district. Such leave of absence shall not in any way affect the
retirement rights of said teacher as a member of a retirement system and
the period of the aforesaid leave of absence shall be credited to the
total years of service of said member in the same manner and for all
purposes as if he had not been granted said leave of absence and had
been present within the district engaged in actual teaching service.
Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this chapter, when the
qualifications of the teacher from the foreign country, other state or
territory or other school district have been approved by the
commissioner of education, he shall be legally entitled to render
instructional service in any public school in this state and a permit
for a period not to exceed two years for such service shall be issued by
the commissioner of education without the payment of fee. Any school
district employing a teacher under this section may supplement the
salary received from the foreign country, other state or territory or
other school district by said teacher.
 § 3005-a. Leave of absence for teaching purposes. In a city of one
million or more, a board of education may permit any teacher to apply
for and receive a leave of absence for a period not to exceed two years
for teaching in a college or university, certificated and accredited by
the commissioner of education, provided such college or university shall
have agreed to furnish an educator of professorial rank to fulfill the
duties of the said teacher on leave of absence or any other duties
assigned by the superintendent of schools. During the period of said
leave of absence for teaching in a college or university, the said
teacher shall receive from the school district in said city the same
compensation that he would have received had he been present and
teaching in a school of the district and the college educator if he is a
member of a publicly operated college or system shall likewise receive
the same compensation as he would have received had he remained in the
college or university. Such leave of absence shall not in any way affect
the retirement rights of the said teacher or college educator as a
member of a retirement system and the period of the aforesaid leave of
absence shall be credited to the total years of service of the said
member in the same manner and for all purposes as if he had continued in
his position. Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this chapter, nor
any other local law or provision, the chancellor of the city board shall
have authority to issue to such college or university educator a special
certificate of competency which shall be valid for a period not to
exceed two years and not renewable and under which such college or
university educator shall be permitted to fulfill the duties and
assignments as herein provided.
 § 3005-b. Leave of absence for personal illness. The school
authorities of each school district outside of a city having a
population in excess of one million shall allow each teacher employed by
the district sick leave without loss of salary for at least ten working
days in any year on account of personal sickness or physical disability;
and provided, further, that if any employee does not use the full amount
of sick leave allowed in any school year, the amount not used shall be
accumulated from year to year and used, if needed, up to a total of not
less than one hundred fifty working days. Any accumulation of unused
sick leave heretofore granted by such school authorities shall be
counted toward the accumulated leave herein provided. Nothing contained
in this section shall be construed to authorize a reduction in the
amount of accumulated leave granted to a teacher prior to July first,
nineteen hundred sixty-five.
 § 3006. Commissioner of education to issue certificates. Types of
certificates. The commissioner of education may issue:
 1. a. A life state certificate upon examinations only which shall
entitle its holder to teach for life in the public schools of the state
without further examination.
 b. Such other certificates as regents general rules shall prescribe.
 c. A temporary license limited to a school district, supervisory
district or city for a period not to exceed one year.
 d. A temporary certificate to a school district upon the request of
the school authorities of the school district, and under such rules as
the regents shall establish, which shall authorize such school
authorities temporarily to employ persons having unusual qualifications
in specific subjects, as visiting lecturers, provided they have been
licensed pursuant to paragraph e of this subdivision, so as to
supplement the regular programs of teaching of such specific subjects.
 e. A temporary license to a person having unusual qualifications in
specific subjects, authorizing him to teach as a visiting lecturer in
accordance with the provisions of paragraph d of this subdivision.
 2. Fees. The commissioner shall charge the following fees for
certificates issued pursuant to this section.
 a. Effective September first, nineteen hundred ninety-two and
thereafter, the fees charged for each application for the following
types of certificates shall be:
 (i) For a certificate issued under this section based upon completion
of a teacher education program registered by the department, fifty
dollars;
 (ii) For a certificate issued under this section based upon education
or experience completed in other than a teacher education program
registered by the department, one hundred dollars;
 (iii) For a temporary license or a temporary coaching license, fifty
dollars;
 (iv) For a continuing certificate for a teaching assistant,
thirty-five dollars;
 (v) For a duplicate certificate, twenty-five dollars.
 b. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph a of this subdivision,
in a case where an individual applies for a certificate of
qualification, provisional and/or permanent certificate within twelve
months of having been issued a temporary license in the same
certification area, the fee for such additional certificate or
certificates shall be fifty dollars.
 3. Registration. a. Commencing with the two thousand sixteen--two
thousand seventeen school year, any holder of a teaching certificate in
the classroom teaching service, teaching assistant certificate, or
educational leadership certificate that is valid for life as prescribed
by the commissioner in regulations shall be required to register with
the department every five years in accordance with regulations of the
commissioner. Such regulations shall prescribe the date or dates by
which applications for initial registration must be submitted and may
provide for staggered initial registration and/or rolling
re-registration so that re-registrations are distributed as equally as
possible throughout the year and across multiple years.
 b. The department shall post an application for registration on its
website. An application shall be submitted for a registration
certificate. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the
department shall renew the registration of each certificate holder upon
receipt of a proper application on a form prescribed by the department.
Any certificate holder who fails to register by the beginning of the
appropriate registration period may be subject to late filing penalties
as prescribed by the commissioner. No certificate holder resuming
practice after a lapse of registration shall be permitted to practice
without verification of re-registration.
 c. Any certificate holder who is not engaging in the practice of his
or her profession in this state and does not desire to register shall so
advise the department. Such certificate holder shall not be subject to
penalties as prescribed by the commissioner for failure to register at
the beginning of the registration period.
 d. Certificate holders shall notify the department of any change of
name or mailing address within thirty days of such change. Willful
failure to register or provide such notice within one hundred eighty
days of such change may constitute grounds for moral character review
under subdivision seven of section three hundred five of this chapter.
 § 3006-a. Registration and continuing teacher and leader education
requirements for holders of professional certificates in the classroom
teaching service, holders of level III teaching assistant certificates,
holders of professional certificates in the educational leadership
service. 1. a. Commencing with the two thousand sixteen--two thousand
seventeen school year, each holder of a professional certificate in the
classroom teaching service, holder of a level III teaching assistant
certificate and holder of a professional certificate in the educational
leadership service shall be required to register every five years with
the department to practice in the state and shall comply with the
provisions of the continuing teacher and leader education requirements
set forth in this section.
 b. Any of the certified individuals described in paragraph a of this
subdivision who do not satisfy the continuing teacher and leader
education requirements shall not practice until they have met such
requirements and have been issued a registration or conditional
registration certificate.
 c. In accordance with the intent of this section, adjustments to the
continuing teacher and leader education requirement may be granted by
the department for reasons of health certified by a health care
provider, for extended active duty with armed forces of the United
States, or for other good cause acceptable to the department which may
prevent compliance.
 d. Any certificate holder who is not practicing as a teacher, teaching
assistant or educational leader in a school district, board of
cooperative educational services, or nonpublic school that is providing
instruction pursuant to subdivision two of section thirty-two hundred
four of this title in this state shall be exempt from the continuing
teacher and leader education requirement upon the filing of a written
statement with the department declaring such status. Any holder of a
professional certificate in the classroom teaching service, holder of a
level III teaching assistant certificate and holder of a professional
certificate in the educational leadership service who resumes practice
during the five-year registration period shall notify the department
prior to resuming practice and shall meet such continuing teacher and
leader education requirements as prescribed in regulations of the
commissioner.
 2. a. During each five-year registration period beginning on or after
July first, two thousand sixteen, an applicant for registration shall
successfully complete a minimum of one hundred hours of continuing
teacher and leader education, as defined by the commissioner. The
department shall issue rigorous standards for courses, programs, and
activities, that shall qualify as continuing teacher and leader
education pursuant to this section. For purposes of this section, a peer
review teacher, or a principal acting as an independent trained
evaluator, conducting a classroom observation as part of the teacher
evaluation system pursuant to section three thousand twelve-d of this
article may credit such time towards his or her continuing teacher and
leader effectiveness requirements.
 b. Nothing in this section shall limit the ability of local school
districts to agree pursuant to collective bargaining to additional hours
of professional development or continuing teacher or leader education
above the minimum requirements set forth in this section.
 c. A certified individual who has not satisfied the continuing teacher
and leader education requirements shall not be issued a five-year
registration certificate by the department and shall not practice unless
and until a registration or conditional registration certificate is
issued as provided in subdivision three of this section. For purposes of
this subdivision, "continuing teacher and leader education requirements"
shall mean activities designed to improve the teacher or leader's
pedagogical and/or leadership skills, targeted at improving student
performance, including but not limited to formal continuing teacher and
leader education activities. Such activities shall promote the
professionalization of teaching and be closely aligned to district goals
for student performance which meet the standards prescribed by
regulations of the commissioner. To fulfill the continuing teacher and
leader education requirement, programs must be taken from sponsors
approved by the department, which shall include but not be limited to
school districts, pursuant to the regulations of the commissioner.
 3. The department, in its discretion, may issue a conditional
registration to a teacher, teaching assistant or educational leader in a
school district, board of cooperative educational services, or nonpublic
school that is providing instruction pursuant to subdivision two of
section thirty-two hundred four of this title in this state who fails to
meet the continuing teacher and leader education requirements
established in subdivision two of this section but who agrees to make up
any deficiencies and take any additional continuing teacher and leader
education which the department may require. The duration of such
conditional registration shall be determined by the department. Any
holder of a professional certificate in the classroom teaching service,
holder of a level III teaching assistant certificate or holder of a
professional certificate in the educational leadership service and any
other certified individual required by the commissioner to register
every five years who is notified of the denial of registration for
failure to submit evidence, satisfactory to the department, of required
continuing teacher and leader education and who practices without such
registration, shall be subject to moral character review under
subdivision seven of section three hundred five of this chapter.
 § 3007. Endorsement of foreign certificates and diplomas. The
commissioner of education may in his discretion endorse:
 1. A diploma issued by a normal school or teachers college of another
state.
 2. A certificate issued by the chief educational officer or state
board of another state.
 Such endorsement confers on the holder of such diploma or certificate
the privileges conferred by law on the holder of the diploma of a state
teachers college or state college for teachers or state certificate
issued in this state. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the
commissioner shall require that any person seeking endorsement of a
foreign certificate or diploma, on or after January first, nineteen
hundred ninety-one, shall have completed two hours of coursework or
training regarding the identification and reporting of child abuse and
maltreatment. The coursework or training shall be obtained from an
institution or provider which has been approved by the department to
provide such course work or training. The coursework or training shall
include information regarding the physical and behavioral indicators of
child abuse and maltreatment and the statutory reporting requirements
set out in sections four hundred thirteen through four hundred twenty of
the social services law, including but not limited to, when and how a
report must be made, what other actions the reporter is mandated or
authorized to take, the legal protections afforded reporters, and the
consequences for failing to report. Each applicant shall provide the
department with documentation showing that he or she has completed the
required training.
 § 3008. Certification of teachers by local authorities. A district
superintendent, a city superintendent of schools or such other authority
of a city school district as may be designated by law may issue such
certificate as may be authorized by law or by the regents general rules.
 § 3009. Unqualified teachers shall not be paid from school moneys.
1. No part of the school moneys apportioned to a district shall be
applied to the payment of the salary of an unqualified teacher, nor
shall his salary, or any part thereof, be collected by a district tax
except as provided in this chapter.
 2. a. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the
school authorities of any school district shall have the power, in their
discretion, to employ persons as teacher aides who shall assist the
regular teacher or teachers of the district in the performance of their
teaching functions by performing those nonteaching duties otherwise
performed by such regular teacher or teachers.
 b. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the
school authorities of any school district shall have the power, in their
discretion, to employ persons as teaching assistants. Such persons, if
so employed, shall be authorized to act only under the general
supervision of a licensed or certified teacher.
 § 3010. Penalty for payment of unqualified teacher. Any trustee or
member of a board of education who applies, or directs, or consents to
the application of, any district money to the payment of an unqualified
teacher's salary, thereby commits a misdemeanor; and any fine imposed
upon him therefor shall be for the benefit of the common schools of the
district.
 § 3011. Contract with teacher. 1. Except as otherwise provided in
sections twenty-five hundred twenty-three, three thousand twelve and
three thousand thirteen, all trustees of school districts or boards of
education who shall employ any teacher to teach shall, at the time of
such employment, make and deliver to such teacher, or cause to be made
and delivered, a contract in writing, signed by them, or by some person
duly authorized to represent them in the premises, in which the details
of the agreement between the parties, and particularly the length of the
term of employment, the amount of compensation and the time when such
compensation shall be due and payable shall be clearly and definitely
set forth.
 1-a. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, in a city with a
population of one million or more, all teachers, as that term is defined
in section 13-501 of the administrative code of the city of New York,
and all board of education employees serving as regular substitutes or
full term per diem substitutes shall be paid the amount of compensation
due them pursuant to collective bargaining agreements or to other
contracts on the precise date such compensation is due. If such payments
are not made on the dates so required, interest shall be recovered
beginning thirty days, following the later of the effective date of this
act or the required payment date through the day that payment is in fact
tendered. In the case of a salary differential, the date compensation is
due shall be defined as thirty days following the date an employee's
application is filed by the employee with the board of education of the
city of New York. Interest shall be computed at the rate set forth in
paragraph one of subdivision (e) of section one thousand ninety-six of
the tax law and shall be added to any compensation amounts referred to
above that have not been paid when owed.
 2. No contract for the employment of a teacher in a district having
three trustees or a board of education shall be made for more than one
year in advance or for a shorter time than ten weeks unless for the
purpose of filling an unexpired term of school; except that a contract
may be made in such a district for not more than five years with any
teacher who has been employed in such district for at least three
consecutive years immediately prior to the execution of the contract.
 3. No contract for the employment of a teacher in a district having a
sole trustee shall be made to extend beyond the date of the expiration
of the term of office of such trustee. A sole trustee of a school
district shall have full power and authority to contract with teachers
for the term for which he has been elected any time after the date of
the annual meeting at which such trustee was elected.
 4. No trustee shall contract with any teacher whose certificate of
qualifications shall not cover a period at least as long as that covered
by the contract of service.
 § 3012. Tenure: certain school districts. 1. (a) i. Teachers and all
other members of the teaching staff of school districts, including
common school districts and/or school districts employing fewer than
eight teachers, other than city school districts, who are appointed
prior to July first, two thousand fifteen, shall be appointed by the
board of education, or the trustees of common school districts, upon the
recommendation of the superintendent of schools, for a probationary
period of three years, except that in the case of a teacher who has
rendered satisfactory service as a regular substitute for a period of
two years or as a seasonally licensed per session teacher of swimming in
day schools who has served in that capacity for a period of two years
and has been appointed to teach the same subject in day schools, on an
annual salary, the probationary period shall be limited to one year;
provided, however, that in the case of a teacher who has been appointed
on tenure in another school district within the state, the school
district where currently employed, or a board of cooperative educational
services, and who was not dismissed from such district or board as a
result of charges brought pursuant to subdivision one of section three
thousand twenty-a of this article, the probationary period shall not
exceed two years. The service of a person appointed to any of such
positions may be discontinued at any time during such probationary
period, on the recommendation of the superintendent of schools, by a
majority vote of the board of education or the trustees of a common
school district.
 ii. Teachers and all other members of the teaching staff of school
districts, including common school districts and/or school districts
employing fewer than eight teachers, other than city school districts,
who are appointed on or after July first, two thousand fifteen, shall be
appointed by the board of education, or the trustees of common school
districts, upon the recommendation of the superintendent of schools, for
a probationary period of four years, except that in the case of a
teacher who has rendered satisfactory service as a regular substitute
for a period of up to two years or such teacher has rendered
satisfactory service as a seasonally licensed per session teacher of
swimming in day schools who has served in that capacity for a period of
up to two years and has been appointed to teach the same subject in day
schools, on an annual salary, the teacher shall be appointed for a
probationary period of a minimum of two years, depending upon the length
of the regular substitute service that shall shorten the length of the
probationary period; provided, however, that in the case of a teacher
who has been appointed on tenure in another school district within the
state, the school district where currently employed, or a board of
cooperative educational services, and who was not dismissed from such
district or board as a result of charges brought pursuant to subdivision
one of section three thousand twenty-a of this article, the teacher
shall be appointed for a probationary period of three years. The service
of a person appointed to any of such positions may be discontinued at
any time during such probationary period, on the recommendation of the
superintendent of schools, by a majority vote of the board of education
or the trustees of a common school district.
 (b) i. Principals, administrators, supervisors and all other members
of the supervising staff of school districts, including common school
districts and/or school districts employing fewer than eight teachers,
other than city school districts, who are appointed prior to July first,
two thousand fifteen, shall be appointed by the board of education, or
the trustees of a common school district, upon the recommendation of the
superintendent of schools for a probationary period of three years. The
service of a person appointed to any of such positions may be
discontinued at any time during the probationary period on the
recommendation of the superintendent of schools, by a majority vote of
the board of education or the trustees of a common school district.
 ii. Principals, administrators, supervisors and all other members of
the supervising staff of school districts, including common school
districts and/or school districts employing fewer than eight teachers,
other than city school districts, who are appointed on or after July
first, two thousand fifteen, shall be appointed by the board of
education, or the trustees of a common school district, upon the
recommendation of the superintendent of schools for a probationary
period of four years; provided, however, that in the case of a
principal, administrator, supervisor, or other member of the supervising
staff who has been appointed on tenure pursuant to this chapter as an
administrator within an authorized administrative tenure area in another
school district within the state, the school district where currently
employed, or a board of cooperative educational services, and who was
not dismissed from such district or board as a result of charges brought
pursuant to subdivision one of section three thousand twenty-a of this
article, the principal, administrator, supervisor or other member of the
supervising staff shall be appointed for a probationary period of three
years. The service of a person appointed to any of such positions may be
discontinued at any time during the probationary period on the
recommendation of the superintendent of schools, by a majority vote of
the board of education or the trustees of a common school district.
 (c) Any person previously appointed to tenure or a probationary period
pursuant to the provisions of former section three thousand thirteen of
this article shall continue to hold such position and be governed by the
provisions of this section notwithstanding any contrary provision of
law.
 2. (a) At the expiration of the probationary term of a person
appointed for such term prior to July first, two thousand fifteen,
subject to the conditions of this section, the superintendent of schools
shall make a written report to the board of education or the trustees of
a common school district recommending for appointment on tenure those
persons who have been found competent, efficient and satisfactory. Such
persons, and all others employed in the teaching service of the schools
of such union free school district, common school district and/or school
district employing fewer than eight teachers, who have served the
probationary period as provided in this section, shall hold their
respective positions during good behavior and efficient and competent
service, and shall not be removed except for any of the following
causes, after a hearing, as provided by section three thousand twenty-a
of this article: (i) insubordination, immoral character or conduct
unbecoming a teacher; (ii) inefficiency, incompetency, physical or
mental disability, or neglect of duty; (iii) failure to maintain
certification as required by this chapter and by the regulations of the
commissioner. Each person who is not to be recommended for appointment
on tenure, shall be so notified by the superintendent of schools in
writing not later than sixty days immediately preceding the expiration
of such person's probationary period.
 (b) At the expiration of the probationary term of a person appointed
for such term on or after July first, two thousand fifteen, subject to
the conditions of this section, the superintendent of schools shall make
a written report to the board of education or the trustees of a common
school district recommending for appointment on tenure those persons who
have been found competent, efficient and satisfactory. Any person who
has acquired tenure shall, upon such person's effective tenure date,
hold their position during good behavior and efficient and competent
service, and shall not be removable except for cause after a hearing as
provided by section three thousand twenty and section three thousand
twenty-a of this article. Failure to maintain certification as required
by this chapter and the regulations of the commissioner shall constitute
cause for removal.
 3. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section no period in
any school year for which there is no required service and/or for which
no compensation is provided shall in any event constitute a break or
suspension of probationary period or continuity of tenure rights of any
of the persons hereinabove described.
 § 3012-a. Elementary tenure area. Notwithstanding any other provision
of law to the contrary, and except in cities having a population of one
million or more, elementary tenure area shall mean kindergarten through
grade six for teachers employed in such grade levels after the effective
date of this section. All teachers holding tenure as of the effective
date of this section in the kindergarten tenure area or grades one
through six tenure area shall be deemed to hold tenure in the elementary
tenure area as defined by this section.
 § 3012-c. Annual professional performance review of classroom teachers
and building principals. 1. Notwithstanding any other provision of law,
rule or regulation to the contrary, the annual professional performance
reviews of all classroom teachers and building principals employed by
school districts or boards of cooperative educational services shall be
conducted in accordance with the provisions of this section. Such
performance reviews which are conducted on or after July first, two
thousand eleven, or on or after the date specified in paragraph c of
subdivision two of this section where applicable, shall include measures
of student achievement and be conducted in accordance with this section.
Such annual professional performance reviews shall be a significant
factor for employment decisions including but not limited to, promotion,
retention, tenure determination, termination, and supplemental
compensation, which decisions are to be made in accordance with locally
developed procedures negotiated pursuant to the requirements of article
fourteen of the civil service law where applicable. Provided, however,
that nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the unfettered
statutory right of a school district or board of cooperative educational
services to terminate a probationary teacher or principal for any
statutorily and constitutionally permissible reasons, including but not
limited to misconduct and until a tenure decision is made, the
performance of the teacher or principal in the classroom. Such
performance reviews shall also be a significant factor in teacher and
principal development, including but not limited to, coaching, induction
support and differentiated professional development, which are to be
locally established in accordance with procedures negotiated pursuant to
the requirements of article fourteen of the civil service law.
 2. a. (1) The annual professional performance reviews conducted
pursuant to this section for classroom teachers and building principals
shall differentiate teacher and principal effectiveness using the
following quality rating categories: highly effective, effective,
developing and ineffective, with explicit minimum and maximum scoring
ranges for each category, for the state assessments and other comparable
measures subcomponent of the evaluation and for the locally selected
measures of student achievement subcomponent of the evaluation, as
prescribed in the regulations of the commissioner. There shall be: (i) a
state assessments and other comparable measures subcomponent which shall
comprise twenty or twenty-five percent of the evaluation; (ii) a locally
selected measures of student achievement subcomponent which shall
comprise twenty or fifteen percent of the evaluation; and (iii) an other
measures of teacher or principal effectiveness subcomponent which shall
comprise the remaining sixty percent of the evaluation, which in sum
shall constitute the composite teacher or principal effectiveness score.
Such annual professional performance reviews shall result in a single
composite teacher or principal effectiveness score, which incorporates
multiple measures of effectiveness related to the criteria included in
the regulations of the commissioner.
 (2) For annual professional performance reviews conducted in
accordance with paragraph b of this subdivision for the two thousand
eleven--two thousand twelve school year and for annual professional
performance reviews conducted in accordance with paragraphs f and g of
this subdivision for the two thousand twelve--two thousand thirteen
school year, the overall composite scoring ranges shall be in accordance
with this subparagraph. A classroom teacher and building principal shall
be deemed to be:
 (A) Highly Effective if they achieve a composite effectiveness score
of 91-100.
 (B) Effective if they achieve a composite effectiveness score of
75-90.
 (C) Developing if they achieve a composite effectiveness score of
65-74.
 (D) Ineffective if they achieve a composite effectiveness score of
0-64.
 (3) For annual professional performance reviews conducted in
accordance with paragraph b of this subdivision for the two thousand
eleven--two thousand twelve school year and for annual professional
performance reviews conducted in accordance with paragraph f of this
subdivision for the two thousand twelve--two thousand thirteen school
year for classroom teachers in subjects and grades for which the board
of regents has not approved a value-added model and for building
principals employed in schools or programs for which there is no
approved principal value-added model, the scoring ranges for the student
growth on state assessments or other comparable measures subcomponent
shall be in accordance with this subparagraph. A classroom teacher and
building principal shall receive:
 (A) a highly effective rating in this subcomponent if the teacher's or
principal's results are well-above the state average for similar
students and they achieve a subcomponent score of 18-20;
 (B) an effective rating in this subcomponent if the teacher's or
principal's results meet the state average for similar students and they
achieve a subcomponent score of 9-17; or
 (C) a developing rating in this subcomponent if the teacher's or
principal's results are below the state average for similar students and
they achieve a subcomponent score of 3-8; or
 (D) an ineffective rating in this subcomponent, if the teacher's or
principal's results are well-below the state average for similar
students and they achieve a subcomponent score of 0-2.
 (4) For annual professional performance reviews conducted in
accordance with paragraph g of this subdivision for the two thousand
twelve--two thousand thirteen school year for classroom teachers in
subjects and grades for which the board of regents has approved a
value-added model and for building principals employed in schools or
programs for which there is an approved principal value-added model, the
scoring ranges for the student growth on state assessments or other
comparable measures subcomponent shall be in accordance with this
subparagraph. A classroom teacher and building principal shall receive:
 (A) a highly effective rating in this subcomponent if the teacher's or
principal's results are well-above the state average for similar
students and they achieve a subcomponent score of 22-25;
 (B) an effective rating in this subcomponent if the teacher's or
principal's results meet the state average for similar students and they
achieve a subcomponent score of 10-21; or
 (C) a developing rating in this subcomponent if the teacher's or
principal's results are below the state average for similar students and
they achieve a subcomponent score of 3-9; or
 (D) an ineffective rating in this subcomponent, if the teacher's or
principal's results are well-below the state average for similar
students and they achieve a subcomponent score of 0-2.
 (5) For annual professional performance reviews conducted in
accordance with paragraph b of this subdivision for the two thousand
eleven--two thousand twelve school year and for annual professional
performance reviews conducted in accordance with paragraph f of this
subdivision for the two thousand twelve--two thousand thirteen school
year for classroom teachers in subjects and grades for which the board
of regents has not approved a value-added model and for building
principals employed in schools or programs for which there is no
approved principal value-added model, the scoring ranges for the locally
selected measures of student achievement subcomponent shall be in
accordance with this subparagraph. A classroom teacher and building
principal shall receive:
 (A) a highly effective rating in this subcomponent if the results are
well-above district-adopted expectations for student growth or
achievement and they achieve a subcomponent score of 18-20; or
 (B) an effective rating in this subcomponent if the results meet
district-adopted expectations for growth or achievement and they achieve
a subcomponent score of 9-17; or
 (C) a developing rating in this subcomponent if the results are below
district-adopted expectations for growth or achievement and they achieve
a subcomponent score of 3-8; or
 (D) an ineffective rating in this subcomponent if the results are
well-below district-adopted expectations for growth or achievement and
they achieve a subcomponent score of 0-2.
 (6) For annual professional performance reviews conducted in
accordance with paragraph b of this subdivision for the two thousand
eleven--two thousand twelve school year and for annual professional
performance reviews conducted in accordance with paragraph g of this
subdivision for the two thousand twelve--two thousand thirteen school
year for classroom teachers in subjects and grades for which the board
of regents has approved a value-added model and for building principals
employed in schools or programs for which there is an approved principal
value-added model, the scoring ranges for the locally selected measures
of student achievement subcomponent shall be in accordance with this
subparagraph. A classroom teacher and building principal shall receive:
 (A) a highly effective rating in this subcomponent if the results are
well-above district-adopted expectations for student growth or
achievement and they achieve a subcomponent score of 14-15; or
 (B) an effective rating in this subcomponent if the results meet
district-adopted expectations for growth or achievement and they achieve
a subcomponent score of 8-13; or
 (C) a developing rating in this subcomponent if the results are below
district-adopted expectations for growth or achievement and they achieve
a subcomponent score of 3-7; or
 (D) an ineffective rating in this subcomponent if the results are
well-below district-adopted expectations for growth or achievement and
they achieve a subcomponent score of 0-2.
 (7) For the two thousand thirteen--two thousand fourteen school year
and thereafter, the commissioner shall review the specific scoring
ranges for each of the rating categories annually before the start of
each school year and shall recommend any changes to the board of regents
for consideration.
 (8) Except for the student growth measures on the state assessments or
other comparable measures of student growth prescribed in paragraphs e,
f and g of this subdivision, the elements comprising the composite
effectiveness score and the process by which points are assigned to
subcomponents shall be locally developed, consistent with the standards
prescribed in the regulations of the commissioner and the requirements
of this section, through negotiations conducted, pursuant to the
requirements of article fourteen of the civil service law.
 b. (1) Annual professional performance reviews conducted by school
districts or boards of cooperative educational services for the two
thousand eleven--two thousand twelve school year of classroom teachers
of common branch subjects or English language arts or mathematics in
grades four to eight and all building principals of schools in which
such teachers are employed shall be conducted pursuant to this
subdivision and shall use two thousand ten--two thousand eleven school
year student data as the baseline for the initial computation of the
composite teacher or principal effectiveness score for such classroom
teachers and principals.
 (2) Subject to paragraph k of this subdivision the entire annual
professional performance review shall be completed and provided to the
teacher or principal as soon as practicable but in no case later than
September first, two thousand twelve. The provisions of subparagraphs
two and three of paragraph c of this subdivision shall apply to such
reviews.
 c. (1) Annual professional performance reviews conducted by school
districts or boards of cooperative educational services for the two
thousand twelve--two thousand thirteen school year and thereafter of all
classroom teachers and all building principals shall be conducted
pursuant to this subdivision and shall use two thousand eleven--two
thousand twelve school year student data as the baseline for the initial
computation of the composite teacher or principal effectiveness score
for such classroom teachers and principals. For purposes of this
section, an administrator in charge of an instructional program of a
board of cooperative educational services shall be deemed to be a
building principal.
 (2) Subject to paragraph k of this subdivision the entire annual
professional performance review shall be completed and provided to the
teacher or principal as soon as practicable but in no case later than
September first of the school year next following the school year for
which the classroom teacher or building principal's performance is being
measured. The teacher's and principal's score and rating on the locally
selected measures subcomponent, if available, and on the other measures
of teacher and principal effectiveness subcomponent for a teacher's or
principal's annual professional performance review shall be computed and
provided to the teacher or principal, in writing, by no later than the
last day of the school year for which the teacher or principal is being
measured. Nothing in this subdivision shall be construed to authorize a
teacher or principal to trigger the appeal process prior to receipt of
his or her composite effectiveness score and rating.
 (3) Each such annual professional performance review shall be based on
the state assessments or other comparable measures subcomponent, the
locally selected measures of student achievement subcomponent and the
other measures of teacher and principal effectiveness subcomponent,
determined in accordance with the applicable provisions of this section
and the regulations of the commissioner, for the school year for which
the teacher's or principal's performance is measured.
 d. Prior to any evaluation being conducted in accordance with this
section, each individual who is responsible for conducting an evaluation
of a teacher or building principal shall receive appropriate training in
accordance with the regulations of the commissioner of education.
 e. (1) For annual professional performance reviews conducted in
accordance with paragraph b of this subdivision for the two thousand
eleven--two thousand twelve school year, forty percent of the composite
score of effectiveness shall be based on student achievement measures as
follows: (i) twenty percent of the evaluation shall be based upon
student growth data on state assessments as prescribed by the
commissioner or a comparable measure of student growth if such growth
data is not available; and (ii) twenty percent shall be based on other
locally selected measures of student achievement that are determined to
be rigorous and comparable across classrooms in accordance with the
regulations of the commissioner and as are developed locally in a manner
consistent with procedures negotiated pursuant to the requirements of
article fourteen of the civil service law.
 (2) Such locally selected measures may include measures of student
achievement or growth on state assessments, regents examinations and/or
department approved equivalent, provided that such measures are
different from those prescribed by the commissioner pursuant to clause
(i) of subparagraph one of this paragraph. The regulations of the
commissioner shall describe the types of measures of student growth or
achievement that may be locally selected. The selection of the local
measure(s) as described in this paragraph to be used by the school
district or board of cooperative educational services shall be
determined through collective bargaining.
 f. (1) For annual professional performance reviews conducted in
accordance with paragraph c of this subdivision for the two thousand
twelve--two thousand thirteen school year and thereafter for classroom
teachers in subjects and grades for which the board of regents has not
approved a value-added model and for building principals employed in
schools or programs for which there is no approved principal value-added
model, forty percent of the composite score of effectiveness shall be
based on student achievement measures as follows: (i) twenty percent of
the evaluation shall be based upon student growth data on state
assessments as prescribed by the commissioner or a comparable measure of
student growth if such growth data is not available; and (ii) twenty
percent shall be based on other locally selected measures of student
achievement that are determined to be rigorous and comparable across
classrooms in accordance with the regulations of the commissioner and as
are developed locally in a manner consistent with procedures negotiated
pursuant to the requirements of article fourteen of the civil service
law.
 (2) One or more of the following types of locally selected measures of
student achievement or growth may be used for the evaluation of
classroom teachers:
 (i) student achievement or growth on state assessments, regents
examinations and/or department approved alternative examinations as
described in the regulations of the commissioner including, but not
limited to, advanced placement examinations, international baccalaureate
examinations, and SAT II, using a measure that is different from the
growth score prescribed by the department for student growth on such
assessments or examinations for purposes of the state assessment or
other comparable measures subcomponent that is either:
 (A) the change in percentage of a teacher's students who achieve a
specific level of performance as determined locally, on such
assessments/examinations compared to those students' level of
performance on such assessments/examinations in the previous school year
such as a three percentage point increase in students earning the
proficient level (three) or better performance level on the seventh
grade math state assessment compared to those same students' performance
levels on the sixth grade math state assessment, or an increase in the
percentage of a teacher's students earning the advanced performance
level (four) on the fourth grade English language arts or math state
assessments compared to those students' performance levels on the third
grade English language arts or math state assessments; or
 (B) a teacher specific growth score computed by the department based
on the percent of the teacher's students earning a department determined
level of growth. The methodology to translate such growth into the
state-established subcomponent scoring ranges shall be determined
locally; or
 (C) a teacher-specific achievement or growth score computed in a
manner determined locally based on a measure of student performance on
the state assessments, regents examinations and/or department approved
alternative examinations other than the measure described in item (A) or
(B) of this subparagraph;
 (ii) student growth or achievement computed in a manner determined
locally based on a student assessment approved by the department
pursuant to a request for qualification process established in the
regulations of the commissioner;
 (iii) student growth or achievement computed in a manner determined
locally based on a district, regional or BOCES-developed assessment that
is rigorous and comparable across classrooms;
 (iv) a school-wide measure of either student growth or achievement
based on either:
 (A) a state-provided student growth score covering all students in the
school that took the state assessment in English language arts or
mathematics in grades four through eight;
 (B) a school-wide measure of student growth or achievement computed in
a manner determined locally based on a district, regional or board of
cooperative educational services developed assessment that is rigorous
and comparable across classrooms or a department approved student
assessment or based on a state assessment; or
 (v) where applicable, for teachers in any grade or subject where there
is no growth or value-added growth model approved by the board of
regents at that grade level or in that subject, a structured
district-wide student growth goal-setting process to be used with any
state assessment or an approved student assessment or a district,
regional or BOCES-developed assessment that is rigorous and comparable
across classrooms.
 (3) One or more of the following types of locally selected measures of
student achievement or growth may be used for the evaluation of
principals, provided that each measure is rigorous and comparable across
classrooms and that any such measure shall be different from that used
for the state assessment or other comparable measures subcomponent:
 (i) student achievement levels on state assessments in English
language arts and/or mathematics in grades four to eight such as
percentage of students in the school whose performance levels on state
assessments are proficient or advanced, as defined in the regulations of
the commissioner;
 (ii) student growth or achievement on state or other assessments in
English language arts and/or mathematics in grades four to eight for
students in each of the performance levels described in the regulations
of the commissioner;
 (iii) student growth or achievement on state assessments in English
language arts and/or mathematics in grades four to eight for students
with disabilities and English language learners in grades four to eight;
 (iv) student performance on any or all of the district-wide locally
selected measures approved for use in teacher evaluations;
 (v) for principals employed in a school with high school grades, four,
five and/or six-year high school graduation and/or dropout rates;
 (vi) percentage of students who earn a regents diploma with advanced
designation and/or honors as defined in the regulations of the
commissioner, for principals employed in a school with high school
grades;
 (vii) percentage of a cohort of students that achieve specified scores
on regents examinations and/or department approved alternative
examinations including, but not limited to, advanced placement
examinations, international baccalaureate examinations and SAT II, for
principals employed in a school with high school grades such as the
percentage of students in the two thousand nine cohort that scored at
least a three on an advanced placement examination since entry into the
ninth grade; and/or
 (viii) students' progress toward graduation in the school using strong
predictive indicators, including but not limited to ninth and/or tenth
grade credit accumulation and/or the percentage of students that pass
ninth and/or tenth grade subjects most commonly associated with
graduation and/or students' progress in passing the number of required
regents examinations for graduation, for principals employed in a school
with high school grades.
 (ix) For school districts or boards of cooperative educational
services that choose to use more than one set of locally selected
measures described in this paragraph for principals in the same or
similar grade configuration or program such as one set of locally
selected measures is used to evaluate principals in some K-5 schools and
another set of locally selected measures is used to evaluate principals
in the other K-5 schools in the district, the superintendent or district
superintendent shall, in their professional performance review plan,
certify that the sets of measures are comparable, in accordance with the
testing standards as defined in regulations of the commissioner.
 (x) For building principals employed in schools or programs for which
there is no approved principal value-added model, the types of locally
selected measures of student achievement or growth specified in
subparagraph three of paragraph g of this subdivision may be used. In
addition, a structured district-wide student growth goal-setting process
to be used with any state assessment or an approved student assessment
or a district, regional of BOCES-developed assessment that is rigorous
and comparable across classrooms may be a locally selected measure.
 (4) The selection of the local measure or measures as described in
subparagraphs two and three of this paragraph to be used by the school
district or board of cooperative educational services shall be
determined through collective bargaining.
 g. (1) For annual professional performance reviews conducted in
accordance with paragraph c of this subdivision for the two thousand
twelve--two thousand thirteen school year and thereafter for classroom
teachers in subjects and grades in which there is a value-added growth
model approved by the board of regents and for building principals
employed in schools or programs for which there is an approved principal
value-added model, forty percent of the composite score of effectiveness
shall be based on student achievement measures as follows: (i)
twenty-five percent of the evaluation shall be based upon student growth
data on state assessments as prescribed by the commissioner or a
comparable measure of student growth if such growth data is not
available; and (ii) fifteen percent shall be based on other locally
selected measures of student achievement that are determined to be
rigorous and comparable across classrooms in accordance with the
regulations of the commissioner and as are locally developed in a manner
consistent with procedures negotiated pursuant to the requirements of
article fourteen of the civil service law. The department shall develop
the value-added growth model and shall consult with the advisory
committee established pursuant to subdivision seven of this section
prior to recommending that the board of regents approve its use in
evaluations.
 (2) One or more of the following types of locally selected measures of
student achievement or growth may be used for the evaluation of
classroom teachers:
 (i) student achievement or growth on state assessments, regents
examinations and/or department approved alternative examinations as
described in the regulations of the commissioner including, but not
limited to, advanced placement examinations, international baccalaureate
examinations and SAT II, using a measure that is different from the
growth score prescribed by the department for student growth on such
assessments or examinations for purposes of the state assessment or
other comparable measures subcomponent that is either:
 (A) the change in percentage of a teacher's students who achieve a
specific level of performance as determined locally, on such
assessments/examinations compared to those students' level of
performance on such assessments/examinations in the previous school year
such as a three percentage point increase in students earning the
proficient level (three) or better performance level on the seventh
grade math state assessment compared to those same students' performance
levels on the sixth grade math state assessment, or an increase in the
percentage of a teacher's students earning the advanced performance
level (four) on the fourth grade English language arts or math state
assessments compared to those students' performance levels on the third
grade English language arts or math state assessments; or
 (B) a teacher specific growth score computed by the state based on the
percent of the teacher's students earning a state determined level of
growth. The methodology to translate such growth into the
state-established subcomponent scoring ranges shall be determined
locally; or
 (C) a teacher-specific achievement or growth score computed in a
manner determined locally based on a measure of student performance on
the state assessments, regents examinations and/or department approved
alternative examinations other than the measure described in item (A) or
(B) of this subparagraph;
 (ii) student growth or achievement computed in a manner determined
locally based on a student assessment approved by the department
pursuant to a request for qualification process established in the
regulations of the commissioner;
 (iii) student growth or achievement computed in a manner determined
locally based on a district, regional or BOCES-developed assessment that
is rigorous and comparable across classrooms;
 (iv) a school-wide measure of either student growth or achievement
based on either:
 (A) a state-provided student growth score covering all students in the
school that took the state assessment in English language arts or
mathematics in grades four through eight; or
 (B) a school-wide measure of student growth or achievement computed in
a manner determined locally based on a district, regional or board of
cooperative educational services developed assessment that is rigorous
and comparable across classrooms or a department approved student
assessment or based on a state assessment.
 (3) One or more of the following types of locally selected measures of
student achievement or growth may be used for the evaluation of
principals, provided that each measure is rigorous and comparable across
classrooms and that any such measure shall be different from that used
for the state assessment or other comparable measures subcomponent:
 (i) student achievement levels on state assessments in English
language arts and/or mathematics in grades four to eight such as
percentage of students in the school whose performance levels on state
assessments are proficient or advanced, as defined in the regulations of
the commissioner;
 (ii) student growth or achievement on state or other assessments in
English language arts and/or mathematics in grades four to eight for
students in each of the performance levels described in the regulations
of the commissioner;
 (iii) student growth or achievement on state assessments in English
language arts and/or mathematics in grades four to eight for students
with disabilities and English language learners in grades four to eight;
 (iv) student performance on any or all of the district-wide locally
selected measures approved for use in teacher evaluations;
 (v) for principals employed in a school with high school grades, four,
five and/or six-year high school graduation and/or dropout rates;
 (vi) percentage of students who earn a regents diploma with advanced
designation and/or honors as defined in the regulations of the
commissioner, for principals employed in a school with high school
grades;
 (vii) percentage of a cohort of students that achieve specified scores
on regents examinations and/or department approved alternative
examinations including, but not limited to, advanced placement
examinations, international baccalaureate examinations and SAT II, for
principals employed in a school with high school grades such as the
percentage of students in the two thousand nine cohort that scored at
least a three on an advanced placement examination since entry into the
ninth grade; and/or
 (viii) students' progress toward graduation in the school using strong
predictive indicators, including but not limited to ninth and/or tenth
grade credit accumulation and/or the percentage of students that pass
ninth and/or tenth grade subjects most commonly associated with
graduation and/or students' progress in passing the number of required
regents examinations for graduation, for principals employed in a school
with high school grades.
 (ix) For school districts or boards of cooperative educational
services that choose to use more than one set of locally selected
measures described in this paragraph for principals in the same or
similar grade configuration or program, the superintendent or district
superintendent shall, in their professional performance review plan,
certify that the sets of measures are comparable, in accordance with the
testing standards as defined in regulations of the commissioner.
 (4) The selection of the local measure or measures as described in
subparagraphs two and three of this paragraph to be used by the school
district or board of cooperative educational services shall be
determined through collective bargaining.
 h. The remaining sixty percent of the evaluations, ratings and
effectiveness scores shall be locally developed, consistent with the
standards prescribed in the regulations of the commissioner, through
negotiations conducted pursuant to article fourteen of the civil service
law.
 (1) A majority of the sixty points for classroom teachers shall be
based on multiple classroom observations conducted by a principal or
other trained administrator, which may be performed in-person or by
video. For evaluations for the two thousand twelve--two thousand
thirteen school year and thereafter, at least one such observation shall
be an unannounced visit.
 (2) For the remaining portion of these sixty points for evaluations
for the two thousand eleven--two thousand twelve school year, the
commissioner's regulation shall prescribe the other forms of evidence of
teacher and principal effectiveness that may be used.
 (3) For evaluations of classroom teachers for the two thousand
twelve--two thousand thirteen school year and thereafter, the remaining
portion of these sixty points shall be based on one or more of the
following:
 (i) one or more classroom observations by independent trained
evaluators selected by the school district or board of cooperative
educational services who are teachers or former teachers with a
demonstrated record of effectiveness and have no prior affiliation with
the school in which they are conducting the evaluation and no other
relationship with the teachers being evaluated that would affect their
impartiality;
 (ii) classroom observations by trained in-school peer teachers; and/or
 (iii) use of a state-approved instrument for parent or student
feedback; and/or
 (iv) evidence of student development and performance through lesson
plans, student portfolios and other artifacts of teacher practices
through a structured review process.
 (4) A majority of these sixty points for building principals shall be
based on a broad assessment of the principal's leadership and management
actions based on the principal practice rubric by the building
principal's supervisor, a trained administrator or a trained independent
evaluator, with one or more visits conducted by the supervisor, and, for
evaluations for the two thousand twelve--two thousand thirteen school
year and thereafter, that such assessment must incorporate multiple
school visits by a supervisor, a trained administrator or other trained
evaluator, with at least one visit conducted by the supervisor and at
least one unannounced visit. For the remaining portion of these sixty
points for evaluations for the two thousand eleven--two thousand twelve
school year, such regulations shall also prescribe the other forms of
evidence of principal effectiveness that may be used consistent with the
standards prescribed by the commissioner.
 (5) For evaluations of building principals for the two thousand
twelve--two thousand thirteen school year and thereafter, the remaining
portion of these sixty points shall include, in addition to the
requirements of subparagraph three of this paragraph, at least two other
sources of evidence from the following options: feedback from teachers,
students, and/or families using state-approved instruments; school
visits by other trained evaluators; and/or review of school documents,
records, and/or state accountability processes. Any such remaining
points shall be assigned based on the results of one or more ambitious
and measurable goals set collaboratively with principals and their
superintendents or district superintendents as follows:
 (i) at least one goal must address the principal's contribution to
improving teacher effectiveness, which shall include one or more of the
following: improved retention of high performing teachers, the
correlation between student growth scores of teachers granted tenure as
opposed to those denied tenure; or improvements in the proficiency
rating of the principal on specific teacher effectiveness standards in
the principal practice rubric.
 (ii) any other goals shall address quantifiable and verifiable
improvements in academic results or the school's learning environmental
such as student or teacher attendance.
 (6) The district or board of cooperative educational services shall
establish specific minimum and maximum scoring ranges for each
performance level within this subcomponent before the start of each
school year and shall assign points to a teacher or principal for this
subcomponent based on the standards prescribed in the regulations of the
commissioner, all in accordance with, and subject to, the requirements
of paragraph j of this subdivision.
 i. For purposes of this section, student growth means the change in
student achievement for an individual student between two or more points
in time.
 j. (1) The process by which points are assigned in subcomponents and
the scoring ranges for the subcomponents must be transparent and
available to those being rated before the beginning of each school year.
The process by which points are assigned in the respective subcomponents
are to be determined as follows:
 (i) For the state assessment or other comparable measures
subcomponent, that process shall be formulated by the commissioner with
the approval of the board of regents.
 (ii) For the locally selected measures of the student achievement
subcomponent, that process shall be established locally through
negotiations conducted under article fourteen of the civil service law.
 (iii) For the other measures of teacher and principal effectiveness
subcomponent, that process shall be established locally through
negotiations conducted under article fourteen of the civil services law.
 (2) Such process must ensure that it is possible for a teacher or
principal to obtain each point in the applicable scoring ranges,
including zero, for the state assessment or other comparable measures
subcomponent, the locally selected measures of student achievement
subcomponent and the overall rating categories. The process must also
ensure that it is possible for a teacher or principal to obtain each
point in the scoring ranges prescribed by the district or board of
cooperative educational services for the other measures of teacher and
principal effectiveness subcomponent.
 (3) The superintendent, district superintendent or chancellor and the
president of the collective bargaining representative (where one exists)
shall certify in its plan that the process will use the narrative
descriptions of the standards for the scoring ranges provided in the
regulations of the commissioner to effectively differentiate a teacher
or principal's performance in each of the subcomponents and in their
overall ratings to improve student learning and instruction.
 (4) The scoring ranges for the other measures of teacher and principal
effectiveness subcomponent shall be established locally through
negotiations conducted under article fourteen of the civil service law.
 k. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, rule or regulation to
the contrary, by July first, two thousand twelve, the governing body of
each school district and board of cooperative educational services shall
adopt a plan, on a form prescribed by the commissioner, for the annual
professional performance review of all of its classroom teachers and
building principals in accordance with the requirements of this section
and the regulations of the commissioner, and shall submit such plan to
the commissioner for approval. The plan may be an annual or multi-year
plan, for the annual professional performance review of all of its
classroom teachers and building principals. The commissioner shall
approve or reject the plan by September first, two thousand twelve, or
as soon as practicable thereafter. The commissioner may reject a plan
that does not rigorously adhere to the provisions of this section and
the regulations of the commissioner. Should any plan be rejected, the
commissioner shall describe each deficiency in the submitted plan and
direct that each such deficiency be resolved through collective
bargaining to the extent required under article fourteen of the civil
service law. If any material changes are made to the plan, the school
district or board of cooperative educational services must submit the
material changes, on a form prescribed by the commissioner, to the
commissioner for approval. To the extent that by July first, two
thousand twelve, or by July first of any subsequent year, if all the
terms of the plan have not been finalized as a result of unresolved
collective bargaining negotiations, the entire plan shall be submitted
to the commissioner upon resolution of all of its terms, consistent with
article fourteen of the civil service law.
 k-1. If material changes are submitted pursuant to paragraph k of this
subdivision for an approved plan that solely relates to the elimination
of student assessments that are not required by state or federal law,
the commissioner shall expedite his or her review of such material
changes and solely review those sections of the plan that relate to the
eliminated student assessments to ensure compliance with this section
and the regulations of the commissioner, provided that the governing
body of such school district or board of cooperative educational
services provide a written explanation of the material changes submitted
for approval, on a form prescribed by the commissioner, and certify that
no other material changes have been made to any other sections of the
currently approved plan, and provided further that the commissioner
shall complete such review of material changes properly and completely
submitted under this paragraph within ten business days of submission.
 k-2. The commissioner shall take actions to reduce time spent on field
tests for students taking the state administered standardized English
language arts and mathematics assessments for grades three through eight
to the extent federal funds are allowable for such purpose under the
state stabilization fund of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
of 2009 or are otherwise available.
 l. In the event a school district does not have an annual professional
performance review plan approved by the commissioner for the applicable
school year as of September first of that year, the collectively
bargained plan most recently approved or the plan determined by the
commissioner shall remain in effect until a subsequent plan is agreed to
by the parties in accordance with this section and is approved by the
commissioner.
 3. Nothing in this section shall be construed to excuse school
districts or boards of cooperative educational services from complying
with the standards set forth in the regulations of the commissioner for
conducting annual professional performance reviews of classroom teachers
or principals, including but not limited to required quality rating
categories, in conducting evaluations prior to July first, two thousand
eleven, or, for classroom teachers or principals subject to paragraph c
of subdivision two of this section, prior to July first, two thousand
twelve.
 4. Notwithstanding any other law, rule or regulation to the contrary,
upon rating a teacher or a principal as developing or ineffective
through an annual professional performance review conducted pursuant to
subdivision two of this section, the school district or board of
cooperative educational services shall formulate and commence
implementation of a teacher or principal improvement plan for such
teacher or principal as soon as practicable but in no case later than
ten school days after the opening of classes for the school year. Such
improvement plan shall be consistent with the regulations of the
commissioner and developed locally through negotiations conducted
pursuant to article fourteen of the civil service law. Such improvement
plan shall include, but need not be limited to, identification of needed
areas of improvement, a timeline for achieving improvement, the manner
in which improvement will be assessed, and, where appropriate,
differentiated activities to support a teacher's or principal's
improvement in those areas.
 5. a. An appeals procedure shall be locally established in each school
district and in each board of cooperative educational services by which
the evaluated teacher or principal may only challenge the substance of
the annual professional performance review, the school district's or
board of cooperative educational services' adherence to the standards
and methodologies required for such reviews, pursuant to this section,
the adherence to the regulations of the commissioner and compliance with
any applicable locally negotiated procedures, as well as the school
district's or board of cooperative educational services' issuance and/or
implementation of the terms of the teacher or principal improvement
plan, as required under this section. Appeal procedures shall provide
for the timely and expeditious resolution of any appeal under this
subdivision. The specifics of the appeal procedure shall be locally
established through negotiations conducted pursuant to article fourteen
of the civil service law. An evaluation which is the subject of an
appeal shall not be sought to be offered in evidence or placed in
evidence in any proceeding conducted pursuant to either section three
thousand twenty-a of this article or any locally negotiated alternate
disciplinary procedure, until the appeal process is concluded.
 b. Nothing in this section shall be construed to alter or diminish the
authority of the governing body of a school district or board of
cooperative educational services to grant or deny tenure to or terminate
probationary teachers or probationary building principals during the
pendency of an appeal pursuant to this section for statutorily and
constitutionally permissible reasons including the teacher's or
principal's performance that is the subject of the appeal.
 c. Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize a teacher
or principal to trigger the appeal process prior to receipt of their
composite effectiveness score and rating from the district or board of
cooperative educational services.
 5-a. In the city school district of the city of New York,
notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the following
shall apply to classroom teachers:
 a. A teacher who did not receive an ineffective rating in the annual
professional performance review for the prior school year is in "year
one status".
 b. A teacher who received an ineffective rating in the previous school
year is in "year two status", until and unless that rating is either
changed by the principal or reversed on appeal in accordance with the
provisions of this subdivision, or until and unless the teacher reverts
to year one status in accordance with the provisions of this
subdivision.
 c. A teacher who is rated ineffective for a school year in which the
teacher has year one status shall have a right to appeal that rating to
the chancellor of the city school district, who shall make a final
determination, unless an appeal is initiated to a three-member panel
subject to the following requirements. The united federation of teachers
(UFT) may appeal to a three-member panel the ineffective ratings of up
to thirteen percent of teachers who received such ineffective ratings
for a school year. Any such appeal may only be made on the ground that
the ineffective rating was given due to harassment or reasons not
related to job performance. These appeals shall be known as a "panel
appeals". The three-member panel shall consist of a person selected by
the UFT, a person selected by the chancellor of the city school district
and an independent person, not affiliated with the UFT or the district
and selected by the state education department, who shall be the chair
of the panel and conduct the appeal hearing. If the panel sustains the
appeal, the principal must submit to the panel a different rating, which
must be approved by the panel. Any ineffective rating that is appealed
to the panel may not be appealed to the chancellor of the city school
district.
 d. The chancellor of the city school district shall notify the UFT of
all ineffective ratings. Each school year, if the UFT is notified of an
ineffective rating prior to October first, a panel appeal of that rating
must be initiated by the UFT by November first, provided that more than
thirteen percent of these ratings may be appealed to the panel. The UFT
and the board of education shall negotiate, pursuant to article fourteen
of the civil service law, a procedure for ensuring that each school
year, not more than thirteen percent of the ratings received by the UFT
after October first are appealed to the panel. The board of education
shall make all reasonable efforts to issue ratings and notify the UFT of
ineffective ratings by October first. Any rating not appealed to the
panel may be appealed by the individual teacher to the chancellor of the
city school district. Appeals made to the chancellor of the city school
district must be filed within ten school days after the UFT would
otherwise be required to notify the board of education of a panel
appeal.
 e. For all teachers in year two status, unless and until the
ineffective rating they received in the prior year is changed by a
principal or otherwise changed in accordance with the provisions of this
subdivision, an independent validator shall be appointed to evaluate the
teacher on each component of the annual professional performance review
in which the scoring of the component is at the discretion of the
principal. These components shall not necessarily be limited to teacher
performance, but shall not include any components in which the scoring
of the component is outside the discretion of the principal, even if the
principal has discretion in a related goal-setting process prior to
scoring. The independent validator shall perform three observations
during the course of the school year. The terms and conditions of the
observations shall be negotiated pursuant to the requirements of article
fourteen of the civil service law.
 f. The UFT and the board of education shall jointly select an
organization or organizations that employ certified educators, including
teachers, to perform the work as independent validators. Independent
validators shall not be employed simultaneously by the board of
education or simultaneously have an individual contract with the board
of education. Should either the board of education or the UFT notify the
department that after a good faith effort the board of education and the
UFT are unable to jointly select organizations, the commissioner shall
name organizations subject to the following requirements. The board of
education shall set forth a required number of validators, and the
commissioner shall name organizations that can provide at least this
number of validators whom the commissioner deems qualified. The
commissioner shall name organizations based on the criteria set forth in
this subdivision that apply to the mutual selection process for the
board of education and the UFT and shall also consider potential
conflicts of interest.
 g. In an instance in which the independent validator does not complete
the review process due to circumstances beyond the control of the board
of education, the teacher shall remain in year two status the following
school year. Should the independent validator not complete the review
process for a second consecutive school year and for any reason in the
second year for other than a leave of absence or chronic absence on the
part of the teacher, the teacher shall return to year one status the
following school year.
 h. An independent validator shall be deemed to have agreed with the
principal when an independent validator's scoring, in conjunction with
the scoring of components not reviewed by the independent validator in
accordance with this subdivision, would result in a rating in the same
category on the annual professional performance review than would result
from the principal's rating.
 i. For purposes of this subdivision, an independent validator shall be
deemed to have disagreed with the principal when an independent
validator's scoring, in conjunction with the scoring of components not
reviewed by the independent validator in accordance with this
subdivision, would result in a rating in a different category on the
annual professional performance review than would result from the
principal's rating.
 j. If a teacher receives an ineffective rating for a school year in
which the teacher is in year two status and the independent validator
agrees, the district may bring a proceeding pursuant to sections three
thousand twenty and three thousand twenty-a of this article based on a
pattern of ineffective teaching or performance. In such proceeding, the
charges shall allege that the employing board has developed and
substantially implemented a teacher improvement plan in accordance with
subdivision four of this section for the employee following the
evaluation made for the year in which the employee was in year one
status and was rated ineffective. The pattern of ineffective teaching or
performance shall give rise to a rebuttable presumption of incompetence
and if the presumption is not successfully rebutted, the finding, absent
extraordinary circumstances, shall be just cause for removal. In these
hearings, the teacher shall have up to three days to present his or her
case for every one day used by the district to present its case. The
hearing officer shall render a written decision within ten days of the
last day of the hearing.
 k. If the teacher receives an ineffective rating by the principal in a
school year in which they are in year two status and the independent
validator disagrees, the ineffective rating remains but the district may
not bring proceeding based on a pattern of ineffective teaching or
performance, as defined in this section, provided however that nothing
in this section shall prevent the board of education from charging a
teacher based on incompetence and entering the principal's evaluations
into evidence.
 l. If upon the completion of a hearing pursuant to sections three
thousand twenty and three thousand twenty-a of this article, based
either on a pattern of ineffective teaching or performance or charges of
incompetence in which year one or year two evaluations were entered into
evidence, and a hearing officer finds the teacher incompetent, but
decides not to terminate, the teacher remains in year two status for the
school year in progress or the following school year if the finding is
made in between school years. If upon the completion of the hearing, the
hearing officer exonerates the teacher of charges of incompetence the
teacher shall revert to year one status if in the middle of the school
year or at the beginning of the following school year if the finding is
made in between school years.
 m. If the teacher receives an ineffective rating in year two by the
principal and the validator agrees, and the district does not bring an
expedited proceeding pursuant to sections three thousand twenty and
three thousand twenty-a of this article, the teacher may appeal the year
two ineffective rating to the chancellor of the city school district,
who shall make a final determination. If the rating is upheld, the
teacher shall remain in year two status for the subsequent school year,
but if following that year the teacher is not charged, the teacher
reverts to year one status for the next school year.
 n. A process shall be established to evaluate the effectiveness of the
specific procedures established in this subdivision after two years from
the effective date of this subdivision, provided however that a failure
or delay in establishing that process shall not invalidate any
provisions of this subdivision.
 o. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the
board of education and the UFT may alter any provisions of this
subdivision through collective bargaining.
 6. For purposes of disciplinary proceedings pursuant to sections three
thousand twenty and three thousand twenty-a of this article, a pattern
of ineffective teaching or performance shall be defined to mean two
consecutive annual ineffective ratings received by a classroom teacher
or building principal pursuant to annual professional performance
reviews conducted in accordance with the provisions of this section.
 7. The regulations adopted pursuant to this section shall be developed
in consultation with an advisory committee consisting of representatives
of teachers, principals, superintendents of schools, school boards,
school district and board of cooperative educational services officials
and other interested parties. The regulations shall also take into
account any (i) professional teaching standards; (ii) standards for
professional contexts; and (iii) standards for a continuum of system
support for teachers and principals developed in consultation with the
advisory committee. Regulations promulgated pursuant to this section
shall be effective no later than July first, two thousand eleven, for
implementation in the two thousand eleven--two thousand twelve school
year.
 8. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, rule or regulation to
the contrary, all collective bargaining agreements applicable to
classroom teachers or building principals entered into after July first,
two thousand ten shall be consistent with requirements of this section.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to abrogate any conflicting
provisions of any collective bargaining agreement in effect on July
first, two thousand ten during the term of such agreement and until the
entry into a successor collective bargaining agreement, provided that
notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, upon
expiration of such term and the entry into a successor collective
bargaining agreement the provisions of this section shall apply.
Furthermore, nothing in this section or in any rule or regulation
promulgated hereunder shall in any way, alter, impair or diminish the
rights of a local collective bargaining representative to negotiate
evaluation procedures in accordance with article fourteen of the civil
service law with the school district or board of cooperative educational
services.
 9. a. The department shall annually monitor and analyze trends and
patterns in teacher and principal evaluation results and data to
identify school districts, boards of cooperative educational services
and/or schools where evidence suggests that a more rigorous evaluation
system is needed to improve educator effectiveness and student learning
outcomes. The criteria for identifying school districts, boards of
cooperative educational services and/or schools shall be prescribed in
the regulations of the commissioner.
 b. A school, school district or board of cooperative educational
services identified by the department in one of the categories
enumerated in paragraph a of this subdivision may be highlighted in
public reports and/or the commissioner may order a corrective action
plan, which may include, but not be limited to, requirements that the
district or board of cooperative educational services arrange for
additional professional development, provide additional in-service
training and/or utilize independent trained evaluators to review the
efficacy of the evaluation system, provided that the plan shall be
consistent with law and not in conflict with any applicable collective
bargaining agreement.
 10. Each school district and board of cooperative educational services
shall fully disclose and release to the public and the department the
final quality ratings and composite effectiveness scores from the annual
professional performance reviews of its teachers and principals as
provided in this subdivision.
 a. The commissioner shall fully disclose professional performance
review data for teachers and principals in each school district and
board of cooperative educational services on the department website and
in any other manner to make such data widely available to the public.
Such data shall be suitable for research, analysis and comparison of
professional performance review data for teachers and principals. Such
public disclosure shall include but not be limited to the final quality
ratings and composite effectiveness scores by school district for
principal evaluation data, by school building for teacher evaluation
data and, within each district and school building, by class, subject
and grade; final quality ratings and composite effectiveness scores by
region, district wealth, district need category, student enrollment,
type of school (i.e. elementary, middle and high school), student need
(e.g., poverty level), and district spending; final quality ratings and
composite effectiveness scores by the percentage or number of teachers
and principals in each final quality rating category, moving to a higher
rating category than the previous year, moving to a lower rating
category than the previous year, and retained in each rating category;
and data on tenure granting and denial based on the final quality rating
categories.
 b. Each school district and board of cooperative educational services
shall fully disclose and release to the parents and legal guardians of a
student the final quality rating and composite effectiveness score for
each of the teachers and for the principal of the school building to
which the student is assigned for the current school year upon the
request of such parents and legal guardians. The governing body of each
school district and board of cooperative educational services shall
provide conspicuous notice to parents and legal guardians of the right
to obtain such information. Parents and legal guardians may review and
receive such data in any manner, including by phone or in person; shall
receive an oral or written explanation of the composite effectiveness
scoring ranges for final quality ratings; and be offered opportunities
to understand such scores in the context of teacher evaluation and
student performance. Reasonable efforts shall be made to verify that any
such request is a bona fide request by a parent or guardian entitled to
review and receive such data pursuant to this paragraph.
 c. The department and each school district and board of cooperative
educational services shall ensure that any release to the public of
annual professional performance review data, or any other data that is
used as a component of annual professional performance reviews, does not
include personally identifying information for any teacher or principal,
provided, however, that nothing shall impair the right of parents and
legal guardians to review and receive the final quality rating and
composite effectiveness score of individual teachers and principals as
provided in paragraph b of this subdivision. Annual professional
performance reviews of individual teachers and principals shall not be
subject to disclosure pursuant to article six of the public officers
law.
 d. Nothing in this subdivision shall prohibit the department from
collecting such data and materials from school districts and boards of
cooperative educational services as is necessary to carry out its
functions and duties, including its responsibilities related to the
federal Race to the Top program.
 § 3012-d. Annual teacher and principal evaluations. 1. General
provisions. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, rule or
regulation to the contrary, the annual teacher and principal evaluations
(hereinafter, evaluations) implemented by districts shall be conducted
in accordance with the provisions of this section. Such annual
evaluations shall be a significant factor for employment decisions
including but not limited to, promotion, retention, tenure
determination, termination, and supplemental compensation. Such
evaluations shall also be a significant factor in teacher and principal
development including but not limited to coaching, induction support,
and differentiated professional development. Provided, however, that for
the two thousand twenty-four--two thousand twenty-five school year and
thereafter, school districts and boards of cooperative educational
services may conduct annual professional performance reviews pursuant to
section three thousand twelve-e of this article. In such case, the
provisions of this section shall not be applicable. Provided, however,
annual teacher and principal evaluation plans adopted pursuant to this
section shall not be applicable after the two thousand thirty-one--two
thousand thirty-two school year.
 2. Definitions.
 a. "District" shall mean school district and/or board of cooperative
educational services, except that for purposes of subdivision eleven of
this section it shall only mean a school district;
 b. "Principal" shall mean a building principal or an administrator in
charge of an instructional program of a board of cooperative educational
services;
 c. "Student growth" shall mean the change in student achievement for
an individual student between two or more points in time.
 d. "State-designed supplemental assessment" shall mean a selection of
state tests or assessments developed or designed by the state education
department, or that the state education department purchased or acquired
from (i) another state; (ii) an institution of higher education; or
(iii) a commercial or not-for-profit entity, provided that such entity
must be objective and may not have a conflict of interest or appearance
of a conflict of interest; such definition may include tests or
assessments that have been previously designed or acquired by local
districts, but only if the state education department significantly
modifies growth targets or scoring bands for such tests or assessments
or otherwise adapts the test or assessment to the state education
department's requirements.
 3. Ratings. The annual evaluations conducted pursuant to this section
shall rate teacher and principal effectiveness using the following
categories: highly effective or "H", effective or "E", developing or "D"
and ineffective or "I".
 4. Categories. The annual evaluation system shall consist of multiple
measures in two categories: student performance and teacher
observations.
 a. Student performance category. Such category shall have at least one
subcomponent and an optional second subcomponent as follows:
 (1) For the first subcomponent, a teacher shall have a student
learning objective (SLO) consistent with a goal-setting process
determined or developed by the commissioner, that results in a student
growth score; provided that, for any teacher whose course ends in a
state-created or administered assessment, such assessment may be used as
the underlying assessment for such SLO;
 (2) For the optional second subcomponent, a district may locally
select a second measure in accordance with this subparagraph. Such
second measure shall apply in a consistent manner, to the extent
practicable, across the district and be either: (A) based on a
state-created or administered test, or (B) based on a state-designed
supplemental assessment. The optional second subcomponent shall provide
options for multiple assessment measures that are aligned to existing
classroom and school best practices and take into consideration the
recommendations in the testing reduction report as required by section
one of subpart F of part EE of chapter fifty-six of the laws of two
thousand fifteen which added this section regarding the reduction of
unnecessary additional testing.
 The commissioner shall determine the weights and scoring ranges for
the subcomponent or subcomponents of the student performance category
that shall result in a combined category rating. The commissioner shall
also set parameters for appropriate targets for student growth for both
subcomponents, and the department must affirmatively approve and shall
have the authority to disapprove or require modifications of district
plans that do not set appropriate growth targets, including after
initial approval. The commissioner shall set such weights and parameters
consistent with the terms contained herein.
 b. Teacher observations category. The observations category for
teachers shall be based on a state-approved rubric and shall include up
to three subcomponents. Such category must include: (1) a subcomponent
based on classroom observations conducted by a principal or other
trained administrator and must also include (2) a subcomponent based on
classroom observations by an impartial independent trained evaluator or
evaluators selected by the district. An independent trained evaluator
may be employed within the school district, but not the same school
building, as the teacher being evaluated. Such category may also include
a subcomponent based on classroom observations conducted by a trained
peer teacher rated effective or highly effective from the same school or
from another school in the district.
 The commissioner shall determine the weights, and/or weighting options
and scoring ranges for the subcomponents of the observations category
that result in a combined category rating. The commissioner shall also
determine the minimum number of observations to be conducted annually,
including frequency and duration, and any parameters therefor. The
commissioner shall set such weights and scores consistent with the terms
contained herein.
 5. Rating determination. The overall rating determination shall be
determined as follows:
 a. If a teacher receives an H in the teacher observation category, and
an H in the student performance category, the teacher's composite score
shall be H;
 b. If a teacher receives an H in the teacher observation category, and
an E in the student performance category, the teacher's composite score
shall be H;
 c. If a teacher receives an H in the teacher observation category, and
a D in the student performance category, the teacher's composite score
shall be E;
 d. If a teacher receives an H in the teacher observation category, and
an I in the student performance category, the teacher's composite score
shall be D;
 e. If a teacher receives an E in the teacher observation category, and
an H in the student performance category, the teacher's composite score
shall be H;
 f. If a teacher receives an E in the teacher observation category, and
an E in the student performance category, the teacher's composite score
shall be E;
 g. If a teacher receives an E in the teacher observation category, and
a D in the student performance category, the teacher's composite score
shall be E;
 h. If a teacher receives an E in the teacher observation category, and
an I in the student performance category, the teacher's composite score
shall be D;
 i. If a teacher receives a D in the teacher observation category, and
an H in the student performance category, the teacher's composite score
shall be E;
 j. If a teacher receives a D in the teacher observation category, and
an E in the student performance category, the teacher's composite score
shall be E;
 k. If a teacher receives a D in the teacher observation category, and
a D in the student performance category, the teacher's composite score
shall be D;
 l. If a teacher receives a D in the teacher observation category, and
an I in the student performance category, the teacher's composite score
shall be I;
 m. If a teacher receives an I in the teacher observation category, and
an H in the student performance category, the teacher's composite score
shall be D;
 n. If a teacher receives an I in the teacher observation category, and
an E in the student performance category, the teacher's composite score
shall be D;
 o. If a teacher receives an I in the teacher observation category, and
a D in the student performance category, the teacher's composite score
shall be I;
 p. If a teacher receives an I in the teacher observation category, and
an I in the student performance category, the teacher's composite score
shall be I.
 6. Prohibited elements. The following elements shall no longer be
eligible to be used in any evaluation subcomponent pursuant to this
section:
 a. evidence of student development and performance derived from lesson
plans, other artifacts of teacher practice, and student portfolios,
except for student portfolios measured by a state-approved rubric where
permitted by the department;
 b. use of an instrument for parent or student feedback;
 c. use of professional goal-setting as evidence of teacher or
principal effectiveness;
 d. any district or regionally-developed assessment that has not been
approved by the department; and
 e. any growth or achievement target that does not meet the minimum
standards as set forth in regulations of the commissioner adopted
hereunder.
 7. The commissioner shall ensure that the process by which weights and
scoring ranges are assigned to subcomponents and categories is
transparent and available to those being rated before the beginning of
each school year. Such process must ensure that it is possible for a
teacher or principal to obtain any number of points in the applicable
scoring ranges, including zero, in each subcomponent. The
superintendent, district superintendent or chancellor and the
representative of the collective bargaining unit (where one exists)
shall certify in the district's plan that the evaluation process shall
use the standards for the scoring ranges provided by the commissioner.
 8. A student may not be instructed, for two consecutive school years,
by any two teachers in the same district, each of whom received a rating
of ineffective under an evaluation conducted pursuant to this section in
the school year immediately prior to the school year in which the
student is placed in the teacher's classroom; provided, that if a
district deems it impracticable to comply with this subdivision, the
district shall seek a waiver from the department from such requirement.
 9. Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the unfettered
statutory right of a district to terminate a probationary (non-tenured)
teacher or principal for any statutorily and constitutionally
permissible reasons.
 10. The local collective bargaining representative shall negotiate
with the district:
 a. whether to use a second measure, and, in the event that a second
measure is used, which measure to use, pursuant to subparagraph two of
paragraph a of subdivision four of this section;
 b. how to implement the provisions of paragraph b of subdivision four
of this section, and associated regulations as established by the
commissioner, in accordance with article fourteen of the civil service
law; and
 c. the selection and use of an assessment in a teacher or principal's
evaluation pursuant to subdivision four of this section and paragraphs a
and b of subdivision sixteen of this section.
 11. Each school district or board of cooperative educational services,
as applicable, shall certify by September first of each year that their
school district or board of cooperative educational services has a
teacher and principal evaluation plan that is in compliance with the
requirements of this section or a performance review plan that is in
compliance with the requirements of section three thousand twelve-e of
this article, as applicable, and that the district or board of
cooperative educational services conducted evaluations in accordance
with their most recently approved plan during the preceding school year.
Provided, however, that a school district or board of cooperative
educational services may only have an approved teacher and principal
evaluation plan pursuant to this section until June thirtieth, two
thousand thirty-two.
 12. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, rule or regulation to
the contrary, all collective bargaining agreements entered into after
April first, two thousand fifteen shall be consistent with the
requirements of this section, unless the agreement relates to the two
thousand fourteen--two thousand fifteen school year only. Nothing in
this section shall be construed to abrogate any conflicting provisions
of any collective bargaining agreement in effect on April first, two
thousand fifteen during the term of such agreement and until the entry
into a successor collective bargaining agreement, provided that
notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, upon
expiration of such term and the entry into a successor collective
bargaining agreement the provisions of this section shall apply.
 13. Any reference in law to "annual professional performance review"
shall be deemed to refer to an annual professional performance review
pursuant to section three thousand twelve-c of this article or annual
teacher and principal evaluations pursuant to this section and any
references to section three thousand twelve-c of this article shall be
deemed to refer to section three thousand twelve-c of this article
and/or this section, as applicable.
 14. The commissioner shall adopt regulations to align the principal
evaluation system as set forth in section three thousand twelve-c of
this article with the new teacher evaluation system set forth herein.
 15. The provisions of paragraphs d, k, k-1, k-2 and l of subdivision
two and subdivisions four, five, five-a, nine, and ten of section three
thousand twelve-c of this article, as amended, shall apply to this
section to the extent determined by the commissioner.
 16. a. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, rule or regulation
to the contrary, the grades three through eight English language arts
and mathematics state assessments and all other state-created or
administered tests shall not be required to be utilized in any manner to
determine a teacher or principal evaluation required by this section.
 b. The commissioner shall promulgate rules and regulations providing
alternative assessments that may be used in grades three through eight
instead of all other state-created or administered tests, which shall
include all of the assessments that have been approved by the
commissioner for use in determining transition scores and ratings.
 c. The selection and use of an assessment in a teacher or principal's
evaluation pursuant to paragraphs a and b of this subdivision and
subdivision four of this section shall be subject to collective
bargaining pursuant to article fourteen of the civil service law.
 d. Notwithstanding any provision of subdivision twelve of this section
to the contrary, nothing in this section shall be construed to abrogate
any conflicting provisions of any collective bargaining agreement in
effect on the date this subdivision takes effect and until the entry
into a successor collective bargaining agreement, provided that
notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, upon
expiration of such term and the entry into a successor collective
bargaining agreement the provisions of this subdivision shall apply;
and, provided further, however, that any assessments used in determining
transition scores and ratings shall be used in determining scores and
ratings pursuant to this section instead of the grades three through
eight English language arts and mathematics state assessments until the
entry into a successor collective bargaining agreement.
 17. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, for the two
thousand twenty--two thousand twenty-one and the two thousand
twenty-one--two thousand twenty-two school years, no school district or
board of cooperative educational services shall be required to complete
an annual teacher and principal evaluation required by this section for
any classroom teacher or building principal.
 § 3012-e. Teacher and principal performance review plans. 1.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, rule, or regulation to the
contrary, for the annual professional performance reviews related to the
two thousand twenty-four--two thousand twenty-five school year and
thereafter, a school district or board of cooperative educational
services shall conduct performance reviews of classroom teachers and
building principals in accordance with the provisions of this section or
section three thousand twelve-d of this article, as applicable. Provided
that all school districts and boards of cooperative educational services
shall adopt a performance review plan pursuant to this section no later
than June thirtieth, two thousand thirty-two and such plan shall be used
to complete performance reviews of classroom teachers and building
principals no later than the two thousand thirty-two--two thousand
thirty-three school year. Performance review plans developed pursuant to
this section shall be the result of reaching a collectively bargained
agreement negotiated pursuant to article fourteen of the civil service
law where a recognized employee organization exists.
 2. Nothing herein shall require modification of an existing teacher
and principal evaluation plan approved by the commissioner pursuant to
section three thousand twelve-d of this article and all teacher and
principal evaluation plans approved by the commissioner pursuant to the
provisions of section three thousand twelve-d of this article shall not
be affected by the provisions of this section on or before June
thirtieth, two thousand thirty-two; provided, however, that when a
school district or board of cooperative educational services adopts a
performance review plan pursuant to this section, the school district or
board of cooperative educational services shall notify the department
and submit the new plan to the department for review on a form and in a
manner prescribed by the commissioner. Provided further that, prior to
June thirtieth, two thousand thirty-two, a teacher and principal
evaluation plan may still be adopted or modified pursuant to section
three thousand twelve-d of this article consistent with the provisions
of such section.
 3. The performance reviews conducted pursuant to this section shall be
a significant factor in teacher and principal development, including but
not limited to coaching, induction support, and differentiated
professional development for all teachers and principals.
 4. (a) A school board or board of cooperative educational services
shall make its most recently adopted and reviewed plan pursuant to this
section available on the school district or board of cooperative
educational services' website.
 (b) On an annual basis, each school district and board of cooperative
educational services shall submit to the commissioner the ratings for
each classroom teacher and building principal on each applicable
teaching or leadership standard, as well as the overall rating for each
teacher and principal, where available, on a form and in a manner
prescribed by the commissioner. Such data shall be collected and used to
the extent necessary to comply with any applicable state and federal
statutory requirements.
 (c) The commissioner and each school district and board of cooperative
educational services shall ensure that any release to the public of data
collected pursuant to this section, or any other data that is used as a
component of performance reviews, does not include personally
identifying information for any classroom teacher or building principal;
provided, however, that each school district or board of cooperative
educational services shall fully disclose and release to the parents or
legal guardians of a student the most recent performance review rating
received for each of the teachers and for the principal of the school
building to which the student is assigned for the current school year
consistent with paragraph b of subdivision ten of section three thousand
twelve-c of this article.
 (d) Performance reviews of individual classroom teachers and building
principals shall not be subject to disclosure pursuant to article six of
the public officers law.
 5. (a) Performance review plans developed pursuant to this section
shall:
 (i) include the criteria by which all classroom teachers and building
principals shall be reviewed and a description of the review procedures;
 (ii) address each state teaching and educational leadership standard,
as developed or adopted by the commissioner;
 (iii) consist of multiple measures; provided, however, that one
measure shall be classroom observations of classroom teachers and school
visits of building principals. The plan shall describe the number and
frequency of observations; provided that nothing herein shall be
construed to require that all classroom teachers or building principals
have the same number or frequency of observations.
 (iv) provide the classroom teacher or building principal with timely,
actionable feedback on their practice based on the information collected
as part of the performance review;
 (v) assign ratings on each applicable teaching or educational
leadership standard and an overall rating of Level 4, Level 3, Level 2,
or Level 1 consistent with the following requirements:
 (1) Level 1 shall indicate performance significantly below a school
district's or board of cooperative educational services' expectations
aligned to teaching or educational leadership standards;
 (2) Level 2 shall indicate performance that partially meets a school
district's or board of cooperative educational services' expectations
aligned to teaching or educational leadership standards;
 (3) Level 3 shall indicate performance that meets a school district's
or board of cooperative educational services' expectations aligned to
teaching or educational leadership standards; and
 (4) Level 4 shall indicate performance that exceeds a school
district's or board of cooperative educational services' expectations
aligned to teaching or educational leadership standards;
 (vi) ensure that it is possible for a classroom teacher or building
principal to obtain each rating on each teaching or educational
leadership standard and as an overall rating. The process by which
ratings are assigned shall be transparent and available to those being
rated prior to the start of the school year, to the extent practicable;
and
 (vii) include a process for each classroom teacher and building
principal to receive formal support for professional growth each year,
provided that teachers and principals who receive an overall rating of
Level 1 or 2 shall have a personalized professional development plan,
developed by the school district or board of cooperative educational
services, consistent with a locally determined growth goal setting
process.
 (b) One measure may be used to address more than one teaching or
educational leadership standard provided that the performance review
includes multiple measures.
 (c) Performance reviews conducted pursuant to this section may assess
a subset of the teaching and educational leadership standards in a given
year; provided, however, that probationary classroom teachers and
building principals shall be rated on each teaching or educational
leadership standard annually.
 (d) Nothing in this section shall be construed to require all
classroom teachers or building principals to be evaluated based on the
same measures or to receive an overall rating annually; provided,
however, that at a minimum, probationary teachers and principals shall
receive a rating on each teaching or educational leadership standard and
an overall rating annually, while other teachers and principals may have
a differentiated performance review process that does not culminate in
an overall rating annually. Provided, further, that nothing herein shall
be construed to prohibit or prevent any other teachers and principals
from receiving an overall rating annually.
 6. The school district or board of cooperative educational services,
as applicable, shall ensure that all classroom teachers and building
principals as well as any individual who conducts all or part of a
performance review receive appropriate training consistent with the
regulations of the commissioner and shall ensure that each teacher and
principal who is reviewed in accordance with this section has the
opportunity to provide written comment on their performance review in
addition to any collectively bargained teacher and principal performance
review grievance or appeal procedures.
 7. Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the unfettered
statutory right of a school district or board of cooperative educational
services, as applicable, to terminate a probationary classroom teacher
or principal for any statutorily and constitutionally permissible
reasons.
 8. Performance review plans developed pursuant to this section shall
be submitted to the commissioner on a form and in a manner prescribed by
the commissioner. The commissioner shall review such plan to determine
compliance with the requirements of this section. If the commissioner
determines that the submitted plan is not in compliance with this
section, the plan shall be returned to the school district or board of
cooperative educational services for revision. Such revisions shall be
resolved through collective bargaining, to the extent required under
article fourteen of the civil service law. The plan most recently
accepted by the commissioner pursuant to this section shall remain in
effect until a subsequent plan is agreed to by the parties and reviewed
by the commissioner to determine compliance with the requirements of
this section. Each school district and board of cooperative educational
services shall certify annually to the commissioner that they have fully
implemented the plan most recently accepted by the commissioner.
 § 3013. Abolition of office or position. 1. If a trustee, board of
trustees, board of education or board of cooperative educational
services abolishes an office or position and creates another office or
position for the performance of duties similar to those performed in the
office or position abolished, the person filling such office or position
at the time of its abolishment shall be appointed to the office or
position thus created without reduction in salary or increment, provided
the record of such person has been one of faithful, competent service in
the office or position he or she has filled.
 2. Whenever a trustee, board of trustee, board of education or board
of cooperative educational services abolishes a position under this
chapter, the services of the teacher having the least seniority in the
system within the tenure of the position abolished shall be
discontinued.
 3. (a) If an office or position is abolished or if it is consolidated
with another position without creating a new position, the person
filling such position at the time of its abolishment or consolidation
shall be placed upon a preferred eligible list of candidates for
appointment to a vacancy that then exists or that may thereafter occur
in an office or position similar to the one which such person filled
without reduction in salary or increment, provided the record of such
person has been one of faithful, competent service in the office or
position he or she has filled. The persons on such preferred list shall
be reinstated or appointed to such vacancies in such corresponding or
similar positions in the order of their length of service in the system
at any time within seven years from the date of abolition or
consolidation of such office or position.
 (b) The persons on such preferred list shall be reinstated, in
accordance with the terms of paragraph (a) of this subdivision, to such
substitute positions of five months or more in duration, as may from
time to time occur without losing their preferred status on such list.
Declination of such reinstatement shall not adversely affect the
persons' preferred eligibility status.
 * 4. (a) The use of artificial intelligence systems as defined by
section one hundred three-e of the state technology law shall not affect
(i) the existing rights of employees pursuant to an existing collective
bargaining agreement, or (ii) the existing representational
relationships among employee organizations or the bargaining
relationships between the employer and an employee organization.
 (b) The use of such artificial intelligence systems shall not result
in the: (i) discharge, displacement or loss of position, including
partial displacement such as a reduction in the hours of non-overtime
work, wages, or employment benefits, or result in the impairment of
existing collective bargaining agreements; or (ii) transfer of existing
duties and functions currently performed by employees of the school
district, board of cooperative educational services or county vocational
education and extension board to an artificial intelligence system.
 (c) The use of such artificial intelligence system shall not alter the
rights or benefits, and privileges, including but not limited to terms
and conditions of employment and civil service status. The collective
bargaining unit membership status of all existing employees of the board
of education, board of cooperative educational services, or board of
trustees thereof shall be preserved and protected.
 * NB Repealed July 1, 2028
 § 3014. Tenure: boards of cooperative educational services. 1. (a)
Administrative assistants, supervisors, teachers and all other members
of the teaching and supervising staff of the board of cooperative
educational services appointed prior to July first, two thousand
fifteen, shall be appointed by a majority vote of the board of
cooperative educational services upon the recommendation of the district
superintendent of schools for a probationary period of not to exceed
three years; provided, however, that in the case of a teacher who has
been appointed on tenure in a school district within the state, the
board of cooperative educational services where currently employed, or
another board of cooperative educational services, and who was not
dismissed from such district or board as a result of charges brought
pursuant to subdivision one of section three thousand twenty-a of this
article, the probationary period shall not exceed two years. Services of
a person so appointed to any such positions may be discontinued at any
time during such probationary period, upon the recommendation of the
district superintendent, by a majority vote of the board of cooperative
educational services.
 (b) Administrative assistants, supervisors, teachers and all other
members of the teaching and supervising staff of the board of
cooperative educational services appointed on or after July first, two
thousand fifteen, shall be appointed by a majority vote of the board of
cooperative educational services upon the recommendation of the district
superintendent of schools for a probationary period of not to exceed
four years; provided, however, that in the case of a teacher who has
been appointed on tenure in a school district within the state, the
board of cooperative educational services where currently employed, or
another board of cooperative educational services, and who was not
dismissed from such district or board as a result of charges brought
pursuant to section three thousand twenty-a of this article, the teacher
shall be appointed for a probationary period of three years; and
provided further that in the case of a principal, administrator,
supervisor, or other member of the supervising staff who has been
appointed on tenure pursuant to this chapter as an administrator within
an authorized administrative tenure area in another school district
within the state, the school district where currently employed, or a
board of cooperative educational services, and who was not dismissed
from such district or board as a result of charges brought pursuant to
subdivision one of section three thousand twenty-a of this article, the
principal, administrator, supervisor, or other member of the supervising
staff shall be appointed for a probationary period of three years.
Services of a person so appointed to any such positions to which this
paragraph applies may be discontinued at any time during the
probationary period, upon the recommendation of the district
superintendent, by a majority vote of the board of cooperative
educational services.
 2. (a) On or before the expiration of the probationary term of a
person appointed for such term prior to July first, two thousand
fifteen, the district superintendent of schools shall make a written
report to the board of cooperative educational services recommending for
appointment on tenure persons who have been found competent, efficient
and satisfactory. Such persons shall hold their respective positions
during good behavior and competent and efficient service and shall not
be removed except for any of the following causes, after a hearing, as
provided by section three thousand twenty-a of this article: (i)
Insubordination, immoral character or conduct unbecoming a teacher; (ii)
Inefficiency, incompetency, or neglect of duty; (iii) Failure to
maintain certification as required by this chapter and by the
regulations of the commissioner. Each person who is not to be so
recommended for appointment on tenure shall be so notified in writing by
the district superintendent not later than sixty days immediately
preceding the expiration of such person's probationary period.
 (b) On or before the expiration of the probationary term of a person
appointed for such term on or after July first, two thousand fifteen,
the district superintendent of schools shall make a written report to
the board of cooperative educational services recommending for
appointment on tenure persons who have been found competent, efficient
and satisfactory. Such persons shall hold their respective positions
during good behavior and competent and efficient service and shall not
be removed except for any of the following causes, after a hearing, as
provided by section three thousand twenty-a of this article: (i)
Insubordination, immoral character or conduct unbecoming a teacher; (ii)
Inefficiency, incompetency, or neglect of duty; (iii) Failure to
maintain certification as required by this chapter and by the
regulations of the commissioner. Each person who is not to be so
recommended for appointment on tenure shall be so notified in writing by
the district superintendent not later than sixty days immediately
preceding the expiration of such person's probationary period.
 § 3014-a. Teachers' rights as a result of a board or boards of
cooperative educational services taking over a program formerly operated
by a school district or districts or by a county vocational education
and extension board. 1. In any case in which a board or boards of
cooperative educational services duly take over the operation of a
program formerly provided by a school district or school districts or by
a county vocational education and extension board, each teacher,
teaching assistant and teacher aide employed in such a program by such a
school district or such a county vocational education and extension
board at the time of such takeover by the board or boards of cooperative
educational services, shall be considered an employee of such board or
boards of cooperative educational services with the same tenure or civil
service status he maintained in such school district or in such county
vocational education and extension board.
 2. If the number of teaching positions needed to provide the services
required by such program by the board or boards of cooperative
educational services is less than the number of teachers, teaching
assistants and teacher aides eligible to be considered employees of such
board or boards of cooperative educational services as provided by
subdivision one of this section, the services of the teachers, teaching
assistants and teacher aides having the least seniority in the school
district or school districts or county vocational education and
extension board whose programs are taken over by the board or boards of
cooperative educational services within the tenure area or civil service
title of the position shall be discontinued. Such teachers, teaching
assistants and teacher aides shall be placed on a preferred eligible
list of candidates for appointment to a vacancy that may thereafter
occur in an office or position under the jurisdiction of the board or
boards of cooperative educational services similar to the one such
teacher, teaching assistant and teacher aide filled in such school
district or school districts or such county vocational education and
extension board. The teachers, teaching assistants and teacher aides on
such preferred list shall be reinstated or appointed to such vacancies
in such corresponding or similar positions under the jurisdiction of the
board or boards of cooperative educational services in the order of
their length of service in such school district or school districts or
in such county vocational education and extension board, within seven
years from the date of the abolition of such office or position.
 3. For any such teacher, teaching assistant and teacher aide as set
forth in subdivision one of this section for salary, sick leave and any
other purposes, the length of service credited in such school district
or in such county vocational education and extension board shall be
credited as employment time with such board or boards of cooperative
educational services.
 4. This section shall in no way be construed to limit the rights of
any of such employees set forth in this section granted by any other
provision of law.
 5. Program takeovers pursuant to this section shall be considered a
transfer pursuant to section seventy of the civil service law.
 § 3014-b. Teachers' rights as a result of a school district taking
over a program formerly operated by a board of cooperative educational
services. 1. In any case in which a school district duly takes over the
operation of a program formerly provided by a board of cooperative
educational services, each teacher, teaching assistant and teacher aide
employed in such a program by such a board of cooperative educational
services at the time of such takeover by the school district shall be
considered an employee of such school district, with the same tenure or
civil service status he maintained in such board of cooperative
educational services.
 2. If the number of teaching positions needed to provide the services
required by such program by the school district is less than the number
of teachers, teaching assistants and teacher aides eligible to be
considered employees of such school district as provided by subdivision
one of this section, the services of the teachers, teaching assistants
and teacher aides having the least seniority in the board of cooperative
educational services whose programs are taken over by the school
district within the tenure area or civil service title of the position
shall be discontinued. Such teachers, teaching assistants and teacher
aides shall be placed on a preferred eligible list of candidates for
appointment to a vacancy that may thereafter occur in an office or
position under the jurisdiction of the school district similar to the
one such teacher, teaching assistant and teacher aide filled in such
board of cooperative educational services. The teachers, teaching
assistants and teacher aides on such preferred list shall be reinstated
or appointed to such vacancies in such corresponding or similar
positions under the jurisdiction of the school district in the order of
their length of service in such board of cooperative educational
services, within seven years from the date of the abolition of such
office or position.
 3. For any such teacher, teaching assistant and teacher aide as set
forth in subdivision one of this section for salary, sick leave and any
other purposes, the length of service credited in such board of
cooperative educational services shall be credited as employment time
with such school district.
 4. In the event that more than one school district duly takes over the
operation of a program formerly provided by a board of cooperative
educational services, then each teacher, teaching assistant and teacher
aide employed in such program by such board of cooperative educational
services at the time of such takeover by more than one school district,
shall select the particular school district in which he shall be
considered an employee, with all of the rights and privileges provided
by the other provisions of this section. Such selection of the
particular school district by such teacher, teaching assistant and
teacher aide is to be based upon the seniority of each teacher, teaching
assistant and teacher aide in such board of cooperative educational
services, with the right of selection passing from such teachers,
teaching assistants and teacher aides with the most seniority to such
teachers, teaching assistants and teacher aides with least seniority.
Any such teacher, teaching assistant and teacher aide who is unable to
obtain a teaching position in any such school districts because the
number of positions needed to provide the services required in such
programs with such school districts are less than the number of
teachers, teaching assistants and teachers aides eligible to be
considered employees of such school districts, shall be placed on a
preferred eligible list in all such school districts in the method and
with all of the rights provided by the other provisions of this section.
 5. This section shall in no way be construed to limit the rights of
any of such employees set forth in this section granted by any other
provision of law.
 § 3014-c. Teachers' rights as a result of a school district taking
back tuition students. 1. As used in this section, a "sending district"
shall mean a school district which previously sent students to another
school district on a tuition basis pursuant to section two thousand
forty of this chapter, and a "receiving district" shall mean a school
district which provided the educational program for students from
another district on a tuition basis pursuant to section two thousand
forty of this chapter.
 2. In any case in which a sending district assumes the education of
students formerly provided by a receiving district, each teacher
employed in the education of such students by such receiving district at
the time of such take back by the sending district shall be considered
an employee of such sending district, with the same tenure status he
maintained in such receiving district.
 3. If the number of teaching positions needed to provide the
educational services required by such sending district is less than the
number of teachers eligible to be considered employees of such sending
district as provided by subdivision two of this section, the services of
the teachers having the least seniority in the receiving district whose
students are taken back by the sending district within the tenure area
of the position shall be discontinued. Such teachers shall be placed on
a preferred eligible list of candidates for appointment to a vacancy
that may thereafter occur in an office or position under the
jurisdiction of the sending district and the receiving district similar
to the one such teacher filled in such receiving district. The teachers
on such preferred list shall be reinstated or appointed to such
vacancies in such corresponding or similar positions under the
jurisdiction of the sending district or the receiving district in the
order of their length of service in such receiving district, within
seven years from the date of the abolition of such office or position.
 4. For any such teacher as described in subdivision two of this
section for salary, sick leave and any other purposes, the length of
service credited in such receiving district shall be credited as
employment time with such sending district.
 5. In the event that more than one sending district assumes the
education of students formerly provided by a receiving district, then
each teacher employed in the education of such students in such
receiving district at the time of such take back by more than one
sending district, shall select the particular sending district in which
he shall be considered an employee, with all of the rights and
privileges provided by the other provisions of this section. Such
selection of the particular sending district by such teacher is to be
based upon each teacher's seniority in such receiving district, with the
right of selection passing from such teachers with the most seniority to
such teachers with least seniority. Any such teacher who is unable to
obtain a teaching position in any such sending district because the
number of positions needed to provide the services required with such
sending district are less than the number of teachers eligible to be
considered employees of such sending districts, shall be placed on a
preferred eligible list in all such sending districts in the method and
with all of the rights provided by the other provisions of this section.
 6. This section shall in no way be construed to limit the rights of
any of such teachers described in this section granted by any other
provision of law.
 § 3014-d. Teachers' rights as a result of a school district sending
students to another district on a tuition basis pursuant to section two
thousand forty of this chapter. 1. As used in this section, a "sending
district" shall mean a school district which sends students to another
school district on a tuition basis pursuant to section two thousand
forty of this chapter, and a "receiving district" shall mean a school
district which receives and provides the educational program for
students from another district on a tuition basis pursuant to section
two thousand forty of this chapter.
 2. In any case in which a sending district sends such students to a
receiving district, each teacher previously employed in the education of
students by such sending district prior to the time that such sending
district sends its students to a receiving district shall be considered
an employee of such receiving district, with the same tenure status he
maintained in such sending district.
 3. If the number of teaching positions needed to provide the
educational services required by such receiving district is less than
the number of teachers eligible to be considered employees of such
receiving district as provided by subdivision two of this section, the
services of the teachers having the least seniority in the sending
district within the tenure area of the position shall be discontinued.
Such teachers shall be placed on a preferred eligible list of candidates
for appointment to a vacancy that may thereafter occur in an office or
position under the jurisdiction of the sending district and the
receiving district similar to the one such teacher filled in such
sending district. The teachers on such preferred list shall be
reinstated or appointed to such vacancies in such corresponding or
similar positions under the jurisdiction of the sending district or the
receiving district in the order of their length of service in such
sending district, within seven years from the date of the abolition of
such office or position.
 4. For any such teacher as described in subdivision two of this
section for salary, sick leave and any other purposes, the length of
service credited in such sending district shall be credited as
employment time with such receiving district.
 5. This section shall in no way be construed to limit the rights of
any of such teachers described in this section granted by any other
provision of law.
 § 3015. Teacher's salary when payable. 1. In school districts
employing fewer than eight teachers, the salary of any teacher so
employed shall be due and payable at least as often as once each
calendar month of the term of employment.
 2. In school districts employing eight or more teachers, the salary of
a teacher employed for a full school year shall be due and payable
within such school year in not less than ten installments. If a teacher
is employed in any such district after July first in any school year,
the amount of the salary that the school authorities agree at the time
of employment to pay such teacher for the balance of that school year
shall be due and payable within the school year at least as often as
once each calendar month that he is so employed. Nothing contained in
this subdivision shall be construed to alter the provisions of sections
twenty-five hundred nine, twenty-five hundred seventy-three, three
thousand twelve, and three thousand thirteen of this chapter.
 3. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to authorize
payment in advance of rendering service to the school district.
 § 3016. Contract when teacher is related to trustee or member of
board of education. 1. No person who is related to any trustee of a
common school district by blood or marriage shall be employed in such
district as a teacher, except with the approval of two-thirds of the
voters of such district present and voting upon the question at an
annual or special meeting of the district.
 2. No person who is related by blood or marriage to any member of a
board of education shall be employed as a teacher by such board, except
upon the consent of two-thirds of the members thereof to be determined
at a board meeting and to be entered upon the proceedings of the board.
 § 3017. Individual liability of trustees. Any person employed in
disregard of section three thousand eleven or of section three thousand
sixteen shall have no claim for wages against the district, but may
enforce the specific contract made against the trustees or board of
education consenting to such employment as individuals.
 § 3018. Revocation of certificate by district superintendent. A
district superintendent shall examine any charge affecting the moral
character of any teacher within his district, first giving such teacher
reasonable notice of the charge, and an opportunity to defend himself
therefrom; and if he find the charge sustained, he shall annul the
teacher's certificate, by whomsoever granted, and declare him unfit to
teach; and if the teacher holds a certificate of the commissioner of
education or of a former superintendent of public instruction or a
diploma of a state college for teachers or state teachers college, he
shall notify the commissioner of education forthwith of such annulment
and declaration.
 § 3019. Penalty for teacher's failure to complete contract. Any
failure on the part of a teacher to complete an agreement to teach a
term of school without good reason therefor shall be deemed sufficient
ground for the revocation of the teacher's certificate.
 § 3019-a. Notice of termination of service by teachers. A teacher who
desires to terminate his services to a school district at any time,
shall file a written notice thereof with the school authorities of such
school district or with the board of cooperative educational services or
county vocational education and extension board at least thirty days
prior to the date of such termination of services. School authorities
or such boards which desire to terminate the services of a teacher
during the probationary period shall give a written notice thereof to
such teacher at least thirty days prior to the effective date of such
termination of services.
 § 3020. Discipline of teachers. 1. No person enjoying the benefits of
tenure shall be disciplined or removed during a term of employment
except for just cause and in accordance with the procedures specified in
section three thousand twenty-a of this article or in accordance with
alternate disciplinary procedures contained in a collective bargaining
agreement covering such person's terms and conditions of employment that
was effective on or before September first, nineteen hundred ninety-four
and has been unaltered by renegotiation, or in accordance with
alternative disciplinary procedures contained in a collective bargaining
agreement covering such person's terms and conditions of employment that
becomes effective on or after September first, nineteen hundred
ninety-four; provided, however, that any such alternate disciplinary
procedures contained in a collective bargaining agreement that becomes
effective on or after September first, nineteen hundred ninety-four,
must provide for the written election by the employee of either the
procedures specified in such section three thousand twenty-a or the
alternative disciplinary procedures contained in the collective
bargaining agreement and must result in a disposition of the
disciplinary charge within the amount of time allowed therefor under
such section three thousand twenty-a.
 2. No person enjoying the benefits of tenure shall be suspended for a
fixed time without pay or dismissed due to a violation of article
thirteen-E of the public health law.
 3. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of law, the procedures
set forth in section three thousand twenty-a of this article and
subdivision seven of section twenty-five hundred ninety-j of this
chapter may be modified or replaced by agreements negotiated between the
city school district of the city of New York and any employee
organization representing employees or titles that are or were covered
by any memorandum of agreement executed by such city school district and
the council of supervisors and administrators of the city of New York on
or after December first, nineteen hundred ninety-nine. Where such
procedures are so modified or replaced: (i) compliance with such
modification or replacement procedures shall satisfy any provision in
this chapter that requires compliance with section three thousand
twenty-a of this article, (ii) any employee against whom charges have
been preferred prior to the effective date of such modification or
replacement shall continue to be subject to the provisions of such
section as in effect on the date such charges were preferred, (iii) the
provisions of subdivisions one and two of this section shall not apply
to agreements negotiated pursuant to this subdivision, and (iv) in
accordance with paragraph (e) of subdivision one of section two hundred
nine-a of the civil service law, such modification or replacement
procedures contained in an agreement negotiated pursuant to this
subdivision shall continue as terms of such agreement after its
expiration until a new agreement is negotiated. Notwithstanding any
inconsistent provision of law, the commissioner shall review any appeals
authorized by such modification or replacement procedures within fifteen
days from receipt by such commissioner of the record of prior
proceedings in the matter subject to appeal. Such review shall have
preference over all other appeals or proceedings pending before such
commissioner.
 4. a. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of law, the
procedures set forth in section three thousand twenty-a of this article
and subdivision seven of section twenty-five hundred ninety-j of this
chapter may be modified by agreements negotiated between the city school
district of the city of New York and any employee organization
representing employees or titles that are or were covered by any
memorandum of agreement executed by such city school district and the
united federation of teachers on or after June tenth, two thousand two.
Where such procedures are so modified: (i) compliance with such modified
procedures shall satisfy any provision of this chapter that requires
compliance with section three thousand twenty-a of this article; (ii)
any employee against whom charges have been preferred prior to the
effective date of such modification shall continue to be subject to the
provisions of such section as in effect on the date such charges were
preferred; (iii) the provisions of subdivisions one and two of this
section shall not apply to agreements negotiated pursuant to this
subdivision, except that no person enjoying the benefits of tenure shall
be disciplined or removed during a term of employment except for just
cause; and (iv) in accordance with paragraph (e) of subdivision one of
section two hundred nine-a of the civil service law, such modified
procedures contained in an agreement negotiated pursuant to this
subdivision shall continue as terms of such agreement after its
expiration until a new agreement is negotiated.
 b. Any modifications to the procedures set forth in section three
thousand twenty-a of this article and subdivision seven of section
twenty-five hundred ninety-j of this chapter shall not change the manner
in which the fees and expenses of such proceedings pursuant to the
aforesaid sections are paid.
 § 3020-a. Disciplinary procedures and penalties. 1. Filing of charges.
All charges against a person enjoying the benefits of tenure as provided
in subdivision three of section eleven hundred two, and sections
twenty-five hundred nine, twenty-five hundred seventy-three, twenty-five
hundred ninety-j, three thousand twelve and three thousand fourteen of
this chapter shall be in writing and filed with the clerk or secretary
of the school district or employing board during the period between the
actual opening and closing of the school year for which the employed is
normally required to serve. Except as provided in subdivision eight of
section twenty-five hundred seventy-three and subdivision seven of
section twenty-five hundred ninety-j of this chapter, no charges under
this section shall be brought more than three years after the occurrence
of the alleged incompetency or misconduct, except when the charge is of
misconduct constituting a crime when committed.
 2. Disposition of charges. a. Upon receipt of the charges, the clerk
or secretary of the school district or employing board shall immediately
notify said board thereof. Within five days after receipt of charges,
the employing board, in executive session, shall determine, by a vote of
a majority of all the members of such board, whether probable cause
exists to bring a disciplinary proceeding against an employee pursuant
to this section. If such determination is affirmative, a written
statement specifying (i) the charges in detail, (ii) the maximum penalty
which will be imposed by the board if the employee does not request a
hearing or that will be sought by the board if the employee is found
guilty of the charges after a hearing and (iii) the employee's rights
under this section, shall be immediately forwarded to the accused
employee by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested or by
personal delivery to the employee.
 b. The employee may be suspended pending a hearing on the charges and
the final determination thereof. The suspension shall be with pay,
except the employee may be suspended without pay if the employee has
entered a guilty plea to or has been convicted of a felony crime
concerning the criminal sale or possession of a controlled substance, a
precursor of a controlled substance, or drug paraphernalia as defined in
article two hundred twenty or two hundred twenty-one of the penal law;
or a felony crime involving the physical abuse of a minor or student.
 c. Where charges of misconduct constituting physical or sexual abuse
of a student are brought on or after July first, two thousand fifteen,
the board of education may suspend the employee without pay pending an
expedited hearing pursuant to subparagraph (i-a) of paragraph c of
subdivision three of this section. Notwithstanding any other law, rule,
or regulation to the contrary, the commissioner shall establish a
process in regulations for a probable cause hearing before an impartial
hearing officer within ten days to determine whether the decision to
suspend an employee without pay pursuant to this paragraph should be
continued or reversed. The process for selection of an impartial hearing
officer shall be as similar as possible to the regulatory framework for
the appointment of an impartial hearing officer for due process
complaints pursuant to section forty-four hundred four of this chapter.
The hearing officer shall determine whether probable cause supports the
charges and shall reverse the decision of the board of education to
suspend the employee without pay and reinstate such pay upon a finding
that probable cause does not support the charges. The hearing officer
may also reinstate pay upon a written determination that a suspension
without pay is grossly disproportionate in light of all surrounding
circumstances. Provided, further, that such an employee shall be
eligible to receive reimbursement for withheld pay and accrued interest
at a rate of six percent compounded annually if the hearing officer
finds in his or her favor, either at the probable cause hearing or in a
final determination pursuant to the expedited hearing held pursuant to
subparagraph (i-a) of paragraph c of subdivision three of this section.
Any suspension without pay shall last no longer than one hundred and
twenty days from the decision of the board of education to suspend the
employee without pay and such suspension shall only relate to employee
compensation, exclusive of other benefits and guarantees.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law or regulation to the
contrary, any provision of a collective bargaining agreement entered
into by the city of New York as of April first, two thousand fifteen,
that provides for suspension without pay for offenses as specified in
this paragraph shall supersede the provisions hereof and shall continue
in effect without modification and may be extended.
 d. The employee shall be terminated without a hearing, as provided for
in this section, upon conviction of a sex offense, as defined in
subparagraph two of paragraph b of subdivision seven-a of section three
hundred five of this chapter. To the extent this section applies to an
employee acting as a school administrator or supervisor, as defined in
subparagraph three of paragraph b of subdivision seven-b of section
three hundred five of this chapter, such employee shall be terminated
without a hearing, as provided for in this section, upon conviction of a
felony offense defined in subparagraph two of paragraph b of subdivision
seven-b of section three hundred five of this chapter.
 e. (i) For hearings commenced by the filing of charges prior to July
first, two thousand fifteen, within ten days of receipt of the statement
of charges, the employee shall notify the clerk or secretary of the
employing board in writing whether he or she desires a hearing on the
charges and when the charges concern pedagogical incompetence or issues
involving pedagogical judgment, his or her choice of either a single
hearing officer or a three member panel, provided that a three member
panel shall not be available where the charges concern pedagogical
incompetence based solely upon a teacher's or principal's pattern of
ineffective teaching or performance as defined in section three thousand
twelve-c of this article. All other charges shall be heard by a single
hearing officer.
 (ii) All hearings commenced by the filing of charges on or after July
first, two thousand fifteen shall be heard by a single hearing officer.
 f. The unexcused failure of the employee to notify the clerk or
secretary of his or her desire for a hearing within ten days of the
receipt of charges shall be deemed a waiver of the right to a hearing.
Where an employee requests a hearing in the manner provided for by this
section, the clerk or secretary of the board shall, within three working
days of receipt of the employee's notice or request for a hearing,
notify the commissioner of the need for a hearing. If the employee
waives his or her right to a hearing the employing board shall proceed,
within fifteen days, by a vote of a majority of all members of such
board, to determine the case and fix the penalty, if any, to be imposed
in accordance with subdivision four of this section.
 3. Hearings. a. Notice of hearing. Upon receipt of a request for a
hearing in accordance with subdivision two of this section, the
commissioner shall forthwith notify the American Arbitration Association
(hereinafter "association") of the need for a hearing and shall request
the association to provide to the commissioner forthwith a list of names
of persons chosen by the association from the association's panel of
labor arbitrators to potentially serve as hearing officers together with
relevant biographical information on each arbitrator. Upon receipt of
said list and biographical information, the commissioner shall forthwith
send a copy of both simultaneously to the employing board and the
employee. The commissioner shall also simultaneously notify both the
employing board and the employee of each potential hearing officer's
record in the last five cases of commencing and completing hearings
within the time periods prescribed in this section.
 b. (i) Hearing officers. All hearings pursuant to this section shall
be conducted before and by a single hearing officer selected as provided
for in this section. A hearing officer shall not be eligible to serve in
such position if he or she is a resident of the school district, other
than the city of New York, under the jurisdiction of the employing
board, an employee, agent or representative of the employing board or of
any labor organization representing employees of such employing board,
has served as such agent or representative within two years of the date
of the scheduled hearing, or if he or she is then serving as a mediator
or fact finder in the same school district.
 (A) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, for hearings commenced
by the filing of charges prior to April first, two thousand twelve, the
hearing officer shall be compensated by the department with the
customary fee paid for service as an arbitrator under the auspices of
the association for each day of actual service plus necessary travel and
other reasonable expenses incurred in the performance of his or her
duties. All other expenses of the disciplinary proceedings commenced by
the filing of charges prior to April first, two thousand twelve shall be
paid in accordance with rules promulgated by the commissioner. Claims
for such compensation for days of actual service and reimbursement for
necessary travel and other expenses for hearings commenced by the filing
of charges prior to April first, two thousand twelve shall be paid from
an appropriation for such purpose in the order in which they have been
approved by the commissioner for payment, provided payment shall first
be made for any other hearing costs payable by the commissioner,
including the costs of transcribing the record, and provided further
that no such claim shall be set aside for insufficiency of funds to make
a complete payment, but shall be eligible for a partial payment in one
year and shall retain its priority date status for appropriations
designated for such purpose in future years.
 (B) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, rule or regulation to
the contrary, for hearings commenced by the filing of charges on or
after April first, two thousand twelve, the hearing officer shall be
compensated by the department for each day of actual service plus
necessary travel and other reasonable expenses incurred in the
performance of his or her duties, provided that the commissioner shall
establish a schedule for maximum rates of compensation of hearing
officers based on customary and reasonable fees for service as an
arbitrator and provide for limitations on the number of study hours that
may be claimed.
 (ii) The commissioner shall mail to the employing board and the
employee the list of potential hearing officers and biographies provided
to the commissioner by the association, the employing board and the
employee, individually or through their agents or representatives, shall
by mutual agreement select a hearing officer from said list to conduct
the hearing and shall notify the commissioner of their selection.
 (iii) Within fifteen days after receiving the list of potential
hearing officers as described in subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph,
the employing board and the employee shall each notify the commissioner
of their agreed upon hearing officer selection. If the employing board
and the employee fail to agree on an arbitrator to serve as a hearing
officer from the list of potential hearing officers, or fail to notify
the commissioner of a selection within such fifteen day time period, the
commissioner shall appoint a hearing officer from the list. The
provisions of this subparagraph shall not apply in cities with a
population of one million or more with alternative procedures specified
in section three thousand twenty of this article.
 (iv) In those cases commenced by the filing of charges prior to July
first, two thousand fifteen in which the employee elects to have the
charges heard by a hearing panel, the hearing panel shall consist of the
hearing officer, selected in accordance with this subdivision, and two
additional persons, one selected by the employee and one selected by the
employing board, from a list maintained for such purpose by the
commissioner. The list shall be composed of professional personnel with
administrative or supervisory responsibility, professional personnel
without administrative or supervisory responsibility, chief school
administrators, members of employing boards and others selected from
lists of nominees submitted to the commissioner by statewide
organizations representing teachers, school administrators and
supervisors and the employing boards. Hearing panel members other than
the hearing officer shall be compensated by the department at the rate
of one hundred dollars for each day of actual service plus necessary
travel and subsistence expenses. The hearing officer shall be
compensated as set forth in this subdivision. The hearing officer shall
be the chairperson of the hearing panel.
 c. Hearing procedures. (i) (A) The commissioner shall have the power
to establish necessary rules and procedures for the conduct of hearings
under this section.
 (B) The department shall be authorized to monitor and investigate a
hearing officer's compliance with statutory timelines pursuant to this
section. The commissioner shall annually inform all hearing officers who
have heard cases pursuant to this section during the preceding year that
the time periods prescribed in this section for conducting such hearings
are to be strictly followed. A record of continued failure to commence
and complete hearings within the time periods prescribed in this section
shall be considered grounds for the commissioner to exclude such
individual from the list of potential hearing officers sent to the
employing board and the employee for such hearings.
 (C) Such rules shall not require compliance with technical rules of
evidence. Hearings shall be conducted by the hearing officer selected
pursuant to paragraph b of this subdivision with full and fair
disclosure of the nature of the case and evidence against the employee
by the employing board and shall be public or private at the discretion
of the employee and provided further that the hearing officer, at the
pre-hearing conference, shall set a schedule and manner for full and
fair disclosure of the witnesses and evidence to be offered by the
employee. The employee shall have a reasonable opportunity to defend
himself or herself and an opportunity to testify in his or her own
behalf. The employee shall not be required to testify. Each party shall
have the right to be represented by counsel, to subpoena witnesses, and
to cross-examine witnesses. All testimony taken shall be under oath
which the hearing officer is hereby authorized to administer. A child
witness under the age of fourteen may be permitted to testify through
the use of live, two-way closed-circuit television, as such term is
defined in subdivision four of section 65.00 of the criminal procedure
law, when the hearing officer, after providing the employee with an
opportunity to be heard, determines by clear and convincing evidence
that such child witness would suffer serious mental or emotional harm
which would substantially impair such child's ability to communicate if
required to testify at the hearing without the use of live, two-way
closed-circuit television and that the use of such live, two-way
closed-circuit television will diminish the likelihood or extent of such
harm. In making such determination, the hearing officer shall consider
any applicable factors contained in subdivision ten of section 65.20 of
the criminal procedure law. Where the hearing officer determines that
such child witness will be permitted to testify through the use of live,
two-way closed-circuit television, the testimony of such child witness
shall be taken in a manner consistent with section 65.30 of the criminal
procedure law.
 (D) An accurate record of the proceedings shall be kept at the expense
of the department at each such hearing in accordance with the
regulations of the commissioner. A copy of the record of the hearings
shall, upon request, be furnished without charge to the employee and the
board of education involved. The department shall be authorized to
utilize any new technology or such other appropriate means to transcribe
or record such hearings in an accurate, reliable, efficient and
cost-effective manner without any charge to the employee or board of
education involved.
 (i-a)(A) Where charges of misconduct constituting physical or sexual
abuse of a student are brought, the hearing shall be conducted before
and by a single hearing officer in an expedited hearing, which shall
commence within seven days after the pre-hearing conference and shall be
completed within sixty days after the pre-hearing conference. The
hearing officer shall establish a hearing schedule at the pre-hearing
conference to ensure that the expedited hearing is completed within the
required timeframes and to ensure an equitable distribution of days
between the employing board and the charged employee. Notwithstanding
any other law, rule or regulation to the contrary, no adjournments may
be granted that would extend the hearing beyond such sixty days, except
as authorized in this subparagraph. A hearing officer, upon request, may
grant a limited and time specific adjournment that would extend the
hearing beyond such sixty days if the hearing officer determines that
the delay is attributable to a circumstance or occurrence substantially
beyond the control of the requesting party and an injustice would result
if the adjournment were not granted.
 (B) The commissioner shall annually inform all hearing officers who
have heard cases pursuant to this section during the preceding year that
the time periods prescribed in this subparagraph for conducting
expedited hearings are to be strictly followed and failure to do so
shall be considered grounds for the commissioner to exclude such
individual from the list of potential hearing officers sent to the
employing board and the employee for such expedited hearings.
 (ii) The hearing officer selected to conduct a hearing under this
section shall, within ten to fifteen days of agreeing to serve in such
position, hold a pre-hearing conference which shall be held in the
school district or county seat of the county, or any county, wherein the
employing school board is located. The pre-hearing conference shall be
limited in length to one day except that the hearing officer, in his or
her discretion, may allow one additional day for good cause shown.
 (iii) At the pre-hearing conference the hearing officer shall have the
power to:
 (A) issue subpoenas;
 (B) hear and decide all motions, including but not limited to motions
to dismiss the charges;
 (C) hear and decide all applications for bills of particular or
requests for production of materials or information, including, but not
limited to, any witness statement (or statements), investigatory
statement (or statements) or note (notes), exculpatory evidence or any
other evidence, including district or student records, relevant and
material to the employee's defense.
 (iv) Any pre-hearing motion or application relative to the sufficiency
of the charges, application or amendment thereof, or any preliminary
matters shall be made upon written notice to the hearing officer and the
adverse party no less than five days prior to the date of the
pre-hearing conference. Any pre-hearing motions or applications not made
as provided for herein shall be deemed waived except for good cause as
determined by the hearing officer.
 (v) In the event that at the pre-hearing conference the employing
board presents evidence that the professional license of the employee
has been revoked and all judicial and administrative remedies have been
exhausted or foreclosed, the hearing officer shall schedule the date,
time and place for an expedited hearing, which hearing shall commence
not more than seven days after the pre-hearing conference and which
shall be limited to one day. The expedited hearing shall be held in the
local school district or county seat of the county or any county,
wherein the said employing board is located. The expedited hearing shall
not be postponed except upon the request of a party and then only for
good cause as determined by the hearing officer. At such hearing, each
party shall have equal time in which to present its case.
 (vi) During the pre-hearing conference, the hearing officer shall
determine the reasonable amount of time necessary for a final hearing on
the charge or charges and shall schedule the location, time(s) and
date(s) for the final hearing. The final hearing shall be held in the
local school district or county seat of the county, or any county,
wherein the said employing school board is located. In the event that
the hearing officer determines that the nature of the case requires the
final hearing to last more than one day, the days that are scheduled for
the final hearing shall be consecutive. The day or days scheduled for
the final hearing shall not be postponed except upon the request of a
party and then only for good cause shown as determined by the hearing
officer. In all cases, the final hearing shall be completed no later
than sixty days after the pre-hearing conference unless the hearing
officer determines that extraordinary circumstances warrant a limited
extension.
 (vii) All evidence shall be submitted by all parties within one
hundred twenty-five days of the filing of charges and no additional
evidence shall be accepted after such time, absent extraordinary
circumstances beyond the control of the parties.
 d. Limitation on claims. Notwithstanding any other provision of law,
rule or regulation to the contrary, no payments shall be made by the
department pursuant to this subdivision on or after April first, two
thousand twelve for: (i) compensation of a hearing officer or hearing
panel member, (ii) reimbursement of such hearing officers or panel
members for necessary travel or other expenses incurred by them, or
(iii) for other hearing expenses on a claim submitted later than one
year after the final disposition of the hearing by any means, including
settlement, or within ninety days after the effective date of this
paragraph, whichever is later; provided that no payment shall be barred
or reduced where such payment is required as a result of a court order
or judgment or a final audit.
 4. Post hearing procedures. a. The hearing officer shall render a
written decision within thirty days of the last day of the final
hearing, or in the case of an expedited hearing within ten days of such
expedited hearing, and shall forward a copy thereof to the commissioner
who shall immediately forward copies of the decision to the employee and
to the clerk or secretary of the employing board. The written decision
shall include the hearing officer's findings of fact on each charge, his
or her conclusions with regard to each charge based on said findings and
shall state what penalty or other action, if any, shall be taken by the
employing board. At the request of the employee, in determining what, if
any, penalty or other action shall be imposed, the hearing officer may
consider the extent to which the employing board made efforts towards
correcting the behavior of the employee which resulted in charges being
brought under this section through means including but not limited to:
remediation, peer intervention or an employee assistance plan. In those
cases where a penalty is imposed, such penalty may be a written
reprimand, a fine, suspension for a fixed time without pay, or
dismissal. In addition to or in lieu of the aforementioned penalties,
the hearing officer, where he or she deems appropriate, may impose upon
the employee remedial action including but not limited to leaves of
absence with or without pay, continuing education and/or study, a
requirement that the employee seek counseling or medical treatment or
that the employee engage in any other remedial or combination of
remedial actions. Provided, however, that the hearing officer, in
exercising his or her discretion, shall give serious consideration to
the penalty recommended by the employing board, and if the hearing
officer rejects the recommended penalty such rejection must be based on
reasons based upon the record as expressed in a written determination.
 b. Within fifteen days of receipt of the hearing officer's decision
the employing board shall implement the decision. If the employee is
acquitted he or she shall be restored to his or her position with full
pay for any period of suspension without pay and the charges expunged
from the employment record. If an employee who was convicted of a felony
crime specified in paragraph b of subdivision two of this section, has
said conviction reversed, the employee, upon application, shall be
entitled to have his or her pay and other emoluments restored, for the
period from the date of his or her suspension to the date of the
decision.
 c. The hearing officer shall indicate in the decision whether any of
the charges brought by the employing board were frivolous as defined in
section eighty-three hundred three-a of the civil practice law and
rules. If the hearing officer finds that all of the charges brought
against the employee were frivolous, the hearing officer shall order the
employing board to reimburse the department the reasonable costs said
department incurred as a result of the proceeding and to reimburse the
employee the reasonable costs, including but not limited to reasonable
attorneys' fees, the employee incurred in defending the charges. If the
hearing officer finds that some but not all of the charges brought
against the employee were frivolous, the hearing officer shall order the
employing board to reimburse the department a portion, in the discretion
of the hearing officer, of the reasonable costs said department incurred
as a result of the proceeding and to reimburse the employee a portion,
in the discretion of the hearing officer, of the reasonable costs,
including but not limited to reasonable attorneys' fees, the employee
incurred in defending the charges.
 5. Appeal. a. Not later than ten days after receipt of the hearing
officer's decision, the employee or the employing board may make an
application to the New York state supreme court to vacate or modify the
decision of the hearing officer pursuant to section seventy-five hundred
eleven of the civil practice law and rules. The court's review shall be
limited to the grounds set forth in such section. The hearing panel's
determination shall be deemed to be final for the purpose of such
proceeding.
 b. In no case shall the filing or the pendency of an appeal delay the
implementation of the decision of the hearing officer.
 § 3021. Removal of superintendents, teachers and employees for
treasonable or seditious acts or utterances. A person employed as
superintendent of schools, teacher or employee in the public schools, in
any city or school district of the state, shall be removed from such
position for the utterance of any treasonable or seditious word or words
or the doing of any treasonable or seditious act or acts while holding
such position.
 § 3021-a. Notification of accusatory instrument alleging a sex
offense. 1. For purposes of this section:
 (a) The term "employee" means any person receiving compensation from a
school district, charter school, board of cooperation educational
services, private elementary or secondary school, special education
schools, or employee of a contracted service provider or worker placed
within the school under a public assistance employment program pursuant
to title nine-B of article five of the social services law, and
consistent with the provisions of such title for the provision of
services to such district or school, its students or employees, directly
or through contract, whereby such services performed by such person
involved direct student contact.
 (b) The term "sex offense" means an offense for which registration as
a sex offender is required pursuant to article six-C of the correction
law.
 2. When an accusatory instrument has been filed alleging the
commission of a sex offense by a person known to be an employee of a
school district, charter school, board of cooperative educational
services, private elementary or secondary school, or special education
schools, it is the responsibility of the district attorney to
immediately notify the superintendent of schools or school administrator
that employs such employee of the accusatory instrument and the sex
offense or offenses alleged therein.
 3. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to diminish the rights,
privileges, or remedies of any employee contained within section three
thousand twenty-a of this article, or section seventy-five of the civil
service law, or under any collective bargaining agreement or employment
contract.
 § 3022. Elimination of subversive persons from the public school
system. 1. The board of regents shall adopt, promulgate, and enforce
rules and regulations for the disqualification or removal of
superintendents of schools, teachers or employees in the public schools
in any city or school district of the state and the faculty members and
all other personnel and employees of any college or other institution of
higher education owned and operated by the state or any subdivision
thereof who violate the provisions of section three thousand twenty-one
of this article or who are ineligible for appointment to or retention in
any office or position in such public schools or such institutions of
higher education on any of the grounds set forth in section twelve-a of
the civil service law and shall provide therein appropriate methods and
procedure for the enforcement of such sections of this article and the
civil service law.
 2. The board of regents shall, after inquiry, and after such notice
and hearing as may be appropriate, make a listing of organizations which
it finds to be subversive in that they advocate, advise, teach or
embrace the doctrine that the government of the United States or of any
state or of any political subdivision thereof shall be overthrown or
overturned by force, violence or any unlawful means, or that they
advocate, advise, teach or embrace the duty, necessity or propriety of
adopting any such doctrine, as set forth in section twelve-a of the
civil service law. Such listings may be amended and revised from time to
time. The board, in making such inquiry, may utilize any similar
listings or designations promulgated by any federal agency or authority
authorized by federal law, regulation or executive order, and for the
purposes of such inquiry, the board may request and receive from such
federal agencies or authorities any supporting material or evidence that
may be made available to it. The board of regents shall provide in the
rules and regulations required by subdivision one hereof that membership
in any such organization included in such listing made by it shall
constitute prima facie evidence of disqualification for appointment to
or retention in any office or position in the public schools of the
state.
 3. The board of regents shall annually, on or before the fifteenth day
of February, by separate report, render to the legislature, a full
statement of measures taken by it for the enforcement of such provisions
of law and to require compliance therewith. Such reports shall contain a
description of surveys made by the board of regents, from time to time,
as may be appropriate, to ascertain the extent to which such provisions
of law have been enforced in the city and school districts of the state.
 § 3023. Liability of a board of education, trustee, trustees or board
of cooperative educational services. Notwithstanding any inconsistent
provision of law, general, special or local, or the limitation contained
in the provisions of any city charter, it shall be the duty of each
board of education, trustee or trustees, in any school district having a
population of less than one million, and each board of cooperative
educational services established pursuant to section nineteen hundred
fifty of this chapter, to save harmless and protect all teachers,
practice or cadet teachers, authorized participants in a school
volunteer program, and members of supervisory and administrative staff
or employees from financial loss arising out of any claim, demand, suit
or judgment by reason of alleged negligence or other act resulting in
accidental bodily injury to any person, or accidental damage to the
property of any person within or without the school building, provided
such teacher, practice or cadet teacher, authorized participant in a
school volunteer program, or member of the supervisory or administrative
staff or employee at the time of the accident or injury was acting in
the discharge of his duties within the scope of his employment or
authorized volunteer duties and/or under the direction of said board of
education, trustee, trustees or board of cooperative educational
services; and said board of education, trustee, trustees or board of
cooperative educational services may arrange for and maintain
appropriate insurance with any insurance company created by or under the
laws of this state, or in any insurance company authorized by law to
transact business in this state, or such board, trustee, trustees or
board of cooperative educational services may elect to act as
self-insurers to maintain the aforesaid protection. A board of
education, trustee, board of trustees, or board of cooperative
educational services, however, shall not be subject to the duty imposed
by this section, unless such teacher, practice or cadet teacher,
authorized participant in a school volunteer program, or member of the
supervisory and administrative staff or employee shall, within ten days
of the time he is served with any summons, complaint, process, notice,
demand or pleading, deliver the original or a copy of the same to such
board of education, trustee, board of trustes, or board of cooperative
educational services.
 § 3024. Teachers responsible for record books. School lists and
accounts of attendance shall be kept and prepared and entries shall be
made in regards thereto, in such manner, as shall be prescribed by the
commissioner of education by regulation or otherwise.
 § 3025. Verification of school register. 1. Each teacher, or other
school district employee as may be designated by the commissioner of
education under section three thousand twenty-four of this chapter,
shall, by his oath or affirmation verify any information submitted by
such person to the school district for the purposes of use as or in the
preparation of school registers in such manner as may be prescribed by
the commissioner of education under section three thousand twenty-four
of this chapter, and such school records shall constitute the source
from which the average daily attendance shall be determined. Such oath
or affirmation may be taken by the district clerk or trustee, but
without charge.
 2. A teacher or other school district employee as may be designated by
the commissioner of education under section three thousand twenty-four
of this chapter shall not be entitled to his salary for the last month
of a term until he shall have made such verification and submitted such
information as is required by subdivision one of this section, and the
trustees shall not draw on the county treasurer, or collector or
treasurer of the district, for any portion of his salary for such month
until such verification shall have been made.
 § 3026. Discriminations based on sex prohibited. There shall be no
discrimination in the determination of the amount to be paid or the
payments to be made to persons employed as teachers in the public
schools in any city, union free or common school district in this state,
based on sex. All contracts hereafter made for the employment of public
school teachers and all schedules of salaries and salary increments
adopted by boards of education, as provided in this chapter, shall not
discriminate between the salaries and salary increments of public school
teachers to be paid under such contracts and schedules because of the
sex of said public school teachers, notwithstanding the provisions of
any general or special law inconsistent herewith.
 § 3027. Discrimination based on age prohibited. Notwithstanding any
provision of law to the contrary, no board of education in any city,
union free, common or central school district in this state shall
hereafter prohibit, prevent, disqualify or discriminate against any
person who is physically and mentally qualified from competing,
participating, or registering for an examination for or from qualifying
for, a position as teacher, or be penalized in a final rating by reason
of his or her age. Any such rule, requirement, resolution, regulation
or penalization of such board shall be void.
 Nothing herein contained, however, shall prevent such board from
adopting reasonable minimum or maximum age requirements for positions
which require extraordinary physical effort, except where age limits for
such positions are already prescribed by law.
 § 3028. Liability of school district for cost and attorney's fees of
action against, or prosecutions of, teachers, members of supervisory and
administrative staff or employees, and school volunteers.
Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of any general, special or
local law, or the limitations contained in the provisions of any city
charter, each board of education, trustee or trustees in the state shall
provide an attorney or attorneys for, and pay such attorney's fees and
expenses necessarily incurred in the defense of a teacher, member of a
supervisory or administrative staff or employee, or authorized
participant in a school volunteer program in any civil or ciminal action
or proceeding arising out of disciplinary action taken against any pupil
of the district while in the discharge of his duties within the scope of
his employment or authorized volunteer duties. For such purposes the
board of education, trustee or trustees may arrange for and maintain
appropriate insurance with any insurance company created by or under the
laws of this state, or in any insurance company authorized by law to
transact business in this state, or such board, trustee or trustees may
elect to act as self-insurers to maintain the aforesaid protection. A
board of education, trustee or board of trustees, however, shall not be
subject to the duty imposed by this section, unless such teacher, or
member of the supervisory and administrative staff or employee or
authorized participant in a school volunteer program shall, within ten
days of the time he is served with any summons, complaint, process,
notice, demand or pleading, deliver the original or a copy of the same
to such board of education, trustee or board of trustees.
 § 3028-a. Students under twenty-one years of age suspected of alcohol
abuse or narcotic addiction. Any teacher, school administrator, school
guidance counselor, school psychologist, school drug counselor, school
nurse, supervisor of attendance, attendance teacher or attendance
officer having reasonable cause to suspect that a secondary or
elementary student under twenty-one years of age is a substance or
alcohol abuser or substance dependent, who report such information to
the appropriate secondary or elementary school officials pursuant to the
school's drug policy or if the school has no drug policy to the school's
principal or the parents or legal guardians of such student under
twenty-one years of age shall have immunity from any civil liability
that might otherwise be incurred or imposed as a result of the making of
such a report.
 § 3028-b. Notification of teachers' duty to provide information and
immunity from liability. Each school shall annually provide to each
teacher and all other school officials a written explanation concerning
the reporting of pupil drug abuse, child abuse, and child abuse in an
educational setting including the immunity provisions of section three
thousand twenty-eight-a of this article and section eleven hundred
twenty-six of this chapter and sections four hundred thirteen and four
hundred nineteen of the social services law. The commissioner, with the
assistance and cooperation of the commissioner of children and family
services and the commissioner of criminal justice services, shall
furnish each school district with the required information. Such
information shall be updated by the commissioner at least once each
school year.
 § 3028-c. Protection of school employees who report acts of violence
and weapons possession. Any school employee having reasonable cause to
suspect that a person has committed an act of violence while in or on
school property, or having reasonable cause to suspect that a person has
committed an act of violence upon a student, school employee or
volunteer either upon school grounds or elsewhere, or having reasonable
cause to suspect that a person has brought a gun, knife, bomb or other
instrument capable of or that appears capable of causing death or
physical injury upon school grounds who in good faith reports such
information to school officials, to the commissioner, or to law
enforcement authorities, shall have immunity from any civil liability
that may arise from the making of such report, and no school district or
school district employee shall take, request or cause a retaliatory
action against any such employee who makes such report.
 § 3028-d. Protection of school employees who report information
regarding illegal or inappropriate financial practices. Any employee of
a school district, board of cooperative educational services, or charter
school having reasonable cause to suspect that the fiscal practices or
actions of an employee or officer of a school district, charter school,
or board of cooperative educational services, violate any local, state,
federal law or rule and regulation, relating to the financial practices
of such entity and who in good faith reports such information to an
official of such school district, board of cooperative educational
services or charter school, or to the office of the state comptroller,
the commissioner or to law enforcement authorities, shall have immunity
from any civil liability that may arise from the making of such report,
and no school district, or employee or officer thereof, charter school,
or employee or officer thereof, or board of cooperative educational
services, or employee or officer thereof, shall take, request, or cause
a retaliatory action against any such employee who makes such report.
 § 3029. Hours of continuous duty for full time teachers. Except in a
city having a population of one million or more persons the school
authorities of any school district employing two or more teachers shall
fix the hours of duty for full time teachers so that no teacher shall be
assigned continuous duty for a length of time in excess of five hours.
When the daily total hours of duty exceed five, duties must be assigned
so as to provide a period of at least thirty minutes in length which
shall be free from assigned duties and which shall be scheduled so far
as practical during the hours normally allotted for pupils' lunch
periods.
 § 3029-a. Silent meditation in public schools. 1. In each public
school classroom, the teacher in charge may, or if so authorized or
directed by the board of education by which he is employed, shall, at
the opening of school upon every school day, conduct a brief period of
silent meditation with the participation of all the pupils therein
assembled.
 2. The silent meditation authorized by subsection one of this act is
not intended to be, and shall not be conducted as, a religious service
or exercise, but may be considered as an opportunity for silent
meditation on a religious theme by those who are so disposed, or a
moment of silent reflection on the anticipated activities of the day.
As used in subdivision one of this section the term "participation"
shall be construed to permit seated participation and not to require any
pupil to stand.
 § 3030. Interstate agreement on qualifications of educational
personnel. 1. The interstate agreement on qualifications of educational
personnel is hereby enacted into law and entered into with all
jurisdictions legally joining therein in the form substantially as
follows:
 INTERSTATE AGREEMENT ON QUALIFICATIONS OF EDUCATIONAL PERSONNEL
 Article I
 Purpose, Findings, and Policy
 1. The states party to this agreement, desiring by common action to
improve their respective school systems by utilizing the teacher or
other professional educational person wherever educated, declare that it
is the policy of each of them, on the basis of cooperation with one
another, to take advantage of the preparation and experience of such
persons wherever gained, thereby serving the best interests of society,
of education, and of the teaching profession. It is the purpose of this
agreement to provide for the development and execution of such programs
of cooperation as will facilitate the movement of teachers and other
professional educational personnel among the states party to it, and to
authorize specific interstate educational personnel contracts to achieve
that end.
 2. The party states find that included in the large movement of
population among all sections of the nation are many qualified
educational personnel who move for family and other personal reasons but
who are hindered in using their professional skill and experience in
their new locations. Variations from state to state in requirements for
qualifying educational personnel discourage such personnel from taking
the steps necessary to qualify in other states. As a consequence, a
significant number of professionally prepared and experienced educators
is lost to our school systems. Facilitating the employment of qualified
educational personnel, without reference to their states of origin, can
increase the available educational resources. Participation in this
compact can increase the availability of educational manpower.
 Article II
 Definitions
 As used in this agreement and contracts made pursuant to it, unless
the context clearly requires otherwise:
 1. "Educational personnel" means persons who must meet requirements
pursuant to state law as a condition of employment in educational
programs.
 2. "Designated state official" means the educational official of a
state selected by that state to negotiate and enter into, on behalf of
this state, contracts pursuant to this agreement.
 3. "Accept", or any variant thereof, means to recognize and give
effect to one or more determinations of another state relating to the
qualifications of educational personnel in lieu of making or requiring a
like determination that would otherwise be required by or pursuant to
the laws of a receiving state.
 4. "State" means a state, territory, or possession of the United
States; the district of Columbia; or the commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
 5. "Originating state" means a state (and the subdivision thereof, if
any) whose determination that certain educational personnel are
qualified to be employed for specific duties in schools is acceptable in
accordance with the terms of a contract made pursuant to article III.
 6. "Receiving state" means a state (and the subdivisions thereof)
which accepts educational personnel in accordance with the terms of a
contract made pursuant to article III.
 Article III
 Interstate Educational Personnel Contracts
 1. The designated state official of a party state may make one or more
contracts on behalf of his state with one or more other party states
providing for the acceptance of educational personnel. Any such contract
for the period of its duration shall be applicable to and binding on the
states whose designated state officials enter into it, and the
subdivisions of those states, with the same force and effect as if
incorporated in this agreement. A designated state official may enter
into a contract pursuant to this article only with states in which he
finds that there are programs of education, certification standards or
other acceptable qualifications that assure preparation or qualification
of educational personnel on a basis sufficiently comparable, even though
not identical to that prevailing in his own state.
 2. Any such contract shall provide for:
 (a) Its duration.
 (b) The criteria to be applied by an originating state in qualifying
educational personnel for acceptance by a receiving state.
 (c) Such waivers, substitutions, and conditional acceptances as shall
aid the practical effectuation of the contract without sacrifice of
basic educational standards.
 (d) Any other necessary matters.
 3. No contract made pursuant to this agreement shall be for a term
longer than five years but any such contract may be renewed for like or
lesser periods.
 4. Any contract dealing with acceptance of educational personnel on
the basis of their having completed an educational program shall specify
the earliest date or dates on which originating state approval of the
program or programs involved can have occurred. No contract made
pursuant to this agreement shall require acceptance by a receiving state
of any persons qualified because of successful completion of a program
prior to January first, nineteen hundred fifty-four.
 5. The certification or other acceptance of a person who has been
accepted pursuant to the terms of a contract shall not be revoked or
otherwise impaired because the contract has expired or been terminated.
However, any certificate or other qualifying document may be revoked or
suspended on any ground which would be sufficient for revocation or
suspension of a certificate or other qualifying document initially
granted or approved in the receiving state.
 6. A contract committee composed of the designated state officials of
the contracting states or their representatives shall keep the contract
under continuous review, study means of improving its administration,
and report no less frequently than once a year to the heads of the
appropriate education agencies of the contracting states.
 Article IV
 Approved and Accepted Programs
 1. Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to repeal or otherwise
modify any law or regulation of a party State relating to the approval
of programs of educational preparation having effect solely on the
qualification of educational personnel within that State.
 2. To the extent that contracts made pursuant to this Agreement deal
with the educational requirements for the proper qualification of
educational personnel, acceptance of a program of educational
preparation shall be in accordance with such procedures and requirements
as may be provided in the applicable contract.
 Article V
 Interstate Cooperation
 The party States agree that:
 1. They will, so far as practicable, prefer the making of multilateral
contracts pursuant to Article III of this Agreement.
 2. They will facilitate and strengthen cooperation in interstate
certification and other elements of educational personnel qualification
and for this purpose shall cooperate with agencies, organizations, and
associations interested in certification and other elements of
educational personnel qualification.
 Article VI
 Agreement Evaluation
 The designated state officials of any party state may meet from time
to time as a group to evaluate progress under the agreement, and to
formulate recommendations for changes.
 Article VII
 Other Arrangements
 Nothing in this agreement shall be construed to prevent or inhibit
other arrangements or practices of any party state or states to
facilitate the interchange of educational personnel.
 Article VIII
 Effect and Withdrawal
 1. This agreement shall become effective when enacted into law by two
states. Thereafter it shall become effective as to any state upon its
enactment of this agreement.
 2. Any party state may withdraw from this agreement by enacting a
statute repealing the same, but no such withdrawal shall take effect
until one year after the governor of the withdrawing state has given
notice in writing of the withdrawal to the governors of all other party
states.
 3. No withdrawal shall relieve the withdrawing state of any obligation
imposed upon it by a contract to which it is a party. The duration of
contracts and the methods and conditions of withdrawal therefrom shall
be those specified in their terms.
 Article IX
 Construction and Severability
 This agreement shall be liberally construed so as to effectuate the
purposes thereof. The provisions of this agreement shall be severable
and if any phrase, clause, sentence, or provision of this agreement is
declared to be contrary to the constitution of any state or of the
United States, or the application thereof to any government, agency,
person, or circumstance is held invalid, the validity of the remainder
of this agreement and the applicability thereof to any government,
agency, person, or circumstance shall not be affected thereby. If this
agreement shall be held contrary to the constitution of any state
participating therein, the agreement shall remain in full force and
effect as to the state affected as to all severable matters.
 2. For the purposes of the agreement set forth in subdivision one of
this section, the "designated state official" for this state shall be
the commissioner of education.
 3. Two copies of all contracts made on behalf of this state pursuant
to the agreement set forth in subdivision one of this section shall be
kept on file in the office of the commissioner of education. The
department shall publish all such contracts in convenient form.
 § 3031. Procedure when tenure not to be granted at conclusion of
probationary period or when services to be discontinued. Notwithstanding
any other provision of this chapter: (a) boards of education, trustees
of common school districts and boards of cooperative educational
services shall review all recommendations not to appoint a person on
tenure, and, teachers, administrators and supervisors employed on
probation by any school district or by any board of cooperative
educational services, as to whom a recommendation is to be made that
appointment on tenure not be granted or that their services be
discontinued shall, at least thirty days prior to the board meeting at
which such recommendation is to be considered, be notified of such
intended recommendation and the date of the board meeting at which it is
to be considered. Such teacher, administrator and supervisor may, not
later than twenty-one days prior to such meeting, request in writing
that he be furnished with a written statement giving the reasons for
such recommendation and within seven days thereafter such written
statement shall be furnished. Such teacher, administrator and supervisor
may file a written response to such statement with the district clerk
not later than seven days prior to the date of the board meeting.
 (b) Where a board of education, trustees of a common school district,
or board of cooperative educational services votes to reject the
recommendation of a superintendent of schools, district superintendent
or district principal to grant tenure to any teacher, administrator and
supervisor employed on probation, such vote shall be considered advisory
and at least thirty days prior to the board meeting at which such
recommendation is to be finally considered, the board shall notify said
teacher, administrator and supervisor of its intention to deny tenure
and the date of the board meeting at which it will take final action.
Such teacher, administrator and supervisor may, not later than
twenty-one days prior to such meeting, request in writing that he be
furnished with a written statement giving the board's reasons for such
intended action and within seven days thereafter such written statement
should be furnished. Such teacher, administrator and supervisor may file
a written response to such statement with the district clerk not later
than seven days prior to the date of the board meeting.
 (c) This section shall not be construed as modifying existing law with
respect to the rights of probationary teachers or the powers and duties
of boards of education, trustees of common school districts or boards of
cooperative educational services, with respect to the discontinuance of
services of teachers, administrators and supervisors or appointments on
tenure of teachers, administrators and supervisors.
 § 3032. Teacher summer business training and employment program; and
employer specific skill training grant program. 1. Definitions. (a)
"Regions" for the purposes of this section means regions as established
by the commissioner pursuant to the provisions of the vocational
education act.
 (b) "Local education agencies" for the purposes of this section means
school districts, boards of cooperative educational services, community
colleges, agricultural and technical colleges, state university of New
York college of technology and centers for advanced technology
designated pursuant to section three thousand one hundred two-a of the
public authorities law, and other postsecondary providers of career
education as set forth annually by the commissioner as eligible
recipients under the federal vocational education act of nineteen
hundred eighty-four.
 (c) "Total employment cost" means salary or wages paid directly to
each teacher participating and associated fringe benefits which accrue
to each teacher in the teacher summer business training and employment
program.
 2. Allocations. The commissioner shall allocate the lesser of forty
thousand dollars or one percent of the total appropriation for the
purposes of this section to each region for administering and conducting
employer specific skill training and employment programs and the
remainder of such appropriation shall be allocated to each region for
the administration and support of teacher summer business training and
employment programs based on the proportion of the base year full time
teachers in the public schools of all school districts and boards of
cooperative educational services within the region to the total of such
teachers in the state, provided however, that each region shall receive
at least five percent of the allocation for such purposes and provided
further that the cost due to such five percent allowance shall be
proportionally borne by the regions not so affected. Use of funds for
administration of the summer business training and employment programs
shall not exceed six percent of the allocation to a region.
 3. Teacher summer business training and employment program. (a) In any
case in which a business or industry within the state shall employ
during the months of July and August a teacher of mathematics,
chemistry, biology, earth science, physics, computer science, career
education or an elementary specialist in the area of mathematics or
science or commencing July first, nineteen hundred eighty-five, a
teacher of other subject areas as the commissioner may deem appropriate,
the state will assist employers with costs associated with approved work
experience for such teachers. Such business or industry shall request
that the chief administrative officer of the school district or board of
cooperative educational services employing such teacher during the same
school year as such business or industry employment occurs, certify to
the commissioner that the summer work experience involved will directly
benefit the individual's effectiveness as a teacher of mathematics,
chemistry, biology, earth science, physics, computer science, career
education, or other subject areas as the commissioner may deem
appropriate. If such chief administrative officer so certifies, then
such officer shall also file the request with the local education agency
designated by the commissioner for pre-approval for funding under this
program in the applicable region. The commissioner shall not approve any
requests for approval that would result in the maximum allocation for
the applicable region being exceeded. No approval shall be given except
for the lesser of thirty per centum of the total employment cost or one
thousand dollars per employed teacher. The remainder of such costs shall
be borne by the business employer involved. Participation in this
program shall be at the option of each school district or board of
cooperative educational services.
 (b) Such requests for pre-approval and certifications shall be on a
form prescribed by the commissioner. Such form shall include but not be
limited to certification of the employer regarding work to be performed
by the teacher, wages, hours, and the certification of the chief
administrative officer of the school district or board of cooperative
educational services as the case may be, as prescribed in this
subdivision.
 (c) The local education agency designated by the commissioner shall be
authorized to submit a claim to the commissioner for an amount of money
equal to eighty percent of the anticipated expenditure, based upon the
requests for pre-approval and certification received. If the
commissioner approves, he shall pay that amount to such local education
agency within thirty days of the receipt of such claim.
 (d) Upon completion of such employment, the participating business or
industry shall certify to the local education agency designated by the
commissioner the identity of the employee, the wages actually paid, the
hours worked and the period in which such hours were worked and shall
assess such local education agency for thirty per centum of such salary
and wage not to exceed one thousand dollars per employed teacher. If the
commissioner approves, he shall reimburse such local education agency
upon receipt of a claim pursuant to this section as provided by law the
amount of money equal to the difference between the monies paid to the
local education agency pursuant to paragraph (c) of this subdivision and
the actual approved expenditure. If the monies paid to the local
education agency pursuant to paragraph (c) of this subdivision exceeds
the actual approved expenditure, the local education agency shall
reimburse that difference to the commissioner.
 (e) The commissioner shall monitor implementation of programs,
evaluate progress, and require reports. Any funds allocated to a region
but not committed for the purposes of this subdivision by September
fifteenth of the current year shall be reallocated by the commissioner
for the purposes of subdivision four of this section.
 4. Employer specific skill training grant programs. (a) Employer
specific skill training grant programs shall be designed to support,
supplement and contribute to the expansion and maintenance of the
economy of the state. Local education agencies shall apply to the
commissioner for grants for conducting employer specific skill training
programs. Application for funds by local education agencies for training
programs shall be in a manner consistent with the application process
for business and industry specific training programs under the
vocational education act of 1963 and the job training partnership act;
the sum of such grants per region shall not exceed the total funds
allocated or reallocated to the region for such purposes. Such programs
shall provide retraining and upgrading to existing or potential
personnel in order to improve technology, quality control, production
efficiency, or to adapt to other changes in the labor market, or to
provide unique training programs to meet the emerging needs and
occupations of the state's business and industry or providing training
to individuals to promote the successful management and/or operation of
a worker owned cooperative or an employee stock ownership plan or
employee-owned enterprises, as defined in subdivision five of section
eighteen hundred thirty-six-b of the public authorities law, by such
employees. No grant shall exceed fifty per centum of the total program
cost. Eligible program cost may include employer wages paid to the
employee for time spent in the training program. Applications for a
grant by local education agencies shall be in a form prescribed by the
commissioner.
 (b) By October first, nineteen hundred eighty-six the department of
education, the department of commerce, and the urban development
corporation shall enter into cooperative agreements to promote more
effective coordination of employer specific training programs with
regional economic development strategies and other activities conducted
by the department of commerce, the urban development corporation and
other state, regional, and local agencies intended to promote economic
development. In preparing these agreements the parties to the
cooperative agreements shall solicit comments from the regional economic
development councils, regional education center for economic development
coordinating committees, technology development councils, private
industry councils and other appropriate entities within the regions as
identified by the commissioner, the commissioner of commerce, or the
chairman of the urban development corporation. Such cooperative
agreements shall be reviewed and revised annually.
 (c) The commissioner shall monitor implementation of programs,
evaluate progress, and require reports as needed.
 (d) If any funds allocated to a region are not committed for the
purposes of this subdivision by November fifteenth, the commissioner may
reallocate some or all of such funds to another region.
 5. Additional employer specific skills training grants. The additional
appropriation for the purposes of this subdivision for administering and
conducting employer specific skills training programs shall be allocated
as follows: (a) thirty percent shall be allocated equally among the
regions; and (b) seventy percent shall be allocated among the regions
based upon the proportion of unemployed persons within the region to the
total number of unemployed persons in the state for the most recent
calendar year as determined by the state department of labor using the
civilian non-instructional population sixteen years of age or older
labor series. Not less than twenty percent of the additional allocation
to each region pursuant to this paragraph shall be available for
training programs which will provide placements for persons who are
economically disadvantaged or dislocated workers as defined pursuant to
the federal job training partnership act. If any money allocated to a
region pursuant to this paragraph is not committed by March first of
each year or is committed prior to March first and is subsequently found
to be unnecessary for expenditure to meet existing contractual
obligations, the commissioner shall reallocate such funds to approved
programs including but not limited to those programs which serve
economically disadvantaged or dislocated workers in regions eligible
pursuant to this paragraph.
 6. Annual report. Annually, on or before January first of each year,
the commissioner shall report to the governor, the temporary president
of the senate and speaker of the assembly and chairpersons of the
appropriate committees on the impact of this program. Such report shall
include but not be limited to:
 (a) The allocation of funding among the regions pursuant to this
section.
 (b) The amount of funding that was made available by each region for
reallocation pursuant to this section. Such amount shall include
separately the amount made available due to the region's inability to
encumber available funds and the amount made available due to the
overestimation of projected program costs.
 (c) The amount of funding that was expended by each region for
administrative activities.
 (d) The allocation of funding among the regions providing for employer
specific skills training grant programs which are administered by the
department and funded through other sources including, but not limited
to, the federal vocational education act and the federal job training
partnership act and the extent to which such funds are combined with the
funds appropriated pursuant to this section to provide funding for
individual projects.
 (e) The participation, completion, and placement rate of individuals
enrolled in employer specific skills training grant programs
administered by the department and funded pursuant to this section and
through other available sources of funding, with particular emphasis on
the rates for individuals who are economically disadvantaged or
dislocated workers.
 (f) A description and evaluation of programs undertaken pursuant to
the cooperative agreements required under this section.
 7. The commissioner shall adopt rules and regulations to implement the
provisions of this section. Rules and regulations governing the employer
specific skills training program established pursuant to this section
shall be promulgated by the commissioner, assisted by the commissioner
of economic development and in consultation with the department of
economic development. Such rules and regulations shall be consistent
with the program plan required by subdivision nineteen of section one
hundred of the economic development law.
 § 3033. New York state mentor teacher-internship program. 1. Boards
of education and boards of cooperative educational services are hereby
authorized to participate in the New York state mentor
teacher-internship program in accordance with the provisions of this
section.
 2. Each board of education or board of cooperative educational
services which applies for funds under this section shall prepare a plan
for implementation of a mentor teacher-internship program consistent
with article fourteen of the civil service law. The plan shall be
developed in accordance with this section and regulations of the
commissioner. The board of education or board of cooperative educational
services shall submit an application and plan by May first of the
current year for approval by the commissioner; provided however for the
nineteen hundred ninety-seven--ninety-eight school year, such plan may
be submitted by November first, nineteen hundred ninety-seven.
 3. Each board of education and board of cooperative educational
services which determines to participate in the program shall select
persons eligible to serve as mentor teachers from a list of persons who
have demonstrated their mastery of pedagogical and subject matter
skills, given evidence of superior teaching abilities and interpersonal
relationship qualities, and who have indicated their willingness to
participate in such program. Such list of persons eligible to serve as
mentor teachers shall be developed by a selection committee composed of
certified or licensed personnel employed by the school district or the
board of cooperative educational services, a majority of whom shall be
classroom teachers chosen by the certified or recognized teachers
employee organization. The assignment of particular mentor teachers and
teacher interns to work together shall be made by the superintendent of
the participating district or district superintendent of the
participating board of cooperative educational services. Each person
designated as a mentor teacher shall continue to provide classroom
instruction for at least sixty percent of the time spent in performance
of such individual's duties during the school year or such person may so
serve on a full-time basis for not more than two school years out of
five consecutive school years, provided that such service as a mentor
teacher shall not diminish or impair the tenure and seniority rights of
the mentor teacher.
 4. Each board of education and board of cooperative educational
services which determines to participate in the mentor
teacher-internship program shall require those first or second year
eligible teachers which it chooses to include in the program to perform
their duties under the guidance of a mentor teacher, and shall ensure
that such teacher intern and mentor carry no more than a ninety percent
classroom instruction assignment in order to allow such teacher intern
time to receive special assistance from a mentor teacher. In order to
participate as a teacher intern in a mentor teacher-internship program,
a first or second year teacher shall hold a provisional or permanent
teaching certificate, temporary emergency license, regular license, or
temporary per diem certificate for a field in which no licensed person
is available to teach and shall not have participated in such program in
the previous year.
 5. A school district or board of cooperative educational services
participating in an approved mentor teacher-internship program in the
current year shall be eligible for aid including but not limited to
costs related to release time of the intern and mentor teacher up to ten
percent of the mentor teacher's salary and up to ten percent of the
teacher intern's salary respectively in accordance with the provisions
of this subdivision. To receive such assistance, a school district or
board of cooperative educational services must file a claim with the
commissioner by October first of the current school year in a form
prescribed by the commissioner which shall include the actual salary of
each program participant as of September fifteenth of such year. The
commissioner shall pay one-half of the amount of such assistance by
January fifteenth of each year and shall pay the remaining amount based
upon a final report filed by the school district by August fifteenth of
each year.
 6. Each board of education and board of cooperative educational
services which participates in the program shall file a report with the
commissioner on or before August first of each school year concerning
compliance with the requirements of the program during the preceding
school year. Such report shall be in such form and in such manner as
the commissioner may require. The commissioner shall evaluate such
programs and file a report with the legislature on or before December
first, nineteen hundred eighty-seven.
 § 3034. Teacher career recruitment clearinghouse. 1. The department,
in consultation with representatives of teacher organizations, boards of
education, school administrators, institutions of higher education and
the armed forces of the United States, shall establish a teacher career
recruitment clearinghouse to recruit qualified teachers and personnel
who provide pedagogical services, as defined in regulations by the
commissioner.
 2. The teacher career recruitment clearinghouse shall:
 (a) Collect and disseminate information to individuals, public and
nonpublic schools, institutions of higher education, and state and
federal military facilities on career opportunities in teaching and
related education professions. Such information shall include, but not
be limited to, information regarding financial assistance for students
interested in careers in education, employment opportunities in
education, and information about certification or licensure
requirements.
 (b) Promote clearinghouse activities, to the extent possible, in
newspapers, state and national professional publications including state
and federal military publications and at institutions of higher
education which confer degrees in education.
 (c) Establish to the extent possible, an applicant data base and
provide access to such data base by public and nonpublic schools.
 (d) Establish to the extent possible a data base of available public
and nonpublic school employment opportunities for access by individuals.
 § 3035. Duties of commissioner; submission of fingerprints. 1. The
commissioner shall submit to the division of criminal justice services
two sets of fingerprints of prospective employees as defined in
subdivision three of section eleven hundred twenty-five of this chapter
received from a school district, charter school or board of cooperative
educational services and of prospective employees received from
nonpublic and private elementary and secondary schools pursuant to title
two of this chapter, and the division of criminal justice services
processing fee imposed pursuant to subdivision eight-a of section eight
hundred thirty-seven of the executive law and any fee imposed by the
federal bureau of investigation. The division of criminal justice
services and the federal bureau of investigation shall forward such
criminal history record to the commissioner in a timely manner. For the
purposes of this section, the term "criminal history record" shall mean
a record of all convictions of crimes and any pending criminal charges
maintained on an individual by the division of criminal justice services
and the federal bureau of investigation. All such criminal history
records sent to the commissioner pursuant to this subdivision shall be
confidential pursuant to the applicable federal and state laws, rules
and regulations, and shall not be published or in any way disclosed to
persons other than the commissioner, unless otherwise authorized by law.
 2. No cause of action against the commissioner, the department or the
division of criminal justice services for damages related to the
dissemination of criminal history records pursuant to this section shall
exist when the commissioner, department or division of criminal justice
services has reasonably and in good faith relied upon the accuracy and
completeness of criminal history information furnished to it by
qualified agencies. The provision of such information by the division of
criminal justice services shall be subject to the provisions of
subdivision sixteen of section two hundred ninety-six of the executive
law. The consideration of such criminal history record by the
commissioner shall be subject to article twenty-three-A of the
correction law.
 3. (a) Clearance. After receipt of a criminal history record from the
division of criminal justice services and the federal bureau of
investigation the commissioner shall promptly notify the appropriate
school district, charter school, board of cooperative educational
services, or nonpublic or private elementary or secondary school whether
the prospective employee to which such report relates is cleared for
employment based upon his or her criminal history. All determinations to
grant or deny clearance for employment pursuant to this paragraph shall
be performed in accordance with subdivision sixteen of section two
hundred ninety-six of the executive law and article twenty-three-A of
the correction law. When the commissioner denies a prospective employee
clearance for employment, such prospective employee shall be afforded
notice and the right to be heard and offer proof in opposition to such
determination in accordance with the regulations of the commissioner.
 (b) Conditional clearance. When the commissioner receives a request
for a determination on the conditional clearance of a prospective
employee, the commissioner, after receipt of a criminal history record
from the division of criminal justice services, shall promptly notify
the prospective employee and the appropriate school district, charter
school, board of cooperative educational services, or nonpublic or
private elementary or secondary school that the prospective employee to
which such report relates is conditionally cleared for employment based
upon his or her criminal history or that more time is needed to make the
determination. If the commissioner determines that more time is needed,
the notification shall include a good faith estimate of the amount of
additional time needed. Such notification shall be made within fifteen
business days after the commissioner receives the prospective employee's
fingerprints. All determinations to grant or deny conditional clearance
for employment pursuant to this paragraph shall be performed in
accordance with subdivision sixteen of section two hundred ninety-six of
the executive law and article twenty-three-A of the correction law.
 3-a. Upon request from a prospective employee who has been cleared by
the commissioner for employment and/or certification, the commissioner
shall have the authority to forward a copy of such criminal history
record to the city school district of the city of New York by the most
expeditious means available. Furthermore, upon notification that such
prospective employee is employed by the city school district of the city
of New York, the division of criminal justice services shall have the
authority to provide subsequent criminal history notifications directly
to the city school district of the city of New York. Upon request from a
prospective employee who has been cleared for licensure and/or
employment by the city school district of the city of New York, such
school district shall have the authority to forward a copy of the
prospective employee's criminal history record to the commissioner, by
the most expeditious means available, for the purposes of this section.
Furthermore, upon notification that such prospective employee is
employed by a school district outside the city of New York, the division
of criminal justice services shall have the authority to provide
subsequent criminal history notifications directly to the commissioner.
 4. The fee provisions of subdivision two of section three thousand
four-b of this chapter shall apply to criminal history records searches
conducted pursuant to this section; provided however that,
notwithstanding the provisions of any other law: (a) the fees associated
with an employee participating in a public assistance employment
program, pursuant to title nine-B of article five of the social services
law, or receiving employment services through the federal temporary
assistance for needy families block grant pursuant to appropriations to
the office of temporary disability assistance, shall be paid by the
social services district making such employment placement or assignment
and the cost of such fees, if not subject to full reimbursement under
such federal block grant, shall be deemed to be an employment services
administrative expense. In no event shall such a participant described
herein be required to personally pay any fee imposed by the division of
criminal justice services or the federal bureau of investigation or any
other fee for the purpose of conducting a criminal history records
search; and (b) any prospective employee, including, notwithstanding any
provision of law to the contrary, a prospective employee applying for a
position in a school district within a city with a population of one
million or more, may submit a request to a governing body of a school
district, on a form prescribed by the commissioner, that the fees
imposed for conducting a criminal history records check be waived. Such
governing body may grant such a request if such governing body
determines that payment of such a fee would impose an unreasonable
financial hardship on the applicant or his or her family and, upon such
determination, the governing body shall pay such fee on behalf of the
prospective employee to the appropriate authority.
 5. The commissioner and the division of criminal justice services
shall enter into an agreement for the purposes of implementing the
provisions of this section.
 6. Nothing in this section shall be construed or interpreted to alter
or in any way diminish the integrity of collective bargaining agreements
negotiated between an employer and any certified or authorized
collective bargaining agent, with respect to payment of fees for
criminal history records searches, nor to diminish any rights pursuant
to such agreements.
 § 3036. Coursework for reporting child abuse and maltreatment for
those with coaching licenses or coaching certificates. 1.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the commissioner shall
prescribe regulations requiring that all persons currently holding a
temporary coaching license or a professional coaching certificate and
persons applying for such license or certificate shall, in addition to
all the other licensure or certification requirements, have completed
two hours of coursework or training regarding the identification and
reporting of child abuse and maltreatment. The coursework or training
shall be obtained from an institution or provider which has been
approved by the department to provide such coursework or training. The
coursework or training shall include information regarding the physical
and behavioral indicators of child abuse and maltreatment and the
statutory reporting requirements set out in sections four hundred
thirteen through four hundred twenty of the social services law,
including but not limited to, when and how a report must be made, what
other actions the reporter is mandated or authorized to take, the legal
protections afforded reporters, and the consequences for failing to
report. Each applicant shall provide the department with documentation
showing that he or she has completed the required training.
 2. Persons currently holding a temporary coaching license or a
professional coaching certificate shall meet the coursework or training
requirements prescribed in subdivision one of this section no later than
July first, two thousand fifteen.
 § 3037. Grants for hiring teachers. 1. For purposes of this section,
the following term shall have the following meaning: "Eligible teacher"
shall mean an individual that: (a) is certified to teach in New York
state pursuant to section three thousand four of this article; or holds
a Master's degree or Ph.D. in Mathematics, Science, Technology or
Education; or holds a Bachelor's degree in Mathematics, Science,
Technology or Education and is currently enrolled in a Master's or Ph.D.
program in Mathematics, Science, Technology or Education within five
years from the later of the effective date of this section or the
employment start date with the nonpublic school, (b) teaches
Mathematics, Science or Technology in any grades from three through
twelve, and (c) is employed by a nonpublic school.
 2. (a) Within amounts appropriated therefor, nonpublic schools shall,
upon application, be reimbursed by the department for the salaries of
eligible teachers. Each school which seeks a reimbursement pursuant to
this section shall submit to the office of religious and independent
schools an application therefor, together with such additional documents
as the commissioner may reasonably require, at such times, in such form
and containing such information as the commissioner may prescribe by
regulation. Applications for reimbursement pursuant to this section must
be received by August first of each year for schools to be reimbursed
for the salaries of eligible teachers in the prior year.
 (b) Pursuant to paragraph (a) of this subdivision, reimbursement for
eligible teachers shall be the average comparable teacher salary and
personal service, per subject area, of public school teachers in the
school district in which such nonpublic schools are located, multiplied
by the percentage of full time equivalent secular instructional hours
completed in the school day per subject area. Reimbursements shall not
be provided for eligible teachers who provide instruction in
mathematics, science or technology if such teachers also provide
non-secular instruction in any capacity.
 (c) In the event that the applications for reimbursement under this
section exceed the appropriation available for this program, then each
applicant shall only be reimbursed an amount equal to the percentage
that each such applicant represents to the total of all applications
submitted.
 3. The commissioner may promulgate any rules or regulations necessary
to carry out the provisions of this section.
 § 3038. The superintendent of each school district, in consultation
with the district superintendent of a board of cooperative educational
services, where applicable, shall designate an employee who is a member
of the school district staff or an employee of the board of cooperative
educational services staff to provide information to any student,
parent, or staff regarding where and how to find available substance use
related services. Where possible, such designated individual shall be a
school social worker, school guidance counselor, or any other health
practitioner or counselor employed by the school. Any information
provided by a student, parent or teacher to such designated individual
shall be confidential, shall not be used in any school disciplinary
proceeding and shall, in addition to any other applicable privilege, be
considered confidential in the same manner as information provided
pursuant to section forty-five hundred eight of the civil practice law
and rules. Provided, however, that nothing in this section shall relieve
such designated individual of any legal duty to otherwise report such
information. Such designated individual or individuals shall undergo any
necessary training as may be required by the commissioner.
 ARTICLE 63
 SALARIES OF TEACHERS AND SUPERVISORS
Section 3101. Definitions.
 3107. (Enacted without section heading).
 3108. Payment of salaries.
 3109. Reduction of salaries for purchase of annuities.
 3109-A. Reduction of salaries for tax-deferred annuities.
 § 3101. Definitions. As used in this article:
 1. "Teachers" shall mean all full-time members of the teaching and
supervisory staff of each school district of the state, including, if
employed in such district, the superintendent of schools, associate,
district or other superintendents, members of the board of examiners,
directors, inspectors, supervisors, principals, administrative
assistants, first assistants, teachers, school psychologists, social
workers in a city having a population of over one million, lecturers and
special instructors, except employees holding the positions enumerated
in subdivisions one and two of section thirty-one hundred six of this
article.
 2. "Year of service" shall mean the number of years which a teacher
has served in the school district in which he is employed including the
year for which a determination for salary purposes is made.
 3. Except in a city having a population of one million or more,
"salary" shall mean the amount of compensation that is to be paid to a
teacher for services rendered during the full ten months period that the
public schools of the district are required by law to be in session
during any school year. For purposes of prorating the salary of a
teacher not rendering all the service required of teachers during such
period, the monthly rate for the services rendered shall be at least one
tenth of the salary and the daily rate at least one two-hundredth of the
salary. If any teacher is required to render services beyond the ten
months period in any school year, the compensation for such additional
services shall be at least the monthly or daily rate used in prorating
the salary.
 4. "Transfer credit" shall mean the credit given by the school
authorities to a teacher for years of service outside the school
district.
 § 3107. In cities having a population of one million or more,
employees of the board of education who are members of the New York city
teachers' retirement system shall be granted sick leave due to personal
illness. Such sick leave shall be on the basis of at least ten days for
each year of service, cumulative to a maximum of two hundred days.
Members shall upon application be granted a retirement leave of absence
with full pay consisting of one-half of their accumulated unused sick
leave, up to a maximum of one school term or the equivalent number of
school days.
 Members of the New York city teachers' retirement system who are in
the employ of the board of higher education and members of the permanent
instructional staff of the board of higher education who are members of
any other retirement system shall be eligible for retirement leave on
the same basis as employees of the board of education, except that such
members shall be granted sick leave due to personal illness of twenty
days for each year of service cumulative to a maximum of one hundred
sixty days. Such members shall upon application to the board of higher
education be granted a retirement leave with full pay consisting of
one-half of their accumulated unused sick leave, up to a maximum of one
semester or the equivalent number of school days.
 Members of any retirement system who are members of the permanent
instructional staff of any community college in the city of New York
shall upon application be granted a retirement leave of absence with
full pay consisting of one-half of their accumulated unused sick leave,
up to a maximum of one semester or the equivalent number of school days.
 Days when school is not in session shall not be counted in the
calculation of such retirement leaves. When a vacation period intervenes
between the end of a retirement leave and the member's retirement date,
such vacation period shall be deemed a period of active service for all
purposes including compensation.
 A retirement leave of absence shall be cancelled when a member on such
leave files an application for immediate retirement or files an
application for reinstatement to active service, in which event such
member shall be deemed to have forfeited the future right to the number
of days of retirement leave already taken. In the event that a member on
retirement leave applies for a sick leave during the period of such
retirement leave, he shall thereupon become entitled to his total
accumulated unused sick leave minus the number of school days actually
taken as retirement leave, provided however, that such retirement leave,
exclusive of sick leave, shall not exceed one school term or semester,
or the equivalent number of school days. However, members of the
instructional staff of the board of higher education or of the community
colleges of the city of New York who are entitled to retirement leave of
one semester shall not have the right to start a retirement leave during
the course of a semester, nor may any member of the instructional staff
of the board of higher education or of the community colleges of the
city of New York on retirement leave have the right to be reinstated to
active service during the course of a semester.
 The extent of such leaves shall be included in the number of years of
allowable service for retirement purposes.
 The duties of members on retirement leave shall be covered in like
manner as when members are absent on sick leave.
 Any provision of law inconsistent with this section is hereby deemed
superseded.
 § 3108. Payment of salaries. No teacher or other employee of any
board of education shall be requested or required to make, execute and
deliver a general release or waiver as a condition prerequisite to the
payment of any salary, compensation or other emolument to which he is
entitled; and no board of education shall deprive any such teacher or
other employee of the whole or any part of such salary, compensation or
other emolument for refusing to make, execute and deliver a general
release.
 § 3109. Reduction of salaries for purchase of annuities. Each board
of education, trustee or trustees in any school district, and each board
of cooperative educational services or county vocational education and
extension board, in its discretion, may enter into a written agreement
with any employee of such school district or board to reduce the annual
salary as otherwise payable by law of such employee for the purpose of
purchasing an annuity or investing in a custodial account as permitted
under section 403(b) of the United States Internal Revenue Code, as
amended, for such employee. Any such agreement may be terminated at any
time upon written notice by either such employee or such school district
or board. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to
diminish or impair any benefits to which such employee or his legal
representatives or beneficiaries would be otherwise entitled had such
salary reduction agreement not been entered into in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
 § 3109-A. Reduction of salaries for tax-deferred annuities. The board
of education of a city having a population of one million or more, in
its discretion, may enter into a written agreement with any of its
employees or with any employee of a school district within such city to
reduce the annual salary, as otherwise earned and payable by law, of
such employee for the purpose of providing a tax-deferred annuity for
such employee under the retirement system in which such employee is
currently a member, but only if such retirement system specifically
provides for such tax-deferred annuities, and subject to any provisions
and limitations applicable thereto. Any such agreement may be
terminated upon written notice by either such employee or such board.
Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to diminish or
impair any benefits to which such employee or his legal representatives
or beneficiaries would be otherwise entitled had such salary reduction
agreement not been entered into in accordance with the provisions of
this section.
 ARTICLE 65
 COMPULSORY EDUCATION AND SCHOOL CENSUS
 PART I
 COMPULSORY EDUCATION
Section 3201. Discrimination on account of race, creed, color or
 national origin prohibited.
 3201-a. Discrimination on account of sex.
 3202. Public schools free to resident pupils; tuition from
 nonresident pupils.
 3203. Selection of school for attendance of children when
 district line intersects a dwelling.
 3204. Instruction required.
 3205. Attendance of minors upon full time day instruction.
 3206. Attendance of minors upon part time instruction.
 3207. Attendance upon evening instruction.
 3207-a. Service of persons seventeen years of age as election
 inspectors or poll clerks.
 3208. Attendance; screening of new entrants; prohibition
 against mandatory medication.
 3208-a. Special proceeding to determine physical capacity of
 student to participate in athletic programs.
 3209. Education of homeless children.
 3209-a. Child abuse prevention.
 3210. Amount and character of required attendance.
 3211. Records of attendance upon instruction.
 3211-a. Reports of reading tests.
 3212. Definition of persons in parental relation and their
 duties; duties of certain other persons.
 3212-a. Records of telephone numbers.
 3213. Supervisors of attendance; attendance teachers;
 attendance officers; appointment, compensation, powers
 and duties.
 3214. Student placement, suspensions and transfers.
 3215. Unlawful employment.
 3215-a. General certification provisions.
 3216. Employment certificates.
 3217. Procedure for issuance of employment certificates.
 3218. Evidence of age.
 3219. Consent of parent or guardian.
 3220. Certificate of physical fitness.
 3221. Pledge of employment.
 3222. Schooling record.
 3223. Duties of employers.
 3224. Temporary services.
 3225. Special employment certificate.
 3226. Farm work permits.
 3227. Street trades.
 3228. Newspaper carrier.
 3230. School district meetings and activities.
 3232. Courts having jurisdiction.
 3233. Penalties.
 3234. Enforcement; withholding state moneys by commissioner of
 education.
 § 3201. Discrimination on account of race, creed, color or national
origin prohibited. 1. No person shall be refused admission into or be
excluded from any public school in the state of New York on account of
race, creed, color or national origin.
 2. Except with the express approval of a board of education having
jurisdiction, a majority of the members of such board having been
elected, no student shall be assigned or compelled to attend any school
on account of race, creed, color or national origin, or for the purpose
of achieving equality in attendance or increased attendance or reduced
attendance, at any school, of persons of one or more particular races,
creeds, colors, or national origins; and no school district, school zone
or attendance unit, by whatever name known, shall be established,
reorganized or maintained for any such purpose, provided that nothing
contained in this section shall prevent the assignment of a pupil in the
manner requested or authorized by his parents or guardian, and further
provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect, in any
way, the right of a religious or denominational educational institution
to select its pupils exclusively or primarily from members of such
religion or denomination or from giving preference to such selection to
such members or to make such selection to its pupils as is calculated to
promote the religious principle for which it is established.
 § 3201-a. Discrimination on account of sex. Notwithstanding any
general, special, local law or rule or regulation of the education
department to the contrary, no person shall be refused admission into or
be excluded from any course of instruction offered in the state public
and high school systems by reason of that person's sex. No person shall
be disqualified from state public and high school athletic teams, by
reason of that person's sex, except pursuant to regulations promulgated
by the state commissioner of education.
 § 3202. Public schools free to resident pupils; tuition from
nonresident pupils. 1. A person over five and under twenty-one years of
age who has not received a high school diploma is entitled to attend the
public schools maintained in the district in which such person resides
without the payment of tuition. Provided further that such person may
continue to attend the public school in such district in the same
manner, if temporarily residing outside the boundaries of the district
when relocation to such temporary residence is a consequence of such
person's parent or person in parental relationship being called to
active military duty, other than training. Notwithstanding any other
provision of law to the contrary, the school district shall not be
required to provide transportation between a temporary residence located
outside of the school district and the school the child attends. A
veteran of any age who shall have served as a member of the armed forces
of the United States and who (a) shall have been discharged therefrom
under conditions other than dishonorable, or (b) has a qualifying
condition, as defined in section one of the veterans' services law, and
has received a discharge other than bad conduct or dishonorable from
such service, or (c) is a discharged LGBT veteran, as defined in section
one of the veterans' services law, and has received a discharge other
than bad conduct or dishonorable from such service, may attend any of
the public schools of the state upon conditions prescribed by the board
of education, and such veterans shall be included in the pupil count for
state aid purposes. A nonveteran under twenty-one years of age who has
received a high school diploma shall be permitted to attend classes in
the schools of the district in which such person resides or in a school
of a board of cooperative educational services upon payment of tuition
under such terms and conditions as shall be established in regulations
promulgated by the commissioner; provided, however, that a school
district may waive the payment of tuition for such nonveteran, but in
any case such a nonveteran who has received a high school diploma shall
not be counted for any state aid purposes. Nothing herein contained
shall, however, require a board of education to admit a child who
becomes five years of age after the school year has commenced unless his
or her birthday occurs on or before the first of December.
 1-a. No pupil over the compulsory attendance age in his or her school
district shall be dropped from enrollment unless he or she has been
absent twenty consecutive school days and the following procedure is
complied with: The principal or superintendent shall schedule and
notify, in writing and at the last known address, both the student and
the person in parental relation to the student of an informal
conference. At the conference the principal or superintendent shall
determine both the reasons for the pupil's absence and whether
reasonable changes in the pupil's educational program would encourage
and facilitate his or her re-entry or continuance of study. The pupil
and the person in parental relation shall be informed orally and in
writing of the pupil's right to re-enroll at any time in the public
school maintained in the district where he or she resides, if otherwise
qualified under this section. If the pupil and the person in parental
relationship fail, after reasonable notice, to attend the informal
conference, the pupil may be dropped from enrollment provided that he or
she and the person in parental relation are notified in writing of the
right to re-enter at any time, if otherwise qualified under this
section.
 2. Nonresidents of a district, if otherwise competent, may be admitted
into the school or schools of a district or city, upon the consent of
the trustees or the board of education, upon terms prescribed by such
trustees or board.
 3. The school authorities of a district or city must deduct from the
tuition of a nonresident pupil, whose parent or guardian owns property
in such district or city and pays a tax thereon for the support of the
schools maintained in such district or city, the amount of such tax.
 4. a. Definitions. For purposes of this subdivision only, the
following definitions shall apply.
 (i) The term "school district of origin" shall mean the school
district within the state of New York in which the child or youth in
foster care was attending a public school or preschool on a tuition-free
basis or was entitled to attend when the social services district or
office of children and family services assumed responsibility for the
placement, support and maintenance of such child or youth, which is
different from the school district of residence.
 (ii) School district of residence. The term "school district of
residence" shall mean the public school district within the state of New
York in which the foster care placement is located, which is different
from the school district of origin.
 b. Except as provided in subdivision five of this section, the cost of
instruction of children in foster care shall be borne by the school
district of origin. Where a school district other than the school
district of origin is designated in accordance with paragraph e of
subdivision two of section thirty-two hundred forty-four of this
article, the cost of instruction shall be borne by the school district
of origin and the tuition paid to the designated school district of
attendance shall be computed as provided in paragraph d of this
subdivision, except that, where the foster care placement receives
program support from a child care institution affiliated with a special
act school district as defined in subdivision eight of section four
thousand one of this chapter, and the designated school district of
attendance, upon the recommendation of its committee on special
education, contracts for such pupil's education pursuant to paragraph c,
d, e, or f of subdivision two of section forty-four hundred one of this
chapter or for a nonresidential placement pursuant to paragraph l of
such subdivision, costs incurred shall be reimbursed in accordance with
paragraph e of this subdivision. Notwithstanding any inconsistent
provision of law, where the permanent residence of a pupil is outside of
the state, the school district in which the pupil was located at the
time the public agency placed such pupil shall be deemed the school
district of origin of such pupil for purposes of this subdivision and
shall be responsible for the cost of instruction of such pupil.
 c. Children cared for in free family homes and children cared for in
family homes at board, when such family homes shall be the actual and
only residence of such children and when such children are not supported
and maintained at the expense of a social services district or of a
state department or agency, shall be deemed residents of the school
district in which such family home is located.
 d. For the purposes of this subdivision, tuition shall be fixed in an
amount which represents the additional operating cost to the designated
school district of attendance resulting from the attendance of a child
for whom tuition is required, computed in accordance with a formula
established by the commissioner of education.
 e. Where the designated school district of attendance for a child or
youth in foster care that receives program support from a child care
institution affiliated with a special act school district, other than
the board of the pupil's school district of origin as defined in
paragraph a of this subdivision, upon the recommendation of its
committee on special education, contracts for the instruction of such
pupil pursuant to paragraph c, d, e, or f of subdivision two of section
forty-four hundred one of this chapter or for a nonresidential placement
pursuant to paragraph l of such subdivision, such board shall submit a
claim to the commissioner for current year reimbursement of costs
incurred for such pupil. The commissioner shall pay such claim in
accordance with the applicable provisions of section thirty-six hundred
nine-b of this chapter and shall be reimbursed by the school district
identified as the pupil's school district of origin as defined in
paragraph a of this subdivision. The commissioner shall deduct the
amount of such claim from moneys otherwise due the school district of
origin.
 f. The identity of the school district of origin shall be established
in accordance with the following procedure:
 (i) Within ten days of the placement of such pupil, the public agency
or its designee shall give written notice of such placement to the board
of education of the school district believed to be the school district
of origin. Such notification shall include the name of the pupil and any
particulars about the pupil that pertain to the identification of the
school district as the school district of origin as defined in paragraph
a of this subdivision.
 (ii) A board of education of a school district which receives
notification pursuant to subparagraph (i) of this paragraph may submit
to the public agency, within ten days of its receipt of such notice,
additional evidence to establish that it is not the pupil's district of
origin as defined in paragraph a of this subdivision. Any evidence so
submitted shall be considered by the agency prior to making its final
determination, which shall be made no later than five days after the
agency's receipt of such additional evidence. In the event such school
district fails to submit additional evidence within such ten day period,
the determination of the public agency shall be final and the
notification provided pursuant to subparagraph (i) of this paragraph
shall be deemed final notification of such determination.
 (iii) If, upon its review, the public agency determines that the
school district notified pursuant to subparagraph (i) of this paragraph
was not the pupil's district of origin, the public agency shall send
notification to the correct school district, in the form prescribed by
subparagraph (i) of this paragraph. Alternatively, if, upon its review,
the public agency determines that the school district originally
designated pursuant to subparagraph (i) of this paragraph is the pupil's
district of origin, the public agency shall notify such district in
writing of its final determination.
 (iv) The board of education of the school district finally determined
by the public agency to be the pupil's school district of origin may
appeal such determination to the commissioner within thirty days of its
receipt of final notification pursuant to this paragraph. Such an appeal
shall be conducted in the same manner as an appeal from the actions of
local school officials pursuant to section three hundred ten of this
chapter, except that the factual allegations of the petitioner shall not
be deemed true in the event the public agency elects not to appear in
the appeal. The petitioner shall join as a party to the appeal any other
school district suspected to be the pupil's actual school district of
origin.
 (v) If the commissioner finds that the school district notified
pursuant to subparagraph (i) or (iii) of this paragraph was not the
pupil's school district of origin as defined in paragraph a of this
subdivision and that the correct school district was not joined as a
party to the appeal, the commissioner shall direct the public agency to
notify the correct school district pursuant to subparagraph (i) of this
paragraph.
 (vi) Notwithstanding any inconsistent provisions of law, during the
pendency of all proceedings to review a denial of financial
responsibility, the commissioner shall issue an interim order assigning
such financial responsibility to the school district or, alternatively,
upon a determination that the public agency failed to make reasonable
efforts to identify the school district of origin of such child, to the
public agency. In the event the public agency fails to provide timely
notice pursuant to subparagraph (i) of this paragraph, or fails to
render its final determination in a timely manner, the public agency
responsible for such pupil's residential placement shall reimburse the
commissioner for the payments made to the district furnishing
instruction pursuant to this paragraph during the pendency of all
proceedings or for the duration of the current school year, whichever is
longer, and the state comptroller shall withhold such amount from any
moneys due the county or the city of New York, on vouchers certified or
approved by the commissioner, in the manner prescribed by law or shall
transfer such amount from the account of such state department or agency
upon certification of the commissioner, and such funds shall be credited
to the general support for public schools local assistance account of
the department.
 (vii) Any final determination or order of the commissioner concerning
the school district of origin of any pupil under this section may only
be reviewed in a proceeding brought in the supreme court pursuant to
article seventy-eight of the civil practice law and rules. In any such
proceeding under such article seventy-eight, the court may grant any
relief authorized by the provisions of section seventy-eight hundred six
of such law and rules and may also, in its discretion, remand the
proceedings to the commissioner. A local social services commissioner or
any state department or agency placing pupils pursuant to this
subdivision is a proper party in any such appeal or proceeding.
 (viii) Upon completion of all proceedings to review the denial of
financial responsibility for the costs of instruction pursuant to this
paragraph, the commissioner shall refund any payments made by a party
cleared of such responsibility and shall collect any payments owed by a
party found to have such responsibility. Where such transactions involve
a school district liable for reimbursement pursuant to paragraph e of
this subdivision, the commissioner shall appropriately increase or
decrease the moneys due a school district by such amount in accordance
with the provisions of section thirty-six hundred nine-b of this
chapter. Where such transactions involve the public agency making a
placement pursuant to this subdivision, the comptroller shall increase
or decrease the moneys due such public agency by such amount upon
certification of the commissioner, transferring such amount to or from
the account of such state department or agency to or from the general
support for public schools local assistance account of the department.
 g. If within ninety days from the entry of an order or judgment of a
court of competent jurisdiction or the receipt of a decision of the
commissioner pursuant to section three hundred ten of this chapter,
determining the responsibility of a school district to pay tuition for a
pupil in accordance with the provisions of paragraph a of this
subdivision or of section five hundred four of the executive law, such
school district has not made payment to the designated school district
of attendance, the school district entitled to such payment may make
application to the commissioner to receive a sum in the amount of such
tuition from the apportionment of public money payable to the school
district required to pay such tuition. The application for payment shall
be accompanied by a certified copy of the order or judgment of a court,
or a copy of the decision of the commissioner, and by proof of service
by first class mail of a copy of such application upon the school
district required to pay such tuition. Unless the school district
required to pay such tuition shall have notified the commissioner of
such payment within thirty days from the receipt of such application,
the commissioner shall withhold an amount equal to the tuition for such
pupil from the public money payable to the school district responsible
for such tuition and shall pay such amount to the school district which
has provided instruction to such pupil. The commissioner is authorized
to promulgate regulations to implement the provisions of this paragraph.
 5. a. Children who reside in a school for individuals with
developmental disabilities operated by the department of mental hygiene
and for whom the department has assumed responsibility for support and
maintenance prior to July one, nineteen hundred seventy-seven and who
are placed in a family home at board, a duly incorporated orphan asylum
or other institution for the care, custody and treatment of children
shall be admitted to the schools of the school district in which such
family home or institution is located. The department is authorized to
reimburse each school district furnishing educational services to such
children for the direct cost of such services in accordance with
regulations promulgated by the commissioner and approved by the director
of the budget. The educational costs for these children shall not be
otherwise aidable or reimbursable.
 b. Children who reside in a school for individuals with developmental
disabilities operated by the department of mental hygiene and for whose
support and maintenance the department assumes responsibility on or
after July one, nineteen hundred seventy-seven and who are thereafter
placed in a family home at board, a duly incorporated orphan asylum or
other institution for the care, custody and treatment of children shall
be admitted to the schools of the school district in which such family
home or institution is located. The department is authorized to
reimburse each school district furnishing educational services to such
children for the direct cost of such services in accordance with
regulations promulgated by the commissioner and approved by the director
of the budget. The educational costs for these children shall not be
otherwise aidable or reimbursable. The school district in which the
child resided at the time the department of mental hygiene assumed
responsibility for the support and maintenance of such child shall
reimburse the education department for its expenditure on behalf of such
child in an amount equal to the school district basic contribution, as
such term is defined in subdivision eight of section forty-four hundred
one of this chapter. The comptroller may deduct from any state funds
which become due to a school district an amount equal to the
reimbursement required to be made by such school district in accordance
with this paragraph, and the amount so deducted shall not be included in
the operating expense of such district for the purpose of computing the
approved operating expense pursuant to paragraph t of subdivision one of
section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter. The department of mental
hygiene shall notify the department of the name of the child, the
location of the family home or institution where the child is to be
placed and the name of the school district in which such child resided
at the time the department of mental hygiene assumed responsibility for
his or her support and maintenance.
 c. (1) The department is authorized to reimburse each school district
furnishing educational services to children residing in schools for
individuals with developmental disabilities operated by the office for
people with developmental disabilities for the direct cost of such
services in accordance with regulations promulgated by the commissioner
and approved by the director of the budget.
 (2) The school district in which each such child resided at the time
the office for people with developmental disabilities assumed
responsibility for the support and maintenance of such child shall
reimburse the department for its expenditures on behalf of such child,
in an amount equal to the school district basic contribution as such
term is defined in subdivision eight of section forty-four hundred one
of this chapter, for any such child admitted to a state school for
individuals with developmental disabilities on or after July first,
nineteen hundred seventy-eight. The comptroller may deduct from any
state funds which become due to a school district an amount equal to the
reimbursement required to be made by such school district in accordance
with this paragraph and the amount so deducted shall not be included in
the approved operating expense of such district for the purpose of
computing the approved operating expenses pursuant to paragraph t of
subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter.
 d. (1) Children who reside in an intermediate care facility for
individuals with developmental disabilities, other than a state operated
school for individuals with developmental disabilities, as defined in
regulations of the office for people with developmental disabilities,
shall be admitted to the public schools, except as otherwise provided in
subparagraph fourteen of this paragraph. The trustees or board of
education of the school district in which such facility is located shall
receive such children in the school or schools of the district for
instruction and for the provision of necessary related services for a
compensation to be fixed by the trustees or board of education, unless
such trustees or board of education shall establish to the satisfaction
of the commissioner that there are valid and sufficient reasons for
refusal to receive such children. Evaluation of the educational needs of
such children and placement in appropriate educational programs shall be
made in accordance with article eighty-nine of this chapter.
 (2) A child who resides in an individualized residential alternative
as defined in regulations of the office for people with developmental
disabilities which is located in a school district other than the school
district in which such child's parent or person in parental relation
resided at the time such child was placed in an institution under the
auspices of such office shall be deemed to reside in an intermediate
care facility for purposes of this subdivision to the extent such child
is enrolled in a home and community based waiver program approved by the
Health Care Financing Administration.
 (3) Such intermediate care facility is authorized to contract with the
trustees or board of education of such school district for the provision
of services, including transportation.
 (4) The education department shall reimburse the school district in
which such intermediate care facility is located for the full cost of
all services, which shall, notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of
law, include transportation services provided pursuant to a contract
authorized by this paragraph. Provided, however, that notwithstanding
any other law, rule or regulation to the contrary, that no reimbursement
shall be payable pursuant to this subparagraph for due process costs
incurred on or after July first, two thousand nine. Such reimbursement
shall be for the period from September first through June thirtieth, and
state reimbursement for July and August programs shall be in accordance
with subdivision one of section forty-four hundred eight of this
chapter. The provisions of subdivision two of such section forty-four
hundred eight shall apply to all July and August programs provided
pursuant to this section.
 (5) The school district in which the child resided at the time of
placement in such intermediate care facility shall reimburse the
education department for its expenditure on behalf of such child in an
amount equal to the school district's basic contribution, as such term
is defined in subdivision eight of section forty-four hundred one of
this article for any child first admitted to such intermediate care
facility, on or after July first, nineteen hundred seventy-nine.
 (6) Upon certification by the commissioner of education, the
comptroller may deduct from any state funds which become due to the
school district an amount equal to the reimbursement required to be made
by such school district in accordance with this paragraph, and the
amount so deducted shall not be included in the operating expense of
such district for the purpose of computing the approved operating
expenses pursuant to paragraph t of subdivision one of section
thirty-six hundred two of this article.
 (7) Within forty-five days of the placement of a child in a school
district, the intermediate care facility shall notify the school
district in which the child resided at time of entrance to the
intermediate care facility and the school district in which the facility
is located. Such notice shall include the name of the child, the
location of the intermediate care facility, and the name of the school
district in which such child resided at the time of placement.
 (8) A board of education of a school district which receives
notification that a child has been placed in an intermediate care
facility for individuals with developmental disabilities may deny
financial responsibility for any child by written notice within twenty
days of such notification to the school district furnishing instruction
and the intermediate care facility.
 (9) An intermediate care facility responsible for placing the child,
the school district furnishing instruction or the parent or guardian of
the child involved may appeal a denial of responsibility to the
commissioner of education. If the commissioner finds that the child was
not a resident of the school district that was notified that the child
was a resident therein, the commissioner shall request the intermediate
care facility to ascertain the correct school district and notify such
school district pursuant to subparagraph six of this paragraph. The
commissioner shall review and determine responsibility for the child in
question. If the commissioner finds that a child has no residence in
this state, he shall determine that there is no local contribution for
such child.
 (10) If the intermediate care facility fails to make a reasonable
effort to identify the residence of such a child, such agency shall be
responsible for the local contribution and, upon notification by the
commissioner of education, shall pay such amount to the commissioner of
education.
 (11) If the intermediate care facility rejects the finding of the
committee on special education of the school district of attendance, or
a finding affirmed or revised on appeal, such facility shall retain
responsibility for payment of the cost of instruction of such child.
 (12) Any final determination or order of the commissioner concerning
residence or placement of any child under this paragraph may only be
reviewed in a proceeding brought in the supreme court pursuant to
article seventy-eight of the civil practice law and rules. In any such
proceeding, the court may grant any relief authorized by the provisions
of section seventy-eight hundred six of such law and rules or may, in
its discretion, remand the proceedings to the commissioner. An
intermediate care facility attempting to place a child pursuant to this
paragraph shall be considered a proper party to any such proceeding.
 (13) The school district providing educational services to children
placed pursuant to this paragraph shall provide a report on the status
of each such child with a handicapping condition annually to the
committee on special education of the school district in which the child
resided at the time of admission to the intermediate care facility for
individuals with developmental disabilities. Such report shall also be
sent to the parent or guardian of the child and the office for people
with developmental disabilities.
 (14) The board of education responsible for providing appropriate
educational services for a child receiving care in an intermediate care
facility developed pursuant to the residential school bed development
program, as authorized by chapter fifty-four of the laws of nineteen
hundred eighty-five or any subsequent enactment extending such program,
shall be the board of education of the school district in which such
child would be deemed to reside but for such child's placement in such
an intermediate care facility. The department shall reimburse such
school district of residence for all nonfederally reimbursable costs of
such educational services in accordance with subparagraph four of this
paragraph as if such district were the school district in which the
intermediate care facility is located, and such school district of
residence shall be responsible for reimbursement of the department for
its expenditure on behalf of the child in an amount equal to the school
district basic contribution, as defined in subdivision eight of section
four thousand four hundred one of this chapter. The comptroller may
deduct the amount of such reimbursement from any state funds due the
district in the manner prescribed in subparagraph six of this paragraph.
 e. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph a of subdivision five
of section thirty-six hundred four of this chapter, the commissioner
shall be authorized to grant a waiver excusing the late filing of claims
submitted for costs incurred pursuant to this subdivision, upon findings
that the school district has submitted a timely request for a waiver and
has submitted proof satisfactory to the commissioner that the delay in
filing was caused by a party other than the school district. A request
for such a waiver, together with all supporting documentation, shall be
submitted to the commissioner within sixty days after the date on which
this paragraph was enacted, or within fourteen months after the end of
the school year in which services were provided pursuant to this
subdivision, whichever is later.
 6. Except as provided in subdivision five of this section or by
article eighty-one of this chapter, children cared for in a hospital or
other institution for the care, custody and treatment of children, other
than a school and excepting children of the officers and employees of
such hospital or institution, shall not, by reason of their presence in
such hospital or institution, be deemed to be residents of the school
district in which such hospital or institution is located. The trustees
or board of education of the school district of their residence shall
provide educational services for such children. Such services may be
provided by a tutor employed by the district, by contract with a school
connected with such hospital or institution, or by contract with the
local public school district in which such hospital or institution is
located. Such contracts shall be limited to the cost of educational
services and shall not include maintenance or medical services.
Provided, however, if such children are supported and maintained at the
expense of a social services district, the cost of said instruction
shall be paid by the social services district which is liable for
payment of the cost of their support and maintenance. In the case of
hospitals or institutions located in the state of New York, the trustees
or board of education of a school district in which such a hospital or
institution is located shall receive such children in the school or
schools of the district for instruction for a compensation to be fixed
by the trustee or board of education, unless such trustees or board of
education shall establish to the satisfaction of the commissioner of
education that there are valid and sufficient reasons for refusal to
receive such children.
 6-a. Notwithstanding subdivision six of this section or any other law
to the contrary, the commissioner of the office of children and family
services shall be responsible for the secular education of youth under
the jurisdiction of the office and may contract for such education with
the trustees or board of education of the school district wherein a
facility for the residential care of such youth is located or with the
board of cooperative educational services at which any such school
district is a component district for special education programs, related
services and career and technical education services and music, art and
foreign language programs in accordance with subparagraph eight of
paragraph (h) of subdivision four of section nineteen hundred fifty of
this chapter. A youth attending a local public school while in residence
at such facility shall be deemed a resident of the school district where
his parent or guardian resides at the commencement of each school year
for the purpose of determining which school district shall be
responsible for the youth's tuition pursuant to section five hundred
four of the executive law.
 7. Youth incarcerated in county correctional facilities or youth
shelters. a. A person under twenty-one years of age who has not received
a high school diploma and who is incarcerated in a correctional facility
maintained by a county or by the city of New York or in a youth shelter
is eligible for educational services pursuant to this subdivision and in
accordance with the regulations of the commissioner. Such services shall
be provided by the school district in which the facility or youth
shelter is located, within the limits of the funds allocated by the
commissioner for such purposes pursuant to section thirty-six hundred
two of this chapter and pursuant to a plan approved by the commissioner.
School districts shall submit such plan by July fifteenth of each school
year. Boards of education are authorized to contract for the provision
of such educational services by a board of cooperative educational
services or by another public school district.
 b. Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, the school district
in which the child resided at the time of the child's commitment to the
custody of the sheriff or local commissioner of corrections or youth
shelter shall reimburse the education department for its expenditure for
the full time equivalent attendance of such child pursuant to
subdivision thirteen of section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter
on behalf of such child, in an amount equal to the product of such full
time equivalent attendance and the school district basic contribution,
as such term is defined in subdivision eight of section forty-four
hundred one of this chapter, provided, however, that such basic
contribution shall be multiplied by the full time equivalent attendance
multiplied by one hundred twenty per centum for such children attending
programs which operate between July first and June thirtieth. If at the
applicable time specified in this paragraph a school district other than
the school district in which the child resides is responsible for the
cost of instruction of the child or for reimbursement of the state for
its expenditure on behalf of the child pursuant to any provision of this
chapter, then such other school district shall be responsible for
reimbursement of the education department in accordance with this
paragraph. Upon certification by the commissioner, the comptroller shall
deduct from any state funds which become due to a school district an
amount equal to the reimbursement required to be made by such school
district in accordance with this paragraph, and the amount so deducted
shall not be included in the operating expense of such district for the
purpose of computing the approved operating expense pursuant to
paragraph t of subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this
chapter.
 c. After admission of a child eligible for educational services
pursuant to this subdivision, but within a time prescribed by the
commissioner in regulations, the correctional facility maintained by the
county or the city of New York shall furnish such child with information
concerning the availability of such educational services and shall
submit a request for educational services to the school district in
which the facility is located. Such request shall conform to
requirements prescribed by the commissioner by regulation in
consultation with the state commission of correction and shall include,
but shall not be limited to, notice of: the name of the child, the name
and location of the facility in which such child is incarcerated, the
last grade completed by the child as reported by the child, the
anticipated duration of the incarceration and the last known residence
of such child at the time of the child's commitment to custody. The
school district in which the facility is located shall notify other
appropriate agencies, including, but not limited to, the education
department and the school district identified as being responsible for
the educational costs of such child pursuant to paragraph b of this
subdivision, that such a request for educational services has been
received. The commissioner shall promulgate regulations specifying the
time within which such notice shall be provided and the contents of such
notice, and establishing a procedure by which a school district may
request the commissioner to review its identification as the school
district responsible for the educational costs of such child.
 d. Upon release or discharge of a child eligible for educational
services pursuant to this subdivision, the correctional facility shall
apprise such child that further educational services may be available
pursuant to this section through the school district in which the child
resides or in which the child is otherwise entitled to attend school,
and shall, at the request of the student, notify such district of the
child's desire to enroll in such district.
 e. The state commission of correction shall promulgate rules and
regulations in consultation with the commissioner which shall require
each correctional facility operated by a county or the city of New York
to cooperate with the school district or board of cooperative
educational services providing educational services and to comply with
the requirements of this subdivision.
 f. As used in this subdivision, "youth shelter" shall mean an
alternative residential facility for the incarceration of youths between
the ages of sixteen and twenty-one who are remanded by the criminal
courts.
 8. Homeless children. A homeless child, as defined in subdivision one
of section thirty-two hundred nine of this article, over the age of five
and under twenty-one years of age, who has not received a high school
diploma, shall be entitled to attend a public school without the payment
of tuition, in accordance with the provisions of section thirty-two
hundred nine of this article.
 § 3203. Selection of school for attendance of children when district
line intersects a dwelling. 1. The owner of taxable property that is so
located that the boundary line between two school districts intersects
(a) the dwelling on said property or (b), in the case of an
owner-occupied single family dwelling unit, the property on which the
dwelling unit is located may designate the school in either of such
districts to which the children lawfully residing in said dwelling on
said property shall attend by filing with the district clerk of each of
such districts a notice of such designation on or before August first in
any year and thereafter or, in the case of a single family unit, when
such dwelling unit is built or when its owner-occupant's first child
commences attending school from such residence and thereafter whenever
the ownership of such taxable property changes hands in an arms length
transaction or, likewise, the first child of its new owner-occupant
first commences attending school from such residence and, until a
subsequent designation shall be made and filed, such children shall be
deemed to be resident children of the district designated and shall be
entitled to the school privileges of such district as resident pupils
without the payment of tuition.
 2. School taxes on such property shall continue to be levied and
collected without reference to the aforesaid designation, but the school
authorities of the district that levies and collects a tax upon such
property and does not furnish instructional service to the children
residing on such property shall pay to the district designated, in which
such children are received and instructed, the amount of the tax on such
property so levied and collected. If any such district shall fail or
refuse on demand to pay the amount of any tax so collected, the school
authorities of the district designated and furnishing the instructional
service may recover the amount in an action therefor.
 3. A designation made as provided in this section shall continue until
a new designation is made or until the district superintendent or
superintendents having jurisdiction over the districts affected shall
otherwise order in a proceeding for the alteration of the boundaries of
the districts, but no subsequent designation may be made in any school
year after August first until the close of that school year.
 § 3204. Instruction required. 1. Place of instruction. A minor
required to attend upon instruction by the provisions of part one of
this article may attend at a public school or elsewhere. The
requirements of this section shall apply to such a minor, irrespective
of the place of instruction.
 2. Quality and language of instruction; text-books. (i) Instruction
may be given only by a competent teacher. In the teaching of the
subjects of instruction prescribed by this section, English shall be the
language of instruction, and text-books used shall be written in
English, except that for a period of three years, which period may be
extended by the commissioner with respect to individual pupils, upon
application therefor by the appropriate school authorities, to a period
not in excess of six years, from the date of enrollment in school,
pupils who, by reason of foreign birth or ancestry have limited English
proficiency, shall be provided with instructional programs as specified
in subdivision two-a of this section and the regulations of the
commissioner. The purpose of providing such pupils with instruction
shall be to enable them to develop academically while achieving
competence in the English language. Instruction given to a minor
elsewhere than at a public school shall be at least substantially
equivalent to the instruction given to minors of like age and
attainments at the public schools of the city or district where the
minor resides.
 (ii) For purposes of considering substantial equivalence pursuant to
this subdivision for nonpublic elementary and middle schools that are:
(1) non-profit corporations, (2) have a bi-lingual program, and (3) have
an educational program that extends from no later than nine a.m. until
no earlier than four p.m. for grades one through three, and no earlier
than five thirty p.m. for grades four through eight, on the majority of
weekdays, the department shall consider the following, but not limited
to: if the curriculum provides academically rigorous instruction that
develops critical thinking skills in the school's students, taking into
account the entirety of the curriculum, over the course of elementary
and middle school, including instruction in English that will prepare
pupils to read fiction and nonfiction text for information and to use
that information to construct written essays that state a point of view
or support an argument; instruction in mathematics that will prepare
pupils to solve real world problems using both number sense and fluency
with mathematical functions and operations; instruction in history by
being able to interpret and analyze primary text to identify and explore
important events in history, to construct written arguments using the
supporting information they get from primary source material,
demonstrate an understating of the role of geography and economics in
the actions of world civilizations, and an understanding of civics and
the responsibilities of citizens in world communities; and instruction
in science by learning how to gather, analyze and interpret observable
data to make informed decisions and solve problems mathematically, using
deductive and inductive reasoning to support a hypothesis, and how to
differentiate between correlational and causal relationships.
 (iii) For purposes of considering substantial equivalence pursuant to
this subdivision for nonpublic high schools that: (1) are established
for pupils in high school who have graduated from an elementary school
that provides instruction as described in this section, (2) are a
non-profit corporation, (3) have a bi-lingual program, and (4) have an
educational program that extends from no later than nine a.m. until no
earlier than six p.m. on the majority of weekdays the department shall
consider the following but not limited to: if the curriculum provides
academically rigorous instruction that develops critical thinking skills
in the school's students, the outcomes of which, taking into account the
entirety of the curriculum, result in a sound basic education.
 (iv) Nothing herein shall be construed to entitle or permit any school
to receive an increase in mandated services aid pursuant to 8 NYCRR 176
on account of providing a longer school day.
 (v) The commissioner shall be the entity that determines whether
nonpublic elementary and secondary schools are in compliance with the
academic requirements set forth in paragraphs (ii) and (iii) of this
subdivision.
 2-a. Instructional programs for pupils of limited English proficiency.
1. Each school district which is receiving total foundation aid shall
develop a comprehensive plan consistent with requirements as the
commissioner may establish in regulations to meet the educational needs
of pupils of limited English proficiency. Such plan shall include a
description of the programs, activities and services used to meet the
educational needs of pupils of limited English proficiency that comply
with the regulations of the commissioner governing such programs. By
July first, two thousand eight, the commissioner shall develop
guidelines for the enhancement of services for such pupils, which shall
include but not be limited to the replication of existing model programs
that have been effective in meeting the needs of such pupils, and shall
establish eligibility standards for incentive grants to improve services
to such pupils and the competitive process that will be used to award
such grants. On or before March first of each year commencing with March
first, two thousand nine, the commissioner shall submit a report to the
governor, the director of the budget, the speaker of the assembly, the
temporary president of the senate, the chair of the fiscal committees of
the senate and assembly on the expenditure of state, local and federal
funds by school districts in the prior school year on programs,
activities and services for pupils of limited English proficiency, along
with recommendations for improvement of such programs.
 2. The board of education of each school district receiving such funds
shall provide a program of bilingual education or English as a second
language for eligible pupils and may contract with a board of
cooperative educational services or another school district to provide
such program, provided that in a city having a population of one million
or more, the community school boards shall provide such program in the
schools within their jurisdiction.
 3. Eligibility for such programs shall be based on the following
criteria. A pupil who by reason of foreign birth or ancestry speaks a
language other than English, and either understands and speaks little or
no English, or who has been identified by any English language
assessment instrument approved by the commissioner as a pupil of limited
English proficiency, shall receive a program of bilingual education or
English as a second language in accordance with standards established by
the commissioner. A pupil's proficiency in the English language shall be
measured annually by such language assessment instrument in order to
determine further participation in bilingual education or English as a
second language program in accordance with standards established by the
commissioner, subject to the provisions of subdivision two of this
section. The parent or guardian of a pupil designated as limited English
proficient shall be informed by the local school authorities of the
pupil's placement in an instructional program.
 4. Bilingual programs shall be designed to:
 (a) provide content instruction for children of limited English
proficiency using the child's native language and English;
 (b) provide native language instruction; and
 (c) provide English as a second language instruction.
 5. English as a second language program shall be designed to develop
skills in listening, speaking, reading and writing the English language,
and assist in the learning of content areas through monolingual
instruction in English.
 6. The commissioner shall establish, by regulation, standards for
approved programs for pupils of limited English proficiency.
 7. After a pupil is enrolled in a regular instructional program, he
may receive additional instruction in his native language.
 8. A school district which provides a program of bilingual education
or English as a second language designed to meet the needs of pupils of
limited English proficiency, shall be empowered to:
 (a) impart to pupils a knowledge of the history and culture associated
with their native languages;
 (b) establish closer cooperation between the school and the home;
 (c) provide early childhood educational programs related to the
purposes of this section and designed to improve the potential for
profitable learning activities by children;
 (d) offer adult education programs related to the purposes of this
section, particularly for parents of pupils with limited English
proficiency;
 (e) provide programs designed for dropouts or potential dropouts
having need of such programs; and
 (f) provide other activities deemed desirable to further the purposes
of this section.
 9. Any duly authorized local educational agency or agencies is hereby
empowered to make application for any grant or grants in furtherance of
this section under any public law enacted by the United States Congress.
 2-b. Gifted instruction in schools. The governing board of any school
district and any community school district is hereby empowered to
determine the circumstances wherein instruction shall be given to meet
the special needs of gifted pupils as provided in this chapter.
 3. Courses of study. a. (1) The course of study for the first eight
years of full time public day schools shall provide for instruction in
at least the twelve common school branches of arithmetic, reading,
spelling, writing, the English language, geography, United States
history, civics, hygiene, physical training, the history of New York
state and science.
 (2) The courses of study and of specialized training beyond the first
eight years of full time public day schools shall provide for
instruction in at least the English language and its use, in civics,
hygiene, physical training, and American history including the
principles of government proclaimed in the Declaration of Independence
and established by the constitution of the United States.
 (3) The courses of study beyond the first eight years of full time
public day schools may provide a program for a course in "communism and
its methods and its destructive effects".
 b. For part time day schools. The course of study of a part time
public day school shall include such subjects as will enlarge the civic
and vocational intelligence and skill of the minors required to attend.
 c. For evening schools. In a public evening school instruction shall
be given in at least speaking, reading, and writing English.
 d. For parental schools. In a parental school provision shall be made
for vocational training and for instruction in other subjects
appropriate to the minor's age and attainments.
 e. Changes in courses of study. The state education department shall
have power to alter the subjects of instruction as prescribed in this
section.
 4. Length of school sessions. a. A full time day school or class,
except as otherwise prescribed, shall be in session for not less than
one hundred eighty days each year, exclusive of legal holidays that
occur during the term of said school and exclusive of Saturdays.
 b. A part time day school or class shall be in session each year for
at least four hours of each week during which the full time day schools
are in session.
 c. Evening schools shall be in session each year as follows:
 (1) In cities having a population of one hundred thousand or more, on
at least one hundred nights;
 (2) In cities having a population of fifty thousand but less than one
hundred thousand, on at least seventy-five nights;
 (3) In each other city, and in each school district where twenty or
more persons from seventeen to twenty-one years of age are required to
attend upon evening instruction, on at least fifty nights.
 4-a. Special education. Every pupil, having been determined to be a
"child with a handicapping condition" by a committee on the handicapped,
shall be offered an opportunity to receive the benefits of an
appropriate public education as prescribed in article eighty-nine of
this chapter.
 4-b. The board of education or the board of trustees of each school
district shall establish a policy and adopt procedures to allow any
student in such district to participate in the graduation ceremony of
the student's high school graduating class and all related activities if
such student has been awarded a skills and achievement commencement
credential or career development and occupational studies commencement
credential but has not otherwise qualified for a regents or local
diploma. The policy and procedures shall provide annual written notice
to all students and their parents or guardians about the school
district's policy and procedures adopted in accordance with this
subdivision. Nothing in this subdivision shall compel a student to
participate in the high school graduation ceremony and activities. For
purposes of this subdivision, a student's high school graduating class
shall be the twelfth grade class with which such student entered into
ninth grade.
 5. Subject to rules and regulations of the board of regents, a pupil
may, consistent with the requirements of public education and public
health, be excused from such study of health and hygiene as conflicts
with the religion of his parents or guardian. Such conflict must be
certified by a proper representative of their religion as defined by
section two of the religious corporations law.
 6. Notwithstanding any law, rule, or regulation to the contrary:
 (a) Instruction at a nonpublic school satisfies all the requirements
of this part applicable to instruction, including subdivision two of
this section, subdivision two of section thirty-two hundred ten of this
part, and any other requirements in this chapter applicable to
instruction, and shall thereby qualify as and be finally recognized to
be at least substantially equivalent to the instruction given to minors
of like age and attainments at the public schools of the city or
district where the minor resides, if such nonpublic school is:
 (i) a registered high school or nonpublic school serving grades one
through eight that has a registered high school;
 (ii) a state-approved private special education school or
state-operated or state-supported school established by the state
legislature pursuant to article eighty-five, eighty-seven or
eighty-eight of this chapter;
 (iii) a nonpublic school that is accredited or is awarded provisional
status by an accreditation body approved by the commissioner for
purposes of demonstrating compliance with the requirements of this
section, except that such provisional status shall only apply for the
first five years that such nonpublic school has been awarded provisional
status. An accreditation body shall have the knowledge and expertise to
properly evaluate the entirety of the day's curriculum of those schools
that it accredits and shall use a peer review process that includes
evaluation by leaders of similar nonpublic schools, appropriately train
all staff and peer reviewers who are involved in the accreditation
process, accredit based on publicly accessible documented standards,
perform a comprehensive onsite visit of any school seeking accreditation
while such school is in session, and periodically conduct a combination
of interim and full accreditation reviews of the nonpublic schools which
it accredits during at least a ten-year period. Additionally, such
accreditation body shall require nonpublic schools seeking accreditation
to have curriculum that is informed by research, document individual
student progress, and have mechanisms for monitoring, assessing, and
providing feedback on student progress. The commissioner may, at any
time, revoke such commissioner's approval of an accreditation body for
cause, upon notice and hearing;
 (iv) a nonpublic school that participates in the international
baccalaureate program;
 (v) a nonpublic school whose instruction is approved by the United
States government for instruction on a military base or service academy;
 (vi) a nonpublic school in which the percentage of students who score
"proficient" on a year-end summative or cumulative assessment and taken
in the same subject areas and for the same grade levels as the annual
New York state testing program to comply with the federal Every Student
Succeeds Act is equal to or greater than one of the following metrics,
and such school has declared the intended use of such metric at the
beginning of the school year:
 (1) the percentage of similarly situated public school students
scoring at the "proficient" level on New York state testing program
tests taken in the same subject areas and grade levels in the school
district that serves the same geographic area as the nonpublic school is
located; or
 (2) the percentage of similarly situated public school students
statewide scoring at the "proficient" level on New York state testing
program tests taken in the same subject areas and grade levels; or
 (vii) a nonpublic school that administers a year-end summative or
cumulative assessment taken in substantially the same subject areas and
same grade levels as the annual New York state testing program to comply
with the federal Every Student Succeeds Act, has a three-year average
participation rate that is equal to or greater than the three-year
statewide average participation rate, and uses the results to assess the
school's educational program and to seek to improve instruction and its
students' performance on such tests.
 (a-1) A nonpublic school's satisfaction of one or more criteria listed
in paragraph (a) of this subdivision in one school year shall not
automatically be deemed satisfaction of such criteria in later school
years if such school ceases to satisfy such criteria in such later
years.
 (b) (i) For purposes of subparagraphs (vi) and (vii) of paragraph (a)
of this subdivision, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
 (1) "Year-end summative or cumulative assessment" shall mean one or
more assessments selected by the nonpublic school that qualifies as (A)
a New York state testing program test; (B) an assessment approved by the
commissioner; or (C) a nationally-recognized, commercially published
norm-referenced achievement test that is: (I) recognized and used in at
least three other states; (II) selected by the nonpublic school from one
of the following: the Iowa Test of Basic Skills, the California
Achievement Test, the Stanford Achievement Test, the Comprehensive Test
of Basic Skills, the Metropolitan Achievement Test, i-Ready, a state
education department test, or; (III) another test approved by the state
education department. All assessments and materials used in connection
with such assessments shall be culturally competent and respectful of
cultural curricula and pedagogy. A nonpublic school shall not need to
use the same year-end summative or cumulative assessment across all
grades or years and may change assessments used at any time.
 (2) "Proficient" shall mean, as applicable, (A) a score of
"proficient" on a New York state testing program test; (B) a score
determined by the commissioner for an assessment approved by the
commissioner; or (C) a score of at least the thirty-third percentile on
a nationally-recognized, commercially published norm-referenced
achievement test, unless the commissioner approves a lower percentage
for such tests.
 (ii) To rely on subparagraph (vi) of paragraph (a) of this
subdivision, a nonpublic school shall demonstrate a student
participation rate on its year-end summative or cumulative assessment or
assessments equal to or greater than the three-year average statewide
participation rate.
 (iii) To allow for adequate preparation of students in connection with
subparagraphs (vi) and (vii) of paragraph (a) of this subdivision, a
phase-in period shall be established. During such phase-in period, a
nonpublic school and its affiliated schools shall be deemed to have met
the criteria in subparagraphs (vi) and (vii) of paragraph (a) of this
subdivision, for purposes of all components of this subdivision. Such
phase-in status shall commence upon the effective date of this
subdivision, including prior to the administration of any year-end
summative or cumulative assessment, and shall continue until the first
cohort entering second grade at such nonpublic school after such
effective date completes the year-end summative or cumulative assessment
for the third grade and shall further continue in the subsequent years,
as long as such nonpublic school continues administering a year-end
summative or cumulative assessment for the third grade and adds one
additional, higher grade each year until such nonpublic school is
administering a year-end summative or cumulative assessment for grades
three through ten. The phase-in period shall end after the two thousand
thirty-two--two thousand thirty-three school year. Prior to such cohorts
tested using year-end summative or cumulative assessments under
subparagraphs (vi) and (vii) of paragraph (a) of this subdivision, such
cohorts may be provided with practice and/or sample testing questions to
begin familiarizing themselves with standardized testing methodology.
The phase-in period shall be applicable to all nonpublic schools, and it
shall only be necessary for a nonpublic school to administer year-end
summative or cumulative assessments for the phased-in grades,
notwithstanding the nonpublic school's past or current administration of
such assessments for other grades.
 (iv) If a nonpublic school meets, or has been deemed pursuant to
subparagraph (iii) of this paragraph to have met, the criteria in
subparagraph (vi) or (vii) of paragraph (a) of this subdivision, then
during the phase-in period of subparagraph (iii) of this paragraph, all
affiliated schools shall be deemed to have met such criteria. Affiliated
schools are those with one of the following: the same office of
religious and independent school support (ORISS) code under a single
basic educational data system (BEDS) code; or the same organization with
a different BEDS code in the same location; or the same ORISS code and
leadership but may have physical buildings in different locations.
During the phase-in period of subparagraph (iii) of this paragraph, a
nonpublic school which meets the criteria of subparagraph (vii) of
paragraph (a) of this subdivision shall include its affiliated schools
when using the results of the year-end summative or cumulative
assessment to assess educational programming and improve instruction and
students' performance on such tests. During the phase-in period of
subparagraph (iii) of this paragraph, if a nonpublic school meets the
criteria in subparagraph (iii) of paragraph (a) of this subdivision with
respect to provisional status then all affiliated schools shall be
deemed to have met such criteria. If a nonpublic high school meets the
criteria in subparagraph (i) or (vi) of paragraph (a) of this
subdivision, then all affiliated middle or elementary schools shall be
deemed to have met such criteria.
 (c) Nothing in this subdivision shall preclude the commissioner from
defining by rule or regulation alternative criteria which may also be
used to demonstrate that instruction at a nonpublic school is in
compliance with this section. Compliance with this section may be
demonstrated through any one or more of the criteria established in this
subdivision and shall thereby qualify as and be finally recognized to be
substantially equivalent without any further requirements. A nonpublic
school's satisfaction of one or more criteria in one school year shall
not automatically be deemed satisfaction of such criteria in later
school years if such school ceases to satisfy such criteria in such
later years. A nonpublic school may elect at any time to select
different criteria. A nonpublic school's omission to satisfy one or more
criteria shall not affect a nonpublic school's ability to satisfy
another criteria, or such criteria at a later date.
 § 3205. Attendance of minors upon full time day instruction. 1. a. In
each school district of the state, each minor from six to sixteen years
of age shall attend upon full time instruction.
 b. Each minor from six to sixteen years of age on an Indian
reservation shall attend upon full time day instruction.
 c. For purposes of this article, a minor who becomes six years of age
on or before the first of December in any school year shall be required
to attend upon full time instruction from the first day that the
appropriate public schools are in session in September of such school
year, and a minor who becomes six years of age after the first of
December in any school year shall be required to attend upon full time
instruction from the first day of session in the following September;
and, except as otherwise provided in subdivision three of this section,
shall be required to remain in attendance until the last day of session
in the school year in which the minor becomes sixteen years of age.
 2. Exceptions. a. A minor who has completed a four-year high school
course of study shall not be subject to the provisions of part one of
this article in respect to required attendance upon instruction.
 b. A minor for whom application for a full-time employment certificate
has been made and who is eligible therefor may, though unemployed, be
permitted to attend part time school not less than twenty hours per week
instead of full time school.
 c. The board of education of every school district within the state is
hereby authorized to require minors who are five years of age on or
before December first to attend kindergarten instruction. However, the
provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to:
 (i) Minors whose parents elect not to enroll their children in school
until the following September.
 (ii) Students enrolled in non-public schools or in home instruction.
 3. In each school district, the board of education shall have power to
require minors from sixteen to seventeen years of age who are not
employed to attend upon full time day instruction until the last day of
session in the school year in which the student becomes seventeen years
of age.
 § 3206. Attendance of minors upon part time instruction. 1. The board
of education of a city or district shall have power to require each
employed minor from sixteen to seventeen years of age to attend upon
part time instruction in accordance with the provisions of this section.
 2. A minor who is a graduate of a four-year high school course of
study shall not be required to attend upon part time instruction.
 3. The attendance of an employed minor required to attend upon part
time instruction by a board of education in accordance with the
provisions of this section shall be for not less than four, nor more
than eight hours per week, and on such day or days of the week as the
school authorities may determine.
 4. An employed minor, while temporarily unemployed, or a minor
attending part time school under the provisions of subdivision two,
paragraph b, of section thirty-two hundred five, required to attend part
time instruction by a board of education in accordance with the
provisions of this section, shall attend upon part time instruction for
not less than twenty hours a week. An employed minor shall be deemed to
be temporarily unemployed until he reenters lawful employment or attends
upon full time day instruction.
 5. The absence of an employed minor during a rush season may be
permitted by the school authorities on condition that the minor attend a
greater number of hours per week thereafter until the absence is made
up, and provided that the minor's employer is a party to such an
agreement.
 6. An absence due to unlawful cause may be required to be made up by
attendance in excess of the number of hours per week otherwise required.
 7. The school authorities of a city or district shall have power after
a hearing to establish a half-time system or program of employment and
required attendance at part time schools for minors who are included by
the provisions of this section.
 8. Each minor above the age of sixteen years and under the age of
eighteen years, who is not in regular full-time day attendance at a
public, private or parochial school or who is regularly and lawfully
employed in some occupation or service, unless such minor has completed
a four year secondary course of instruction approved by the regents of
the university, shall attend a part-time school or class in the city or
district in which such minor resides or may be employed, provided the
board of education of such city or district has enacted appropriate
rules and regulations requiring attendance at such part-time schools
under the provisions of section forty-six hundred one. Such attendance
shall be subject to the provisions of article ninety-three of this
chapter.
 § 3207. Attendance upon evening instruction. In each city and school
district in which evening instruction is provided, under the provisions
of part one of this article, each person from seventeen to twenty-one
years of age who is unable to speak, read and write English as required
for the completion of the fifth year of the elementary school course of
study, and who is not attending upon equivalent day instruction, shall
attend upon such evening instruction.
 § 3207-a. Service of persons seventeen years of age as election
inspectors or poll clerks. A school district may permit an enrolled
student, with the consent of such student's parent, guardian, or other
person in parental relation, to serve as an election inspector or poll
clerk pursuant to section 3-400 of the election law (and other
applicable provisions of this chapter and the labor law). For the
purposes of attendance, any student so serving while school is in
session shall be recorded as in attendance.
 * § 3208. Attendance; screening of new entrants; prohibition against
mandatory medication. 1. A person included by the provisions of this
part shall be required to attend upon instruction only if in proper
mental and physical condition.
 2. A person whose mental or physical condition is such that his or her
attendance upon instruction under the provisions of this part would
endanger the health or safety of such person or of others shall not be
permitted to attend, provided that nothing in this section shall be
construed to authorize a denial of access to education based on
disability in violation of state or federal law.
 3. If a person's mental or physical condition, by virtue of which he
or she is not required or permitted to attend upon instruction, is due
to a mental or physical condition which may be remedied by the taking of
reasonable measures, such mental or physical condition shall justify
only the temporary failure of the person to attend.
 4. The determination of mental or physical condition under the
provisions of this part shall be based upon actual examination made by a
person or persons qualified by appropriate training and experience, in
accordance with regulations of the department. The department shall
designate persons having the required qualifications to make such mental
or physical examinations on behalf of any local school authorities,
except that in a city having a population of one million or more the
superintendent of schools shall designate such persons.
 4-a. Officers or employees of the state, a school district, a board of
cooperative educational services, a charter school, an approved private
school for the education of students with disabilities approved pursuant
to paragraph e, f, g or h of subdivision two of section forty-four
hundred one of this chapter, an approved provider of preschool special
education approved pursuant to section forty-four hundred ten of this
chapter or a state-supported school operating pursuant to article
forty-five of this chapter, shall be prohibited from requiring a child
who is entitled to attend school pursuant to subdivision one of section
thirty-two hundred two of this part to obtain a prescription for a
substance covered by the federal controlled substances act, section
eight hundred one of title twenty-one of the United States code, et
seq., as a condition of attending school, receiving an evaluation or
reevaluation pursuant to article eighty-nine of this chapter or any
other provision of law relating to students with disabilities or
receiving special education programs or services.
 5. a. Each board of education or trustees of each school district
shall provide for the screening of every new entrant to school to
determine which pupils are or may be children with disabilities or
gifted children, as well as all pupils who score below level two on
either the third grade English language arts or mathematics assessments
for New York state elementary schools, in accordance with regulations of
the commissioner to determine whether such pupils may have disabilities.
 b. Such screening shall include, but not be limited to:
 (1) A physical examination pursuant to the provisions of sections nine
hundred one, nine hundred three and nine hundred four of this chapter,
including proof of immunization as required by section twenty-one
hundred sixty-four of the public health law.
 (2) A language development assessment.
 c. If such screening indicates a suspected disability, which may
require the provision of special education services or programs, a
referral shall be made to the committee on special education.
 d. If such screening indicates a possibly gifted child, the name and
finding shall be reported to the superintendent of schools of such
district and to the parent or legal guardian of such child. Such
notification shall not be construed as an entitlement for services for
any such child identified as possibly gifted.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2027
 * § 3208. Attendance; proper mental and physical condition. 1. A
person included by the provisions of part one of this article shall be
required to attend upon instruction only if in proper mental and
physical condition.
 2. A person whose mental or physical condition is such that his
attendance upon instruction under the provisions of part one of this
article would endanger the health or safety of himself or of others
shall not be permitted to attend.
 3. If a person's mental or physical condition, by virtue of which he
is not required or permitted to attend upon instruction, is due to
physical defects or to a physical condition which may be remedied by the
taking of reasonable measures, such mental or physical condition shall
justify only the temporary failure of the person to attend.
 4. The determination of mental or physical condition under the
provisions of part one of this article shall be based upon actual
examination made by a person or persons qualified by appropriate
training and experience, in accordance with regulations of the state
education department. The state education department shall designate
persons having the required qualifications to make such mental or
physical examinations on behalf of any local school authorities, except
that in a city having a population of one million or more the
superintendent of schools shall designate such persons.
 5. a. Each board of education or trustees of each school district
shall provide for the screening of every new entrant to school to
determine which pupils are or may be children with handicapping
conditions or gifted, as well as all pupils who score below level two on
either the third grade reading or mathematics tests for New York state
elementary schools and all students who obtain a comparable percentile
score on the regents preliminary competency test, in accordance with
regulations of the commissioner to determine whether such pupils may
have handicapping conditions.
 b. Such screening shall include, but not be limited to:
 (1) A physical examination pursuant to the provisions of sections nine
hundred one, nine hundred three and nine hundred four of this chapter,
including proof of immunization as required by section twenty-one
hundred sixty-four of the public health law.
 (2) A language development assessment.
 c. If such screening indicates a suspected handicapping condition,
which may require the provision of special education services or
programs, a referral shall be made to the committee on special
education.
 d. If such screening indicates a possibly gifted child, the name and
finding shall be reported to the superintendent of schools of such
district and to the parent or legal guardian of such child. Such
notification shall not be construed as an entitlement for services for
any such child identified as possibly gifted.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2027
 § 3208-a. Special proceeding to determine physical capacity of student
to participate in athletic programs. 1. Upon a school district's
determination that a student shall not be permitted to participate in an
athletic program by reason of a physical impairment, based on a medical
examination conducted by the school physician, the student may commence
a special proceeding in the supreme court pursuant to the provisions of
article four of the civil practice law and rules to enjoin the school
district from prohibiting his participation. Such special proceeding
may be brought in the county in which the student resides or in the
county in which the school district is located.
 2. The petition in the proceeding shall be a verified petition of a
parent or guardian of the student. The petition shall have annexed
affidavits of at least two licensed physicians setting forth that in
their opinion the student is physically capable of participating in an
athletic program, that participation would be reasonably safe, and any
special or preventive measures or devices needed to protect the student.
 3. The court shall grant such petition if it is satisfied that it is
in the best interest of the student to participate in an athletic
program and that it is reasonably safe for him to do so.
 4. No school district shall be held liable for an injury sustained by
a student granted an order under this section provided such injury is
incurred during such student's actual participation in an athletic
program and, provided further, that such injury is attributable to the
physical impairment for which such court order was obtained.
 5. Unless specifically prohibited by the court, an order granted
pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be considered valid and
sufficient for subsequent years, provided that the student has not
changed athletic programs and, further, that two licensed physicians set
forth current affidavits that, in their opinion, the student's physical
impairment has not changed since the time of the original court order.
 6. In no event shall a successful petitioner be entitled to costs in
any proceeding brought pursuant to this section.
 7. The school district shall not be responsible for providing or bear
the cost of, any special or preventive measures or devices needed to
protect the student unless such special or preventive measures or
devices are contained in a student's individual education plan
recommended by the school district committee on the handicapped and such
student is a child with a handicapping condition, as defined in section
forty-four hundred one of this chapter.
 8. A physically impaired child eligible to commence a special
proceeding as provided by this section shall be defined as any child
determined by a school physician as ineligible for participation on the
basis of the regulations of the state education department, the American
Medical Association Guide for Medical Evaluation for Candidates for
School Sports, or by any standard established by the school district
involved.
 9. An athletic program for the purpose of this section shall include
intramural activities, inter-school activities, extramural activities,
and organized practice as defined by section 135.1 by the commissioner
of education's regulations.
 § 3209. Education of homeless children. 1. Definitions.
 a. Homeless child. For the purposes of this article, the term
"homeless child" shall mean:
 (1) a child or youth who lacks a fixed, regular, and adequate
nighttime residence, including a child or youth who is:
 (i) sharing the housing of other persons due to a loss of housing,
economic hardship or a similar reason;
 (ii) living in motels, hotels, trailer parks or camping grounds due to
the lack of alternative adequate accommodations;
 (iii) abandoned in hospitals; or
 (iv) a migratory child, as defined in subsection two of section
thirteen hundred nine of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of
1965, as amended by the Every Student Succeeds Act of 2015, who
qualifies as homeless under any of the provisions of clauses (i) through
(iii) of this subparagraph or subparagraph two of this paragraph;
 (v) an unaccompanied youth, as defined in section seven hundred
twenty-five of subtitle B of title VII of the McKinney-Vento Homeless
Assistance Act; or
 (2) a child or youth who has a primary nighttime location that is:
 (i) a supervised publicly or privately operated shelter designed to
provide temporary living accommodations including, but not limited to,
shelters operated or approved by the state or local department of social
services, and residential programs for runaway and homeless youth
established pursuant to article nineteen-H of the executive law; or
 (ii) a public or private place not designed for, or ordinarily used
as, a regular sleeping accommodation for human beings, including a child
or youth who is living in a car, park, public space, abandoned building,
substandard housing, bus or train stations or similar setting.
 a-1. Exception. For the purposes of this article the term "homeless
child" shall not include a child in a foster care placement or receiving
educational services pursuant to subdivision four, five, six, six-a or
seven of section thirty-two hundred two of this part or pursuant to
article eighty-one, eighty-five, eighty-seven or eighty-eight of this
chapter.
 b. Designator. The term "designator" shall mean:
 (1) the parent or the person in parental relation to a homeless child;
or
 (2) the homeless child, if no parent or person in parental relation is
available; or
 (3) the director of a residential program for runaway and homeless
youth established pursuant to article nineteen-H of the executive law,
in consultation with the homeless child, where such homeless child is
living in such program.
 c. School district of origin. The term "school district of origin"
shall mean the school district within the state of New York in which the
homeless child was attending a public school or preschool on a
tuition-free basis or was entitled to attend when circumstances arose
which caused such child to become homeless, which is different from the
school district of current location. School district of origin shall
also mean the school district in the state of New York in which the
child was residing when circumstances arose which caused such child to
become homeless if such child was eligible to apply, register, or enroll
in public preschool or kindergarten at the time such child became
homeless, or the homeless child has a sibling who attends a school in
the school district in which the child was residing when circumstances
arose which caused such child to become homeless.
 d. School district of current location. The term "school district of
current location" shall mean the public school district within the state
of New York in which the hotel, motel, shelter or other temporary
housing arrangement of a homeless child, or the residential program for
runaway and homeless youth, is located, which is different from the
school district of origin.
 e. Regional placement plan. The term "regional placement plan" shall
mean a comprehensive regional approach to the provision of educational
placements for homeless children which has been approved by the
commissioner.
 f. Feeder school. The term "feeder school" shall mean:
 (1) a preschool whose students are entitled to attend a specified
elementary school or group of elementary schools upon completion of that
preschool;
 (2) a school whose students are entitled to attend a specified
elementary, middle, intermediate, or high school or group of specified
elementary, middle, intermediate, or high schools upon completion of the
terminal grade of such school; or
 (3) a school that sends its students to a receiving school in a
neighboring school district pursuant to section two thousand forty of
this chapter.
 g. Preschool. The term "preschool" shall mean a publicly funded
prekindergarten program administered by the department or a local
educational agency or a Head Start program administered by a local
educational agency and/or services under the Individuals with
Disabilities Education Act administered by a local educational agency.
 h. Receiving school. The term "receiving school" shall mean:
 (1) a school that enrolls students from a specified or group of
preschools, elementary schools, middle schools, intermediate schools, or
high schools; or
 (2) a school that enrolls students from a feeder school in a
neighboring local educational agency pursuant to section two thousand
forty of this chapter.
 i. School of origin. The term "school of origin" shall mean a public
school that a child or youth attended when permanently housed, or the
school in which the child or youth was last enrolled, including a
preschool or a charter school. Provided that, for a homeless child or
youth who completes the final grade level served by the school of
origin, the term "school of origin" shall include the designated
receiving school at the next grade level for all feeder schools. Where
the child is eligible to attend school in the school district of origin
because the child becomes homeless after such child is eligible to
apply, register, or enroll in the public preschool or kindergarten or
the child is living with a school-age sibling who attends school in the
school district of origin, the school of origin shall include any public
school or preschool in which such child would have been entitled or
eligible to attend based on such child's last residence before the
circumstances arose which caused such child to become homeless.
 2. Choice of district and school.
 a. The designator shall have the right to designate one of the
following as the school district within which the homeless child shall
be entitled to attend upon instruction:
 (1) the school district of current location;
 (2) the school district of origin; or
 (3) a school district participating in a regional placement plan.
 b. The designator shall also have the right to designate one of the
following as the school where a homeless child seeks to attend for
instruction:
 (1) the school of origin; or
 (2) any school that nonhomeless children and youth who live in the
attendance area in which the child or youth is actually living are
eligible to attend, including a preschool.
 c. (1) Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary,
where the public school district in which a homeless child is
temporarily housed is the school district of origin, the homeless child
shall be entitled to attend the schools of such district without the
payment of tuition in accordance with subdivision one of section
thirty-two hundred two of this article for the duration of the
homelessness and until the end of the school year in which such child
becomes permanently housed and for one additional year if that year
constitutes the child's terminal year in such building.
 (2) Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, where
the school district of origin or school of origin that a homeless child
was attending on a tuition-free basis or was entitled to attend when
circumstances arose which caused the child to become homeless is located
in New York state and the homeless child's temporary housing arrangement
is located in a contiguous state, the homeless child shall be entitled
to attend the school of origin or any school that nonhomeless children
and youth who live in the attendance area in which the child or youth is
actually living are eligible to attend, including a preschool, subject
to a best interest determination pursuant to subparagraph three of
paragraph f of this subdivision, for the duration of the homelessness
and until the end of the school year in which such child becomes
permanently housed and for one additional year if that year constitutes
the child's terminal year in such building.
 (3) Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, where
the child's temporary housing arrangement is located in New York state,
the homeless child shall be entitled to attend the school of origin or
any school that nonhomeless children and youth who live in the
attendance area in which the child or youth is actually living are
eligible to attend, including a preschool, subject to a best interest
determination pursuant to subparagraph three of paragraph f of this
subdivision, for the duration of the homelessness and until the end of
the school year in which such child becomes permanently housed and for
one additional year if that year constitutes the child's terminal year
in such building.
 d. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph a of this subdivision,
a homeless child who has designated the school district of current
location as the district of attendance and who has relocated to another
temporary housing arrangement outside of such district, or to a
different attendance zone or community school district within such
district, shall be entitled to continue to attend in the same school
building or designate any school that nonhomeless children and youth who
live in the attendance area in which the child or youth is actually
living are eligible to attend, including a preschool, subject to a best
interest determination in accordance with subparagraph three of
paragraph f of this subdivision, for the duration of the homelessness
and until the end of the school year in which the child becomes
permanently housed and for one additional year if that year constitutes
the child's terminal year in such building.
 e. Such designation shall be made on forms specified by the
commissioner, and shall include the name of the child, the name of the
parent or person in parental relation to the child, the name and
location of the temporary housing arrangement, the name of the school
district of origin, the name of the school district where the child's
records are located, the complete address where the family was located
at the time circumstances arose which caused such child to become
homeless and any other information required by the commissioner. All
school districts, temporary housing facilities operated or approved by a
local social services district, and residential facilities for runaway
and homeless youth shall make such forms available and shall ensure that
the completed designation forms are given to the local educational
agency liaison for the local educational agency in which the designated
school is located in a timeframe prescribed by the commissioner in
regulations. Where the homeless child is located in a temporary housing
facility operated or approved by a local social services district, or a
residential facility for runaway and homeless youth, the director of the
facility or a person designated by the social services district, shall,
within two business days, assist the designator in completing the
designation forms and enrolling the homeless child in the designated
school district and shall forward the completed designation form to the
local educational agency liaison for the local educational agency in
which the designated school is located in a timeframe prescribed by the
commissioner in regulations.
 f. Upon receipt of the designation form, the designated school
district shall immediately:
 (1) review the designation form to ensure that it has been completed;
 (2) admit the homeless child even if the child or youth is unable to
produce records normally a requirement for enrollment, such as previous
academic records, records of immunization and/or other required health
records, proof of residency or other documentation and/or even if the
child has missed application or enrollment deadlines during any period
of homelessness, if applicable. Provided that nothing herein shall be
construed to require the immediate attendance of an enrolled student
lawfully excluded from school temporarily pursuant to section nine
hundred six of this chapter because of a communicable or infectious
disease that imposes a significant risk of infection of others;
 (3) determine whether the designation made by the designator is
consistent with the best interests of the homeless child or youth. In
determining a homeless child's best interest, a local educational agency
shall:
 (i) presume that keeping the homeless child or youth in the school of
origin is in the child's or youth's best interest, except when doing so
is contrary to the request of the child's parent or guardian, or in the
case of an unaccompanied youth, the youth;
 (ii) consider student-centered factors, including but not limited to
factors related to the impact of mobility on achievement, education, the
health and safety of the homeless child, giving priority to the request
of the child's or youth's parent or guardian or the youth in the case of
an unaccompanied youth;
 (iii) if after considering student-centered factors and conducting a
best interest school placement determination, the local educational
agency determines that it is not in the homeless child's best interest
to attend the school of origin or the school designated by the
designator, the local educational agency must provide a written
explanation of the reasons for its determination, in a manner and form
understandable to such parent, guardian, or unaccompanied youth. The
information must also include information regarding the right to a
timely appeal in accordance with regulations of the commissioner. The
homeless child or youth must be enrolled in the school in which
enrollment is sought by the designator during the pendency of all
available appeals;
 (4) treat the homeless child as a resident for all purposes;
 (5) make a written request to the school district where the child's
records are located for a copy of such records; and
 (6) forward the designation form to the school district of origin
where applicable.
 g. Within five days of receipt of a request for records pursuant to
subparagraph five of paragraph f of this subdivision, the school
district shall forward, in a manner consistent with state and federal
law, a complete copy of the homeless child's records including, but not
limited to, proof of age, academic records, evaluations, immunization
records, and guardianship papers, if applicable.
 h. Where the school of origin is a charter school, the school district
designated pursuant to this subdivision shall be deemed to be the school
district of residence of such child for purposes of fiscal and
programmatic responsibility under article fifty-six of this chapter and
shall be responsible for transportation of the homeless child if a
social services district is not otherwise responsible pursuant to
subdivision four of this section.
 i. The commissioner shall promulgate regulations setting forth the
circumstances pursuant to which a change in designation may be made and
establishing a procedure for the identification of the school district
of origin.
 2-a. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, each
local educational agency, as such term is defined in subsection
twenty-six of section ninety-one hundred one of the Elementary and
Secondary Education Act of 1965, as amended by the Every Student
Succeeds Act of 2015, shall designate a local educational agency liaison
for homeless children and youths and shall, consistent with the
provisions of this section, otherwise comply with the applicable
requirements of paragraphs three through seven of subsection (g) of
section seven hundred twenty-two of subtitle B of title VII of the
McKinney-Vento Assistance Act.
 3. Reimbursement.
 a. Where either the school district of current location or a school
district participating in a regional placement plan is designated as the
district in which the homeless child shall attend upon instruction and
such homeless child's school district of origin is within New York
state, the school district providing instruction, including preschool
instruction, shall be eligible for reimbursement by the department, as
approved by the commissioner, for the direct cost of educational
services, not otherwise reimbursed under special federal programs,
calculated pursuant to regulations of the commissioner for the period of
time for which such services are provided. The claim for such
reimbursement shall be in a form prescribed by the commissioner. The
educational costs for such children shall not be otherwise aidable or
reimbursable.
 b. The school district of origin shall reimburse the department for
its expenditure for educational services on behalf of a homeless child
pursuant to paragraph a of this subdivision in an amount equal to the
school district basic contribution, as such term is defined in
subdivision eight of section forty-four hundred one of this chapter,
pro-rated for the period of time for which such services were provided
in the base year by a school district other than the school district of
origin. Upon certification by the commissioner, the comptroller shall
deduct from any state funds which become due to the school district of
origin an amount equal to the reimbursement required to be made by such
school district in accordance with this paragraph, and the amount so
deducted shall not be included in the operating expense of such district
for the purpose of computing the approved operating expense pursuant to
paragraph t of subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this
chapter.
 4. Transportation.
 a. A social services district shall provide for the transportation of
each homeless child, including those in preschool and students with
disabilities identified pursuant to sections forty-four hundred one and
forty-four hundred two of this chapter whose individualized education
programs include special transportation services, who is eligible for
benefits pursuant to section three hundred fifty-j of the social
services law, to and from a temporary housing location in which the
child was placed by the social services district and the school attended
by such child pursuant to this section, if such temporary housing
facility is located outside of the designated school district pursuant
to paragraph a of subdivision two of this section. A social services
district shall be authorized to contract with a board of education or a
board of cooperative educational services for the provision of such
transportation. Where the social services district requests that the
designated school district of attendance provide or arrange for
transportation for a homeless child eligible for transportation pursuant
to this paragraph, the designated school district of attendance shall
provide or arrange for the transportation and the social services
district shall fully and promptly reimburse the designated school
district of attendance for the cost as determined by the designated
school district. This paragraph shall apply to placements made by a
social services district without regard to whether a payment is made by
the district to the operator of the temporary housing facility.
 b. The designated school district of attendance shall provide for the
transportation of each homeless child who is living in a residential
program for runaway and homeless youth established pursuant to article
nineteen-H of the executive law, to and from such residential program,
and the school attended by such child pursuant to this section, if such
temporary housing location is located outside the designated school
district. The designated district of attendance shall be authorized to
contract with a board of cooperative educational services or a
residential program for runaway and homeless youth for the provision of
such transportation. The department shall reimburse the designated
school district of attendance for the cost of transporting such child to
and from the residential program and the school attended by such child
to the extent funds are provided for such purpose, as determined by the
director of the budget.
 c. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any homeless child not
entitled to receive transportation pursuant to paragraphs a and b of
this subdivision who requires transportation in order to attend a school
of origin designated pursuant to subdivision two of this section, shall
be entitled to receive such transportation pursuant to this paragraph.
The designated school district of attendance shall provide
transportation to and from the child's temporary housing location and
the school of origin. Such transportation shall not be in excess of
fifty miles each way except where the commissioner certifies that
transportation in excess of fifty miles is in the best interest of the
child. Any cost incurred for such transportation that is allowable
pursuant to the applicable provision of parts two and three of article
seventy-three of this chapter or herein, shall be aidable pursuant to
subdivision seven of section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter,
provided that the approved transportation expense shall not exceed an
amount determined by the commissioner to be the total cost for providing
the most cost-effective mode of such transportation in a manner
consistent with commissioner's regulations. The commissioner shall
promulgate regulations setting forth the circumstances pursuant to which
parent accompaniment for transportation may be reimbursable, including
but not limited to: the age of the child; the distance of the
transportation; the cost-effectiveness of the transportation; and
whether the child has a handicapping condition.
 d. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, where a homeless child
designates the school district of current location as the district the
child will attend and such child does not attend the school of origin,
such school district shall provide transportation to such child on the
same basis as a resident student.
 e. Where the designated school district of attendance has recommended
that the homeless child attend a summer educational program and the lack
of transportation poses a barrier to such child's participation in the
summer educational program, the designated school district of attendance
shall provide transportation.
 f. The designated school district of attendance, or the social
services district if such child is eligible for transportation from the
social services district pursuant to paragraph a of this subdivision,
shall provide or arrange for transportation to extracurricular or
academic activities where:
 (1) the homeless child participates in or would like to participate in
an extracurricular or academic activity, including an after-school
activity, at the school;
 (2) the homeless child meets the relevant eligibility criteria for the
activity; and
 (3) the lack of transportation poses a barrier to such child's
participation in the activity.
 g. Where the homeless child is temporarily living in a contiguous
state and has designated a school of origin located in the state of New
York, the designated school district in New York state shall collaborate
with the local educational agency in which such child is temporarily
living to arrange for transportation in accordance with section
722(g)(1)(J)(iii)(II) of the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act.
 h. Where the homeless child is temporarily living in New York state
and continues to attend a school of origin located in a contiguous
state, the school district of current location shall coordinate with the
local educational agency where such child is attending school to arrange
for transportation in accordance with section 722(g)(1)(J)(iii)(II) of
the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act.
 i. Transportation as described in this subdivision must be provided to
the homeless child by the designated school district of attendance or
the social services district for the duration of homelessness. The
designated district of attendance must transport the child for the
remainder of the school year in which the child becomes permanently
housed and one additional year if that year constitutes the child's
terminal year in the designated school. Such transportation shall not be
in excess of fifty miles each way except where the commissioner
certifies that transportation in excess of fifty miles is in the best
interest of the child. The designated school district of attendance
shall be entitled to reimbursement from the current school district in
which the child becomes permanently housed for any cost incurred for
transportation for the remainder of the school year after the child
becomes permanently housed and one additional year if that year
constitutes the child's terminal year in the designated school.
 5. Each school district shall:
 a. establish procedures, in accordance with 42 U.S.C. section
11432(g)(3)(E), for the prompt resolution of disputes regarding school
selection or enrollment of a homeless child or youth, including, but not
limited to, disputes regarding transportation and/or a child's or
youth's status as a homeless child or unaccompanied youth;
 b. provide a written explanation, including a statement regarding the
right to appeal pursuant to 42 U.S.C. section 11432(g)(3)(E)(ii), the
name, post office address and telephone number of the local educational
agency liaison and the form petition for commencing an appeal to the
commissioner pursuant to section three hundred ten of this chapter of a
final determination regarding enrollment, school selection and/or
transportation, to the homeless child's or youth's parent or guardian,
if the school district declines to either enroll and/or transport such
child or youth to the school of origin or a school requested by the
parent or guardian; and
 c. shall immediately enroll the child or youth in the school in which
enrollment is sought pending final resolution of the dispute over the
school district's final determination of the child's or youth's homeless
status, including all available appeals within the local educational
agency and the commissioner pursuant to the provisions of section three
hundred ten of this chapter.
 6. a. By January thirty-first, nineteen hundred ninety-five, the
commissioner, the commissioner of the office of temporary and disability
assistance and the commissioner of the office of children and family
services shall develop a plan to ensure coordination and access to
education for homeless children and shall annually review such plan.
 b. The commissioner shall periodically monitor local school districts
to ensure their compliance with the provisions of this article, and that
such districts review and revise any local regulations, policies, or
practices that may act as barriers to the enrollment or attendance of
homeless children in school or their receipt of comparable services as
defined in Part B of Title VII of the Federal Stewart B. McKinney Act.
 c. School districts shall periodically report such information to the
commissioner as he or she may require to carry out the purposes of this
section.
 7. Public welfare officials, except as otherwise provided by law,
shall furnish indigent children with suitable clothing, shoes, books,
food, transportation and other necessaries to enable them to attend upon
instruction as required by law. Upon demonstration of need, such
necessaries shall also include transportation of indigent children for
the purposes of evaluations pursuant to section forty-four hundred ten
of this chapter and title II-A of article twenty-five of the public
health law.
 8. Information about a homeless child's or youth's living situation
shall be treated as a student educational record, and shall not be
deemed to be directory information, under the McKinney-Vento Homeless
Assistance Act, as amended by the Every Student Succeeds Act of 2015.
 9. Each homeless child to be assisted under this section shall be
provided services comparable to services offered to other students in
the school selected under this section, including the following:
transportation services; educational services for which the child or
youth meets the eligibility criteria, such as services provided under
Title I of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 or similar
state or local programs; educational programs for children with
disabilities; educational programs for English learners; programs in
career and technical education; programs for gifted and talented
students; and school nutrition programs.
 10. The commissioner may promulgate regulations to carry out the
purposes of this section.
 § 3209-a. Child abuse prevention. Each school district of the state
shall: (1) develop, maintain and disseminate written policies and
procedures pursuant to title six of article six of the social services
law and applicable provisions of article ten of the family court act,
regarding the mandatory reporting of child abuse or neglect, reporting
procedures and obligations of persons required to report, provisions for
taking a child into protective custody, mandatory reporting of deaths,
immunity from liability, penalties for failure to report and obligations
for the provision of services and procedures necessary to safeguard the
life or health of the child; and (2) establish, and implement on an
ongoing basis, a training program for all current and new school
officials regarding the policies and procedures established pursuant to
this section.
 § 3210. Amount and character of required attendance. 1. Regularity and
conduct. a. A minor required by the provisions of part one of this
article to attend upon instruction shall attend regularly as prescribed
where he resides or is employed, for the entire time the appropriate
public schools or classes are in session and shall be subordinate and
orderly while so attending.
 b. (i) Absence for religious observance and education shall be
permitted under rules that the commissioner shall establish.
 (ii) In addition, the board of education or trustees shall determine
whether school session should not be held at an individual public
school, or district-wide, on a day where, if school were in session,
absenteeism may result in the waste of educational resources because a
considerable proportion of the student population is unlikely to attend
because of a religious or cultural day of observance.
 c. In the event that a person requests the release of a minor required
by the provisions of part one of this article to attend upon
instruction, the identity of such person shall be verified against a
list of names provided by the person or persons in parental relation to
the minor, as defined in section two of this chapter, at the time of
such minor's enrollment. The school district may adopt appropriate
procedures for the purpose of submitting a list of names at a later date
or updating the list of names provided by the person or persons in
parental relation. If such person is identified as one of those persons
included on such list, such minor may be released from attendance. If
such person is identified as a person not included on such list, such
minor may not be released except in the event of an emergency as
determined in the sole discretion of the principal of the school, or his
designee, provided that the person or persons in parental relation to
the minor have been contacted and have agreed to such release. A school
district may presume that either parent of the student has authority to
obtain the release of said minor unless the school district has been
provided with a certified copy of the legally binding instrument such as
the court order or decree of divorce, separation or custody which
provides evidence to the contrary. No situation shall be deemed an
emergency until the facts of such situation have been verified by such
principal or his designee. No civil or criminal liability shall arise or
attach to any school district or employee thereof for any act or
omission to act as a result of, or in connection with, the duties or
activities authorized or directed by this paragraph. The foregoing
procedure shall not apply to release of a minor pursuant to the
protective custody provisions of the social services law and the family
court act.
 2. Attendance elsewhere than at a public school. a. Hours of
attendance. If a minor included by the provisions of part one of this
article attends upon instruction elsewhere than at a public school, he
shall attend for at least as many hours, and within the hours specified
therefor.
 b. Absence. Absence from required attendance shall be permitted only
for causes allowed by the general rules and practices of the public
schools. Absence for religious observance and education shall be
permitted under rules that the commissioner shall establish.
 c. Holidays and vacations. Holidays and vacations shall not exceed in
total amount and number those allowed by the public schools.
 d. Exception. In applying the foregoing requirements a minor required
to attend upon full time day instruction by the provisions of part one
of this article may be permitted to attend for a shorter school day or
for a shorter school year or for both, provided, in accordance with the
regulations of the state education department, the instruction he
receives has been approved by the school authorities as being
substantially equivalent in amount and quality to that required by the
provisions of part one of this article.
 § 3211. Records of attendance upon instruction. 1. Who shall keep
such record. The teacher of every minor required by the provisions of
part one of this article to attend upon instruction, or any other school
district employee as may be designated by the commissioner of education
under section three thousand twenty-four of this chapter, shall keep an
accurate record of the attendance and absence of such minor. Such record
shall be in such form as may be prescribed by the commissioner of
education.
 2. Certificates of attendance to be presumptive evidence. A duly
certified transcript of the record of attendance and absence of a child
which has been kept, as provided in this section, shall be accepted as
presumptive evidence of the attendance of such child in any proceeding
brought under the provisions of part one of this article.
 3. Inspection of records of attendance. An attendance officer, or any
other duly authorized representative of the school authorities, may at
any time during school hours, demand the production of the records of
attendance of minors required to be kept by the provisions of part one
of this article, and may inspect or copy the same and make all proper
inquiries of a teacher or principal concerning the records and the
attendance of such minors.
 4. Duties of principal or person in charge of the instruction of a
minor. The principal of a school, or other person in charge of the
instruction upon which a minor attends, as provided by part one of this
article, shall cause the record of his attendance to be kept and
produced and all appropriate inquiries in relation thereto answered as
hereinbefore required. He shall give prompt notification in writing to
the school authorities of the city or district of the discharge or
transfer of any such minor from attendance upon instruction, stating the
date of the discharge, its cause, the name of the minor, his date of
birth, his place of residence prior to and following discharge, if such
place of residence be known, and the name of the person in parental
relation to the minor.
 § 3211-a. Reports of reading tests. The results of any standardized
reading test administered by a district or school to determine the level
at which a pupil is capable of reading shall be reported to the parents
(including persons in parental relationship) of any pupil who shall
attain a score at the twenty-third percentile or below. Local school
districts shall determine the means of reporting these scores to
parents. If the parent requests an interpretation of such test results,
such scores shall be interpreted for the parent by a certified teacher
of reading, or, in the absence of a certified teacher of reading, by
other appropriate school district personnel.
 § 3212. Definition of persons in parental relation and their duties;
duties of certain other persons. 1. Definition. As used in this article,
a person in parental relation to another individual shall include his
father or mother, by birth or adoption, his step-father or step-mother,
his legally appointed guardian, or his custodian. A person shall be
regarded as the custodian of another individual if he has assumed the
charge and care of such individual because the parents or legally
appointed guardian of such individual have died, are imprisoned, are
mentally ill, or have been committed to an institution, or because, they
have abandoned or deserted such individual or are living outside the
state or their whereabouts are unknown, or have designated the person
pursuant to title fifteen-A of article five of the general obligations
law as a person in parental relation to the child.
 2. Duties of persons in parental relation. Every person in parental
relation to another individual included by the provisions of part one of
this article:
 a. Shall submit at the time such individual begins to attend upon
instruction evidence of age as required for the issuance of an
employment certificate, or show that such evidence cannot be produced.
When such evidence cannot be produced, or when circumstances exist which
reasonably indicate that such individual may be a missing child, the
superintendent of schools or his or her authorized representative shall
report and make inquiry to the statewide central register for missing
children pursuant to section eight hundred thirty-seven-e of the
executive law. If such child appears to match a child registered with
the statewide central register for missing children, or one registered
with the national crime information center register, the superintendent
or his or her authorized representative shall immediately contact the
local law enforcement authority. No civil or criminal liability shall
arise or attach to any school district or employee thereof for any act
or omission to act as a result of, or in connection with, the duties or
activities authorized or directed by this paragraph.
 b. Shall cause such individual to attend upon instruction as
hereinbefore required, and to comply with the provisions of part one of
this article with respect to the employment or occupation of minors in
any business or service whatever.
 c. Shall cause such individual to be placed in proper physical
condition to attend upon required instruction, if his physical condition
is remediable by the taking of reasonable measures.
 d. Shall furnish proof that an individual who is not attending upon
instruction at a public or parochial school in the city or district
where the person in parental relation resides is attending upon required
instruction elsewhere. Failure to furnish such proof shall be
presumptive evidence that such individual is not attending.
 e. Shall furnish, with respect to an individual from seventeen to
twenty-one years of age, on demand of a duly authorized representative
of the school authorities, satisfactory proof that he is able to speak,
read and write English as required for the completion of the fifth year
of the elementary school course of study, or cause such individual to
submit to an examination to determine his ability in these respects.
 3. Exception. A person in parental relation to another individual
included by the foregoing provisions of this section shall not be
subject thereto if it can be shown that he is unable to control such
individual.
 4. Duties of certain individuals from sixteen to twenty-one years of
age. An individual from sixteen to twenty-one years of age, if not under
the control of a person in parental relation, shall comply with such
requirements of part one of this article as are applicable.
 5. Duties of other persons.
 a. No person shall induce another individual to absent himself from
attendance upon required instruction or harbor him while he is absent or
aid or abet him in violating any provision of part one of this article.
 b. No person shall interfere with an attendance officer in the lawful
pursuit of his duties, or neglect or refuse to answer his lawful
inquiries.
 c. No person shall violate any provision of part one of this article
in relation to employment of minors, duties of employers, issuance or
transfer of any paper authorizing the employment of minors.
 d. No person shall make a false oral or written statement in or in
relation to any employment certificate or other paper required by part
one of this article as to any matter required to appear therein.
 f. No person shall present as his own any substitute, altered or
transferred certificate or badge.
 6. Birth certificates. For the purpose of part one of this article,
the board of health upon request shall furnish to the school
authorities, or to the person in parental relation to a minor, or to an
individual from seventeen to twenty-one years of age, a duly certified
transcript of the birth certificate, filed according to law, of an
individual from five to twenty-one years of age.
 § 3212-a. Records of telephone numbers. 1. Each school shall maintain
a record of the telephone number of each pupil enrolled in the school
and each person in parental relation to such pupil including the
residential and business telephone numbers of persons in parental
relation to pupils unless such person or pupil chooses not to supply
such numbers. The record of such telephone numbers shall, except as
otherwise provided by law, be accessible solely for emergency purposes.
 2. The provisions of this section shall not be applicable in any
school district in which the board of education has adopted a resolution
providing that the record otherwise required hereby shall not be
maintained.
 § 3213. Supervisors of attendance; attendance teachers; attendance
officers; appointment, compensation, powers and duties. 1. Appointment,
removal, compensation and supervision. a. To the end that children shall
not suffer through unnecessary failure to attend school for any cause
whatsoever, it shall be the duty of each attendance teacher and each
attendance supervisor to secure for every child his right to educational
opportunities which will enable him to develop his fullest
potentialities for education, physical, social and spiritual growth as
an individual and to provide for the school adjustment of any
nonattendant child in cooperation with school authorities, special
school services and community and social agencies.
 The school authorities of each city school district, union free school
district, central school district, central high school district, or
common school district whose limits include in whole or in part an
incorporated village, shall appoint and may remove one or more
supervisors of attendance or attendance teachers of such district. A
supervisor of attendance shall be appointed in accordance with the civil
service law and rules, unless he or she is a licensed attendance teacher
or a teacher licensed to teach in New York state, with such further
qualifications as the board of regents shall establish. On and after
July first, nineteen hundred fifty-five no full-time supervisor of
attendance shall be appointed unless he or she holds a license as
attendance teacher. Such supervisors of attendance and those holding
full-time positions who are similarly licensed teachers or who hold
attendance teacher licenses shall be assigned to the step in the salary
schedule of the school district commensurate with the salary being paid
such supervisors or teachers. Such persons shall be paid thereafter in
accordance with such schedule. If the amount of salary received on said
July first, nineteen hundred fifty-five is less than the minimum step of
the salary schedule, such supervisor or teacher shall be paid until June
thirtieth, nineteen hundred fifty-six at the rate of the first step and
in accordance with the schedule thereafter.
 No supervisor of attendance or attendance teacher shall be appointed
who is not twenty-one years of age and in proper physical condition.
 In the establishment of an eligible list advanced education related to
attendance service shall be taken into consideration in the grading of
the candidates. Experience in teaching, in social service and welfare
work, and in business or in the professional field shall likewise be
taken into consideration.
 Paragraph a of subdivision one of this section shall apply to a city
in which attendance supervisors are appointed from an eligible list now
prepared by a board of examiners.
 Supervisors of attendance in a city having a board of examiners shall
be licensed as attendance teachers only when they comply with the
regulations for such license as established by the commissioner of
education and any additional requirements which may be established by
the board of examiners.
 The board of education shall fix the compensation of part-time
supervisors of attendance and prescribe their duties not inconsistent
with part one of this article and make rules and regulations for the
performance thereof. The superintendent of schools or district
superintendent of schools shall supervise the enforcement of part one of
this article within such city or school district.
 b. The town board of each town, with the approval, in writing, of the
district superintendent, shall appoint, on or before August first of
each year, one or more attendance officers and shall fix their
compensation. During the school year it shall also fill promptly any
vacancy after notification thereof by the district superintendent. The
district superintendent shall promptly notify the town board of his
approval or disapproval of an appointment. If within one month a town
board shall not comply with the foregoing provisions, the district
superintendent, subject to appeal to the commissioner of education,
shall exercise the powers and duties of the town board with respect
thereto. An attendance officer appointed for a town shall have
jurisdiction over all school districts of the town which are not
otherwise provided for by this section. He shall be removable at the
pleasure of the district superintendent. His compensation and his
necessary expenses in attending conferences called by the district
superintendent shall be a town charge.
 c. In case a school district shall include territory lying within the
boundaries of more than one town, the attendance officer appointed by
the town in which the schoolhouse is located shall have jurisdiction
over the entire school district.
 2. Powers and duties. a. Arrest of truants. A supervisor of
attendance, attendance teacher or attendance officer, as the case may
be, may arrest without warrant any minor who is unlawfully absent from
attendance upon instruction. He shall forthwith place the minor so
arrested in attendance upon required instruction and shall notify the
parent or guardian of the minor, and he may then begin proceedings for
his commitment as a school delinquent or arraign him before a court
having jurisdiction. Where a minor resides in one school district and
attends school in another school district, the supervisor of attendance,
attendance teacher or attendance officer of the district where the minor
resides and the supervisor of attendance, attendance teacher or
attendance officer of the district where said minor attends school shall
have concurrent jurisdiction with reference to said minor and to the
person or persons in parental relation to him.
 b. Right of entry.
 (1) A supervisor of attendance, attendance teacher or attendance
officer, as the case may be, in the performance of his duties, may enter
during business hours any factory, mercantile or other establishment, or
other place in which a minor is believed to be employed within the city
or school district in which he is appointed, and shall be entitled to
examine on demand the employment certificates or work permits of minors
therein employed, for whose lawful employment such certificates or
permits are required by the provisions of part one of this article.
 (2) He may also enter any public place during the hours in which the
public have access thereto, to ascertain if any minor is therein who is
required to attend upon instruction by the provisions of part one of
this article, or engaged in a street trade contrary to the provisions of
part one of this article, or to collect information required for the
school census.
 c. Notification upon absence. It shall be the duty of every school
district to inform persons in parental relation to elementary school
pupils of such person's right to be notified when such pupil is deemed
absent from attendance at his designated school. Persons in parental
relation to elementary school pupils shall, if such notification is
desired, forward a request in writing to the principal of the pupil's
designated school. Such request shall contain the telephone number of
person or persons in parental relation to the pupil or other information
to facilitate communication with such persons by the most expedient
means available. No civil or criminal liability shall arise or attach to
any school district or employee thereof for any act or omission to act
as a result of, or in connection with, the duties or activities
authorized or directed by this paragraph.
 d. Notification when deemed absent. A supervisor of attendance,
attendance teacher, attendance officer, or other person authorized by
the school district, as the case may be, shall, where a request for
notification has been made pursuant to paragraph c of this subdivision,
notify a person in parental relation to any elementary school pupil by
the means designated in such request when such pupil is deemed absent
from required attendance at his designated school without prior
notification and consent to such absence by the person in parental
relation. No civil or criminal liability shall arise or attach to any
school district or employee thereof for any act or omission to act as a
result of, or in connection with, the duties or activities authorized or
directed by this paragraph.
 e. To the extent that supervisors of attendance, attendance teachers
and attendance officers act pursuant to this subdivision and subdivision
one of this section for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of
part one of this article, they shall be deemed to have acted within the
scope of their employment. Such personnel shall continue to have all the
powers, duties and responsibilities conferred on them by law prior to
the date on which the provisions of this paragraph become effective.
 § 3214. Student placement, suspensions and transfers. 1. School
delinquent. A minor under seventeen years of age, required by any of the
provisions of part one of this article to attend upon instruction, who
is an habitual truant from such instruction or is irregular in such
attendance or insubordinate or disorderly or disruptive or violent
during such attendance, is a school delinquent.
 2. Special day schools. The school authorities of any city or school
district may establish schools or set apart rooms in public school
buildings for the instruction of school delinquents, and fix the number
of days per week and the hours per day of required attendance, which
shall not be less than is required of minors attending the full time day
schools.
 2-a. a. Violent pupil. For the purposes of this section, a violent
pupil is an elementary or secondary student under twenty-one years of
age who:
 (1) commits an act of violence upon a teacher, administrator or other
school employee;
 (2) commits, while on school district property, an act of violence
upon another student or any other person lawfully upon said property;
 (3) possesses, while on school district property, a gun, knife,
explosive or incendiary bomb, or other dangerous instrument capable of
causing physical injury or death;
 (4) displays, while on school district property, what appears to be a
gun, knife, explosive or incendiary bomb or other dangerous instrument
capable of causing death or physical injury;
 (5) threatens, while on school district property, to use any
instrument that appears capable of causing physical injury or death;
 (6) knowingly and intentionally damages or destroys the personal
property of a teacher, administrator, other school district employee or
any person lawfully upon school district property; or
 (7) knowingly and intentionally damages or destroys school district
property.
 b. Disruptive pupil. For the purposes of this section, a disruptive
pupil is an elementary or secondary student under twenty-one years of
age who is substantially disruptive of the educational process or
substantially interferes with the teacher's authority over the
classroom.
 3. Suspension of a pupil. a. The board of education, board of trustees
or sole trustee, the superintendent of schools, district superintendent
of schools or principal of a school may suspend the following pupils
from required attendance upon instruction:
 A pupil who is insubordinate or disorderly or violent or disruptive,
or whose conduct otherwise endangers the safety, morals, health or
welfare of others.
 b. (1) The board of education, board of trustees, or sole trustee,
superintendent of schools, district superintendent of schools and the
principal of the school where the pupil attends shall have the power to
suspend a pupil for a period not to exceed five school days. In the case
of such a suspension, the suspending authority shall provide the pupil
with notice of the charged misconduct. If the pupil denies the
misconduct, the suspending authority shall provide an explanation of the
basis for the suspension. The pupil and the person in parental relation
to the pupil shall, on request, be given an opportunity for an informal
conference with the principal at which the pupil and/or person in
parental relation shall be authorized to present the pupil's version of
the event and to ask questions of the complaining witnesses. The
aforesaid notice and opportunity for an informal conference shall take
place prior to suspension of the pupil unless the pupil's presence in
the school poses a continuing danger to persons or property or an
ongoing threat of disruption to the academic process, in which case the
pupil's notice and opportunity for an informal conference shall take
place as soon after the suspension as is reasonably practicable.
 (2) A teacher shall immediately report and refer a violent pupil to
the principal or superintendent for a violation of the code of conduct
and a minimum suspension period pursuant to section twenty-eight hundred
one of this chapter.
 c. * (1) No pupil may be suspended for a period in excess of five
school days unless such pupil and the person in parental relation to
such pupil shall have had an opportunity for a fair hearing, upon
reasonable notice, at which such pupil shall have the right of
representation by counsel, with the right to question witnesses against
such pupil and to present witnesses and other evidence on his or her
behalf. Where the pupil is a student with a disability or a student
presumed to have a disability, the provisions of paragraph g of this
subdivision shall also apply. Where a pupil has been suspended in
accordance with this subparagraph by a superintendent of schools,
district superintendent of schools, or community superintendent, the
superintendent shall personally hear and determine the proceeding or
may, in his or her discretion, designate a hearing officer to conduct
the hearing. The hearing officer shall be authorized to administer oaths
and to issue subpoenas in conjunction with the proceeding before him or
her. A record of the hearing shall be maintained, but no stenographic
transcript shall be required and a tape recording shall be deemed a
satisfactory record. The hearing officer shall make findings of fact
and recommendations as to the appropriate measure of discipline to the
superintendent. The report of the hearing officer shall be advisory
only, and the superintendent may accept all or any part thereof. An
appeal will lie from the decision of the superintendent to the board of
education who shall make its decision solely upon the record before it.
The board may adopt in whole or in part the decision of the
superintendent of schools. Where the basis for the suspension is, in
whole or in part, the possession on school grounds or school property by
the student of any firearm, rifle, shotgun, dagger, dangerous knife,
dirk, razor, stiletto or any of the weapons, instruments or appliances
specified in subdivision one of section 265.01 of the penal law, the
hearing officer or superintendent shall not be barred from considering
the admissibility of such weapon, instrument or appliance as evidence,
notwithstanding a determination by a court in a criminal or juvenile
delinquency proceeding that the recovery of such weapon, instrument or
appliance was the result of an unlawful search or seizure.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2027
 * (1) No pupil may be suspended for a period in excess of five school
days unless such pupil and the person in parental relation to such pupil
shall have had an opportunity for a fair hearing, upon reasonable
notice, at which such pupil shall have the right of representation by
counsel, with the right to question witnesses against such pupil and to
present witnesses and other evidence on his behalf. Where a pupil has
been suspended in accordance with this subdivision by a superintendent
of schools, district superintendent of schools, or community
superintendent, the superintendent shall personally hear and determine
the proceeding or may, in his discretion, designate a hearing officer to
conduct the hearing. The hearing officer shall be authorized to
administer oaths and to issue subpoenas in conjunction with the
proceeding before him. A record of the hearing shall be maintained, but
no stenographic transcript shall be required and a tape recording shall
be deemed a satisfactory record. The hearing officer shall make findings
of fact and recommendations as to the appropriate measure of discipline
to the superintendent. The report of the hearing officer shall be
advisory only, and the superintendent may accept all or any part
thereof. An appeal will lie from the decision of the superintendent to
the board of education who shall make its decision solely upon the
record before it. The board may adopt in whole or in part the decision
of the superintendent of schools. Where the basis for the suspension is,
in whole or in part, the possession on school grounds or school property
by the student of any firearm, rifle, shotgun, dagger, dangerous knife,
dirk, razor, stiletto or any of the weapons, instruments or appliances
specified in subdivision one of section 265.01 of the penal law, the
hearing officer or superintendent shall not be barred from considering
the admissibility of such weapon, instrument or appliance as evidence,
notwithstanding a determination by a court in a criminal or juvenile
delinquency proceeding that the recovery of such weapon, instrument or
appliance was the result of an unlawful search or seizure.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2027
 (2) Where a pupil has been suspended in accordance with this section
by a board of education, the board may in its discretion hear and
determine the proceeding or appoint a hearing officer who shall have the
same powers and duties with respect to the board that a hearing officer
has with respect to a superintendent where the suspension was ordered by
him. The findings and recommendations of the hearing officer conducting
the proceeding shall be advisory and subject to final action by the
board of education, each member of which shall before voting review the
testimony and acquaint himself with the evidence in the case. The board
may reject, confirm or modify the conclusions of the hearing officer.
 d. (1) Consistent with the federal gun-free schools act, any public
school pupil who is determined under this subdivision to have brought a
firearm to or possessed a firearm at a public school shall be suspended
for a period of not less than one calendar year and any nonpublic school
pupil participating in a program operated by a public school district
using funds from the elementary and secondary education act of nineteen
hundred sixty-five who is determined under this subdivision to have
brought a firearm to or possessed a firearm at a public school or other
premises used by the school district to provide such programs shall be
suspended for a period of not less than one calendar year from
participation in such program. The procedures of this subdivision shall
apply to such a suspension of a nonpublic school pupil. A superintendent
of schools, district superintendent of schools or community
superintendent shall have the authority to modify this suspension
requirement for each student on a case-by-case basis. The determination
of a superintendent shall be subject to review by the board of education
pursuant to paragraph c of this subdivision and the commissioner
pursuant to section three hundred ten of this chapter. Nothing in this
subdivision shall be deemed to authorize the suspension of a student
with a disability in violation of the individuals with disabilities
education act or article eighty-nine of this chapter. A superintendent
shall refer the pupil under the age of sixteen who has been determined
to have brought a weapon or firearm to school in violation of this
subdivision to a presentment agency for a juvenile delinquency
proceeding consistent with article three of the family court act except
a student fourteen or fifteen years of age who qualifies for juvenile
offender status under subdivision forty-two of section 1.20 of the
criminal procedure law. A superintendent shall refer any pupil sixteen
years of age or older or a student fourteen or fifteen years of age who
qualifies for juvenile offender status under subdivision forty-two of
section 1.20 of the criminal procedure law, who has been determined to
have brought a weapon or firearm to school in violation of this
subdivision to the appropriate law enforcement officials.
 (2) Nothing in this paragraph shall be deemed to mandate such action
by a school district pursuant to subdivision one of this section where
such weapon or firearm is possessed or brought to school with the
written authorization of such educational institution in a manner
authorized by article two hundred sixty-five of the penal law for
activities approved and authorized by the trustees or board of education
or other governing body of the public school and such governing body
adopts appropriate safeguards to ensure student safety.
 (3) As used in this paragraph:
 (i) "firearm" shall mean a firearm as defined in subsection a of
section nine hundred twenty-one of title eighteen of the United States
Code; and
 (ii) "weapon" shall be as defined in paragraph 2 of subsection g of
section nine hundred thirty of title eighteen of the United States Code.
 e. Procedure after suspension. Where a pupil has been suspended
pursuant to this subdivision and said pupil is of compulsory attendance
age, immediate steps shall be taken for his or her attendance upon
instruction elsewhere or for supervision or detention of said pupil
pursuant to the provisions of article seven of the family court act.
Where a pupil has been suspended for cause, the suspension may be
revoked by the board of education whenever it appears to be for the best
interest of the school and the pupil to do so. The board of education
may also condition a student's early return to school and suspension
revocation on the pupil's voluntary participation in counseling or
specialized classes, including anger management or dispute resolution,
where applicable.
 f. Whenever the term "board of education or superintendent of schools"
is used in this subdivision, it shall be deemed to include community
boards of education and community superintendents governing community
districts in accordance with the provisions of article fifty-two-A of
this chapter.
 * g. Discipline of students with disabilities and students presumed to
have a disability for discipline purposes. (1) Notwithstanding any other
provision of this subdivision to the contrary, a student with a
disability as such term is defined in section forty-four hundred one of
this chapter and a student presumed to have a disability for discipline
purposes, may be suspended or removed from his or her current
educational placement for violation of school rules only in accordance
with the procedures established in this section, the regulations of the
commissioner implementing this paragraph, and subsection (k) of section
fourteen hundred fifteen of title twenty of the United States code and
the federal regulations implementing such statute, as such federal law
and regulations are from time to time amended. Nothing in this paragraph
shall be construed to confer greater rights on such students than are
conferred under applicable federal law and regulations, or to limit the
ability of a school district to change the educational placement of a
student with a disability in accordance with the procedures in article
eighty-nine of this chapter.
 (2) As used in this paragraph:
 (1) a "student presumed to have a disability for discipline purposes"
shall mean a student who the school district is deemed to have knowledge
was a student with a disability before the behavior that precipitated
disciplinary action under the criteria in subsection (k) (5) of section
fourteen hundred fifteen of title twenty of the United States code and
the federal regulations implementing such statute; and
 (ii) a "manifestation team" means a representative of the school
district, the parent or person in parental relation, and relevant
members of the committee on special education, as determined by the
parent or person in parental relation and the district.
 (3) In applying the federal law consistent with this section:
 (i) in the event of a conflict between the procedures established in
this section and those established in subsection (k) of section fourteen
hundred fifteen of title twenty of the United States code and the
federal regulations implementing such statute, such federal statute and
regulations shall govern.
 (ii) the trustees or board of education of any school district, a
district superintendent of schools or a building principal shall have
authority to order the placement of a student with a disability into an
appropriate interim alternative educational setting, another setting or
suspension for a period not to exceed five consecutive school days where
such student is suspended pursuant to this subdivision and, except as
otherwise provided in clause (vi) of this subparagraph, the suspension
does not result in a change in placement under federal law.
 (iii) the superintendent of schools of a school district, either
directly or upon recommendation of a hearing officer designated pursuant
to paragraph c of this subdivision, may order the placement of a student
with a disability into an interim alternative educational setting,
another setting or suspension for up to ten consecutive school days,
inclusive of any period in which the student is placed in an appropriate
interim alternative educational setting, another setting or suspension
pursuant to clause (ii) of this subparagraph for the behavior, where the
superintendent determines in accordance with the procedures set forth in
this subdivision that the student has engaged in behavior that warrants
a suspension, and, except as otherwise provided in clause (vi) of this
subparagraph, the suspension does not result in a change in placement
under federal law.
 (iv) the superintendent of schools of a school district, either
directly or upon recommendation of a hearing officer designated pursuant
to paragraph c of this subdivision, may order the change in placement of
a student with a disability to an interim alternative educational
setting for up to forty-five school days under the circumstances
specified in subsection (k)(1)(G) of section fourteen hundred fifteen of
title twenty of the United States code and the federal regulations
implementing such statute or a longer period where authorized by federal
law under the circumstances specified in subsection (k)(1)(C) of section
fourteen hundred fifteen of title twenty of the United States code and
the federal regulations implementing such statute, but in neither case
shall such period exceed the period of suspension ordered by a
superintendent in accordance with this subdivision.
 (v) the terms "day," "business day," and "school day" shall be as
defined in section 300.11 of title thirty-four of the code of federal
regulations.
 (vi) notwithstanding any other provision of this subdivision to the
contrary, upon a determination by a manifestation team that the behavior
of a student with a disability was not a manifestation of the student's
disability, such student may be disciplined pursuant to this section in
the same manner and for the same duration as a nondisabled student,
except that such student shall continue to receive services to the
extent required under federal law and regulations, and such services may
be provided in an interim alternative educational setting.
 (vii) an impartial hearing officer appointed pursuant to subdivision
one of section forty-four hundred four of this chapter may order a
change in placement of a student with a disability to an appropriate
interim alternative educational setting for not more than forty-five
school days under the circumstances specified in subsections (k)(3) and
(k)(4) of section fourteen hundred fifteen of title twenty of the United
States code and the federal regulations implementing such statutes,
provided that such procedure may be repeated, as necessary.
 (viii) nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the
suspension or removal of a student with a disability from his or her
current educational placement for violation of school rules following a
determination by a manifestation team that the behavior is a
manifestation of the student's disability, except as authorized under
federal law and regulations.
 (ix) the commissioner shall implement this paragraph by adopting
regulations which coordinate the procedures required for discipline of
students with disabilities, and students presumed to have a disability
for discipline purposes, pursuant to subsection (k) of section fourteen
hundred fifteen of title twenty of the United States code and the
federal regulations implementing such statute, with the general
procedures for student discipline under this section.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2027
 * g. Discipline of students with disabilities and students presumed to
have a disability for discipline purposes. (1) Notwithstanding any other
provision of this subdivision to the contrary, a student with a
disability as such term is defined in section forty-four hundred one of
this chapter and a student presumed to have a disability for discipline
purposes, may be suspended or removed from his or her current
educational placement for violation of school rules only in accordance
with the procedures established in this section, the regulations of the
commissioner implementing this paragraph, and subsection (k) of section
fourteen hundred fifteen of title twenty of the United States code and
the federal regulations implementing such statute, as such federal law
and regulations are from time to time amended. Nothing in this paragraph
shall be construed to confer greater rights on such students than are
conferred under applicable federal law and regulations, or to limit the
ability of a school district to change the educational placement of a
student with a disability in accordance with the procedures in article
eighty-nine of this chapter.
 (2) As used in this paragraph, a "student presumed to have a
disability for discipline purposes" shall mean a student who the school
district is deemed to have knowledge was a student with a disability
before the behavior that precipitated disciplinary action under the
criteria in subsection (k)(8) of section fourteen hundred fifteen of
title twenty of the United States code and the federal regulations
implementing such statute.
 (3) In applying the federal law consistent with this section:
 (i) in the event of a conflict between the procedures established in
this section and those established in subsection (k) of section fourteen
hundred fifteen of title twenty of the United States code and the
federal regulations implementing such statute, such federal statute and
regulations shall govern.
 (ii) the trustees or board of education of any school district, a
district superintendent of schools or a building principal shall have
authority to order the placement of a student with a disability into an
appropriate interim alternative educational setting, another setting or
suspension for a period not to exceed five consecutive school days where
such student is suspended pursuant to this subdivision and, except as
otherwise provided in clause (vi) of this subparagraph, the suspension
does not result in a change in placement under federal law.
 (iii) the superintendent of schools of a school district, either
directly or upon recommendation of a hearing officer designated pursuant
to paragraph c of this subdivision, may order the placement of a student
with a disability into an interim alternative educational setting,
another setting or suspension for up to ten consecutive school days,
inclusive of any period in which the student is placed in an appropriate
interim alternative educational placement, another setting or suspension
pursuant to clause (ii) of this subparagraph for the behavior, where the
superintendent determines in accordance with the procedures set forth in
this subdivision that the student has engaged in behavior that warrants
a suspension, and, except as otherwise provided in clause (vi) of this
subparagraph, the suspension does not result in a change in placement
under federal law.
 (iv) the superintendent of schools of a school district, either
directly or upon recommendation of a hearing officer designated pursuant
to paragraph c of this subdivision, may order the change in placement of
a student with a disability to an interim alternative educational
setting for up to forty-five days, but not to exceed the period of
suspension ordered by a superintendent in accordance with this
subdivision, under the circumstances specified in subsection (k)(1) of
section fourteen hundred fifteen of title twenty of the United States
code and the federal regulations implementing such statute.
 (v) the terms "day," "business day," and "school day" shall be as
defined in section 300.9 of title thirty-four of the code of federal
regulations.
 (vi) notwithstanding any other provision of this subdivision to the
contrary, upon a determination by the committee on special education
that the behavior of a student with a disability was not a manifestation
of the student's disability, such student may be disciplined pursuant to
this section in the same manner as a nondisabled student, except that
such student shall continue to receive services to the extent required
under federal law and regulations.
 (vii) an impartial hearing officer appointed pursuant to subdivision
one of section forty-four hundred four of this chapter may order a
change in placement of a student with a disability to an appropriate
interim alternative educational setting for not more than forty-five
days under the circumstances specified in subsections (k)(2) and (k)(7)
of section fourteen hundred fifteen of title twenty of the United States
code and the federal regulations implementing such statutes, provided
that such procedure may be repeated, as necessary.
 (viii) nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the
suspension or removal of a student with a disability from his or her
current educational placement for violation of school rules following a
determination by the committee on special education that the behavior is
a manifestation of the student's disability, except as authorized under
federal law and regulations.
 (ix) the commissioner shall implement this paragraph by adopting
regulations which coordinate the procedures required for discipline of
students with disabilities, and students presumed to have a disability
for discipline purposes, pursuant to subsection (k) of section fourteen
hundred fifteen of title twenty of the United States code and the
federal regulations implementing such statute, with the general
procedures for student discipline under this section.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2027
 3-a. Teacher removal of a disruptive pupil. In addition, any teacher
shall have the power and authority to remove a disruptive pupil, as
defined in subdivision two-a of this section, from such teacher's
classroom consistent with discipline measures contained in the code of
conduct adopted by the board pursuant to section twenty-eight hundred
one of this chapter. The school authorities of any school district shall
establish policies and procedures to ensure the provision of continued
educational programming and activities for students removed from the
classroom pursuant to this subdivision and provided further that nothing
in this subdivision shall authorize the removal of a pupil in violation
of any state or federal law or regulation. No pupil shall return to the
classroom until the principal makes a final determination pursuant to
paragraph c of this subdivision, or the period of removal expires,
whichever is less.
 a. Such teacher shall inform the pupil and the school principal of the
reasons for the removal. If the teacher finds that the pupil's continued
presence in the classroom does not pose a continuing danger to persons
or property and does not present an ongoing threat of disruption to the
academic process, the teacher shall, prior to removing the student from
the classroom, provide the student with an explanation of the basis for
the removal and allow the pupil to informally present the pupil's
version of relevant events. In all other cases, the teacher shall
provide the pupil with an explanation of the basis for the removal and
an informal opportunity to be heard within twenty-four hours of the
pupil's removal, provided that if such twenty-four hour period does not
end on a school day, it shall be extended to the corresponding time on
the next school day.
 b. The principal shall inform the person in parental relation to such
pupil of the removal and the reasons therefor within twenty-four hours
of the pupil's removal, provided that if such twenty-four hour period
does not end on a school day, it shall be extended to the corresponding
time on the next school day. The pupil and the person in parental
relation shall, upon request, be given an opportunity for an informal
conference with the principal to discuss the reasons for the removal. If
the pupil denies the charges, the principal shall provide an explanation
of the basis for the removal and allow the pupil and/or person in
parental relation to the pupil an opportunity to present the pupil's
version of relevant events. Such informal hearing shall be held within
forty-eight hours of the pupil's removal, provided that if such
forty-eight hour period does not end on a school day, it shall be
extended to the corresponding time on the second school day next
following the pupil's removal. For purposes of this subdivision, "school
day" shall mean a school day as defined pursuant to clause (v) of
subparagraph three of paragraph g of subdivision three of this section.
 c. The principal shall not set aside the discipline imposed by the
teacher unless the principal finds that the charges against the pupil
are not supported by substantial evidence or that the pupil's removal is
otherwise in violation of law or that the conduct warrants suspension
from school pursuant to this section and a suspension will be imposed.
The principal's determination made pursuant to this paragraph shall be
made by the close of business on the school day next succeeding the end
of the forty-eight hour period for an informal hearing contained in
paragraph b of this subdivision.
 d. The principal may, in his or her discretion, designate a school
district administrator, to carry out the functions required of the
principal under this subdivision.
 4. Expense. a. The expense attending the commitment and costs of
maintenance of any school delinquent shall be a charge against the city
or district where he resides, if such city or district employs a
superintendent of schools; otherwise it shall be a county charge.
 b. The school authorities may institute proceedings before a court
having jurisdiction to determine the liability of a person in parental
relation to contribute towards the maintenance of a school delinquent
under sixteen years of age ordered to attend upon instruction under
confinement. If the court shall find the person in parental relation
able to contribute towards the maintenance of such a minor, it may issue
an order fixing the amount to be paid weekly.
 5. Involuntary transfers of pupils who have not been determined to be
a student with a disability or a student presumed to have a disability
for discipline purposes.
 a. The board of education, board of trustees or sole trustee, the
superintendent of schools, or district superintendent of schools may
transfer a pupil who has not been determined to be a student with a
disability as defined in section forty-four hundred one of this chapter,
or a student presumed to have a disability for discipline purposes as
defined in paragraph g of subdivision three of this section from regular
classroom instruction to an appropriate educational setting in another
school upon the written recommendation of the school principal and
following independent review thereof. For purposes of this section of
the law, "involuntary transfer" does not include a transfer made by a
school district as part of a plan to reduce racial imbalance within the
schools or as a change in school attendance zones or geographical
boundaries.
 b. A school principal may initiate a non-requested transfer where it
is believed that such a pupil would benefit from the transfer, or when
the pupil would receive an adequate and appropriate education in another
school program or facility.
 No recommendation for pupil transfer shall be initiated by the
principal until such pupil and a person in parental relation has been
sent written notification of the consideration of transfer
recommendation. Such notice shall set a time and place of an informal
conference with the principal and shall inform such person in parental
relation and such pupil of their right to be accompanied by counsel or
an individual of their choice.
 c. After the conference and if the principal concludes that the pupil
would benefit from a transfer or that the pupil would receive an
adequate and appropriate education in another school program or
facility, the principal may issue a recommendation of transfer to the
superintendent. Such recommendation shall include a description of
behavior and/or academic problems indicative of the need for transfer; a
description of alternatives explored and prior action taken to resolve
the problem. A copy of that letter shall be sent to the person in
parental relation and to the pupil.
 d. Upon receipt of the principal's recommendation for transfer and a
determination to consider that recommendation, the superintendent shall
notify the person in parental relation and the pupil of the proposed
transfer and of their right to a fair hearing as provided in paragraph c
of subdivision three of this section and shall list community agencies
and free legal assistance which may be of assistance. The written notice
shall include a statement that the pupil or person in parental relation
has ten days to request a hearing and that the proposed transfer shall
not take effect, except upon written parental consent, until the ten day
period has elapsed, or, if a fair hearing is requested, until after a
formal decision following the hearing is rendered, whichever is later.
 Parental consent to a transfer shall not constitute a waiver of the
right to a fair hearing.
 6. Transfer of a pupil. Where a suspended pupil is to be transferred
pursuant to subdivision five of this section, he or she shall remain on
the register of the original school for two school days following
transmittal of his or her records to the school to which he or she is to
be transferred. The receiving school shall immediately upon receiving
those records transmitted by the original school, review them to insure
proper placement of the pupil. Staff members who are involved in the
pupil's education must be provided with pertinent records and
information relating to the background and problems of the pupil before
the pupil is placed in a classroom.
 7. Transfer of disciplinary records. Notwithstanding any other
provision of law to the contrary, each local educational agency, as such
term is defined in subsection thirty of section eighty-one hundred one
of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965, as amended, shall
establish procedures in accordance with section eighty-five hundred
thirty-seven of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965, as
amended, and the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974, to
facilitate the transfer of disciplinary records relating to the
suspension or expulsion of a student to any public or nonpublic
elementary or secondary school in which such student enrolls or seeks,
intends or is instructed to enroll, on a full-time or part-time basis.
 * § 3215. Unlawful employment. 1. It shall be unlawful, except as
otherwise provided by law, to employ in any trade, business or service a
minor who does not present an employment certificate or permit issued in
accordance with this article.
 2. No minor shall be employed during the hours when attendance upon
instruction is required by this chapter.
 3. No minor shall be employed in violation of any provision of the
labor law or other law.
 4. Exceptions. a. When attendance upon instruction is not required by
this chapter, a minor fourteen years of age or over may be employed
without an employment certificate or permit in the following
occupations:
 (1) Caddy service on a golf course;
 (2) Service as a baby sitter staying with and at the home of another
child or children with or without the presence at such home of such
child or children's parents or guardians;
 (3) Casual employment of a minor fourteen or fifteen years of age
consisting of yard work and household chores in and about a residence or
the premises of a non-profit, non-commercial organization, not involving
the use of power-driven machinery; and
 (4) Casual employment of a minor sixteen years of age or over
consisting of yard work and household chores in and about a residence or
the premises of a non-profit, non-commercial organization, not involving
the use of power-driven machinery other than power-driven machinery
ordinarily used in such yard work or household chores.
 b. When attendance upon instruction is not required, a minor sixteen
years of age or over may be employed in work on a farm without an
employment certificate or permit.
 c. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the employment of a minor
during the school lunch period in a school cafeteria at the school which
the minor attends if the minor presents an employment certificate issued
in accordance with this article.
 d. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the
employment of a minor in accordance with sections thirty-two hundred
twenty-six through and including section thirty-two hundred thirty of
this chapter.
 e. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the
employment of a minor twelve years of age or over in work for his
parents or guardians on the home farm or at other outdoor work not
connected with or for any trade, business or service when attendance
upon instruction is not required by this chapter.
 f. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, an employment
certificate or permit shall not be required for a student sixteen years
of age or over who is in attendance at a recognized institution of
higher learning and who is employed by a non-profit college or
university or by a non-profit college or university fraternity,
sorority, student association or faculty association.
 * NB Effective until May 9, 2027
 * § 3215. Unlawful employment. 1. It shall be unlawful, except as
otherwise provided by law, to employ in any trade, business or service a
minor who does not present an employment certificate or permit issued in
accordance with this article and section one hundred thirty-five of the
labor law.
 2. No minor shall be employed during the hours when attendance upon
instruction is required by this chapter.
 3. No minor shall be employed in violation of any provision of the
labor law or other law.
 4. Exceptions. a. When attendance upon instruction is not required by
this chapter, a minor fourteen years of age or over may be employed
without an employment certificate or permit in the following
occupations:
 (1) Caddy service on a golf course;
 (2) Service as a baby sitter staying with and at the home of another
child or children with or without the presence at such home of such
child or children's persons in parental relation;
 (3) Casual employment of a minor fourteen or fifteen years of age
consisting of yard work and household chores in and about a residence or
the premises of a non-profit, non-commercial organization, not involving
the use of power-driven machinery; and
 (4) Casual employment of a minor sixteen years of age or over
consisting of yard work and household chores in and about a residence or
the premises of a non-profit, non-commercial organization, not involving
the use of power-driven machinery other than power-driven machinery
ordinarily used in such yard work or household chores.
 b. When attendance upon instruction is not required, a minor sixteen
years of age or over may be employed in work on a farm without an
employment certificate or permit.
 c. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the employment of a minor
during the school lunch period in a school cafeteria at the school which
the minor attends if the minor presents an employment certificate issued
in accordance with this article.
 d. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the
employment of a minor in accordance with section thirty-two hundred
twenty-six of this chapter.
 e. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the
employment of a minor twelve years of age or over in work for their
person in parental relation on the home farm or at other outdoor work
not connected with or for any trade, business or service when attendance
upon instruction is not required by this chapter.
 f. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, an employment
certificate or permit shall not be required for a student sixteen years
of age or over who is in attendance at a recognized institution of
higher learning and who is employed by a non-profit college or
university or by a non-profit college or university fraternity,
sorority, student association or faculty association.
 * NB Effective May 9, 2027
 * § 3215-a. General certification provisions. 1. Certificating
officials. Employment certificates or permits shall be issued by the
chancellor in the city school district of the city of New York, and by
the superintendent of schools in other school districts, provided that
the district superintendent of schools may issue such certificates or
permits for students attending classes operated by a board of
cooperative educational services, and the principal of a nonpublic
secondary school may issue such certificates or permits for students
attending such school. The chancellor in New York city, or elsewhere the
superintendent of schools or district superintendent of schools may
designate in writing the principal of the public school the minor
attends or last attended or other public school official to act as
certificating official in his stead. During the months of July and
August, and at other times in extraordinary circumstances and
emergencies, one or more public school officials shall be designated in
writing by the chancellor in New York city and elsewhere by the
superintendent or district superintendent to act as certificating
officials. The designation or authorization of certificating officials
in public schools shall be subject to such limitations or standards as
may be prescribed by the chancellor in New York city and elsewhere by
the superintendent or district superintendent.
 2. Revocation. Employment certificates or permits may be revoked for
cause by the chancellor in New York city and elsewhere by the
superintendent of schools or the district superintendent of schools
within their respective jurisdictions, or, by a principal of a nonpublic
secondary school for a student attending such school. Where a student
who is required to attend school pursuant to section thirty-two hundred
five of this article has failed no less than four academic courses in
one semester, the chancellor in New York city, and elsewhere the
superintendent of schools or the district superintendent of schools
within their respective jurisdictions, or a principal of a nonpublic
secondary school may revoke such student's employment certificate or
permit. In determining whether to revoke an employment certificate or
permit, the chancellor in New York city, and elsewhere the
superintendent of schools or the district superintendent of schools
within their respective jurisdictions, or a principal of a nonpublic
secondary school, shall consider, (1) an evaluation of the student's
overall academic performance and past academic record; (2) an
examination of the student's attendance record; (3) the economic need of
the student's family for the income provided by the student; (4) the
willingness of the student to participate in a cooperative education
program, work study program, school to work program or any other
structured program which provides a student with an opportunity to earn
income while earning academic credit; (5) such other factors as the
aforementioned officials identify; and (6) any material submitted by the
student.
 Notwithstanding any other provisions of law, nothing in this section
shall be construed to prevent any student from obtaining an employment
certificate or permit for the purpose of working during the months of
July and August.
 3. Approval of form and contents. The commissioner of education shall
prescribe or approve the form and contents of all certificates, permits,
physical examination records, and schooling records required by part one
of this article. The form of such certificates and permits shall also be
subject to the approval of the industrial commissioner.
 * NB Effective until May 9, 2027
 * § 3215-a. General certification provisions. 1. Certificating
officials. Employment certificates or permits shall be issued by the
commissioner of labor. The commissioner of labor may share the status of
a student's certificate or permit with the chancellor in the city school
district of the city of New York and elsewhere with the superintendent
of schools or the district superintendent of schools within their
respective jurisdictions or with a principal of a nonpublic secondary
school for a student attending such school.
 2. Revocation. Employment certificates or permits may be revoked by
the commissioner of labor pursuant to section one hundred thirty-five of
the labor law.
 Notwithstanding any other provisions of law, nothing in this section
shall be construed to prevent any student from obtaining an employment
certificate or permit for the purpose of working during the months of
July and August.
 3. Approval of form and contents. The commissioner of labor, in
consultation with the commissioner of education, shall prescribe the
form and contents of all certificates, permits, and schooling records
required by part one of this article for employment purposes and
consistent with section one hundred thirty-five of the labor law. Any
employment certificate or permit issued pursuant to this part shall be
issued electronically within the database created and maintained by the
department of labor, in consultation with and with support from the
department, pursuant to section one hundred thirty-five of the labor
law.
 * NB Effective May 9, 2027
 * § 3216. Employment certificates. 1. A student non-factory
employment certificate may be issued to a minor fourteen or fifteen
years of age who is attending day school. The certificate shall be valid
for work in a trade, business or service, but shall not be valid for
work in or in connection with a factory except as provided in
subdivision four of section one hundred thirty-one of the labor law.
 2. A student general employment certificate may be issued to a minor
sixteen or seventeen years of age who is attending day school. It shall
be valid for work in or in connection with a factory or any other trade,
business or service.
 3. A full-time employment certificate may be issued to a minor sixteen
or seventeen years of age who is not attending day school or who
declares his intention to leave day school for full-time employment. It
shall be valid for work in or in connection with a factory or any other
trade, business or service. A full-time employment certificate also may
be issued to a minor who is a graduate of a four-year high school, but
if such minor is under sixteen years of age the certificate shall not be
valid for work in or in connection with a factory except as provided in
subdivision four of section one hundred and thirty-one of the labor law.
 4. A limited employment certificate may be issued as provided in
subdivision two of section thirty-two hundred twenty of this article.
 5. A special employment certificate may be issued as provided in
section thirty-two hundred twenty-five of this article.
 6. An employment certificate shall be valid not only for the initial
employment but also for subsequent employments in work permitted by the
particular type of certificate.
 7. An employment certificate shall expire two years from the date of
its issuance, except as otherwise provided in this article. No
employment certificate shall be valid for employment in violation of any
provision of the labor law or rules issued thereunder.
 8. An employment certificate shall be kept on file at the place of the
minor's employment and shall be returned to the minor when the
employment terminates.
 * NB Effective until May 9, 2027
 * § 3216. Employment certificates. 1. A student non-factory employment
certificate may be issued to a minor fourteen or fifteen years of age
who is attending day school. The certificate shall be valid for work in
a trade, business or service, but shall not be valid for work in or in
connection with a factory except as provided in subdivision four of
section one hundred thirty-one of the labor law.
 2. A student general employment certificate may be issued to a minor
sixteen or seventeen years of age who is attending day school. It shall
be valid for work in or in connection with a factory or any other trade,
business or service.
 3. A full-time employment certificate may be issued to a minor sixteen
or seventeen years of age who is not attending day school or who
declares their intention to leave day school for full-time employment.
It shall be valid for work in or in connection with a factory or any
other trade, business or service. A full-time employment certificate
also may be issued to a minor who is a graduate of a four-year high
school, but if such minor is under sixteen years of age the certificate
shall not be valid for work in or in connection with a factory except as
provided in subdivision four of section one hundred and thirty-one of
the labor law.
 4. An employment certificate shall be valid not only for the initial
employment but also for subsequent employments in work permitted by the
particular type of certificate, provided that the minor has updated
their electronic registration to reflect the subsequent employer as
required by section one hundred thirty-five of the labor law.
 5. An employment certificate shall expire two years from the date of
its issuance, except as otherwise provided in this article. No
employment certificate shall be valid for employment in violation of any
provision of the labor law or rules issued thereunder.
 6. An employment certificate shall be kept on file at the place of the
minor's employment or be readily accessible to any person authorized by
law to examine such document in accordance with the recordkeeping
requirements set forth in section one hundred thirty-five of the labor
law.
 * NB Effective May 9, 2027
 * § 3217. Procedure for issuance of employment certificates. 1. An
application for an employment certificate shall be made by a minor on a
form prescribed by the commissioner of education.
 2. Before issuing an employment certificate the issuing official shall
require the minor to submit the following:
 a. Evidence of age;
 b. Written consent of the parent or guardian;
 c. A certificate of physical fitness; and
 d. If the application is for a full-time employment certificate, a
schooling record.
 In addition, in a city or school district which, pursuant to section
thirty-two hundred five, subdivision three, of this article, requires
minors from sixteen to seventeen years of age who are not employed to
attend school, the certificating official shall require a minor applying
for a full-time employment certificate to submit the following:
 a. A pledge of employment; and
 b. A schooling record.
 * NB Effective until May 9, 2027
 * § 3217. Procedure for issuance of employment certificates. 1. An
application for an employment certificate shall be made by a minor in
the manner prescribed by the commissioner of labor and consistent with
the requirements of section one hundred thirty-five of the labor law.
 2. Before issuing an employment certificate the issuing official shall
require the minor to submit the following:
 a. Evidence of age;
 b. Written consent of the person in parental relation as defined in
section thirty-two hundred twelve of this part; and
 c. If the application is for a full-time employment certificate, a
schooling record.
 In addition, in a city or school district which, pursuant to section
thirty-two hundred five, subdivision three, of this article, requires
minors from sixteen to seventeen years of age who are not employed to
attend school, the certificating official shall require a minor applying
for a full-time employment certificate to submit the following:
 a. A pledge of employment; and
 b. A schooling record.
 * NB Effective May 9, 2027
 § 3218. Evidence of age. 1. Evidence showing that the minor is of the
required age shall be presented as follows:
 a. A duly certified transcript of a birth certificate filed according
to law, or duly certified transcript of a record of baptism, giving the
date of birth; or, if not available,
 b. A passport showing the date of birth of the minor; or, if not
available,
 c. Other documentary evidence or other recorded evidence in existence
two years or more, and satisfactory to the certificating officer, except
an affidavit of age.
 2. Certificate of age. A person over eighteen years of age may apply
for a certificate of age to the superintendent of schools, the district
superintendent, or to the certificating officer. Upon such application a
certificate of age, containing the name, date of birth, address and
signature of the applicant, shall be issued to him if he furnishes such
evidence that he is over eighteen years of age as is required for the
issuance of an employment certificate. Such a certificate of age or an
employment certificate previously issued for such person shall be
conclusive evidence for an employer that the person has reached the age
certified to therein.
 * § 3219. Consent of parent or guardian. If the application is for a
full-time employment certificate a parent or guardian shall personally
appear before the issuing officer or school authorities to indicate
consent to the issuance of the application, provided, however, that such
personal appearance shall not be required if the applicant is a high
school graduate.
 * NB Repealed May 9, 2027
 * § 3220. Certificate of physical fitness. 1. A certificate of
physical fitness shall be issued to a minor if a thorough physical
examination made within twelve months of his or her application for an
employment certificate shows that such minor is of sound health, and if
there are no known health problems at the time of issuance of the
certificate, and if the applicant is physically qualified for lawful
employment. If a known health problem exists at the time of the
application for such certificate, another examination may be required by
the issuing authority. Such certificate shall be issued and such
physical examination shall be made, in a city of over three hundred
thousand population, by a physician designated by the board of health,
and elsewhere by the director of school health services charged with the
duty of making physical examinations of all school children or by any
physician duly licensed to practice medicine in this state. A new
certificate of physical fitness shall not be required if one had been
issued to the minor within twelve months.
 2. If the physician authorized to issue certificates of physical
fitness shall find that a minor from fourteen to eighteen years of age
is not physically sound but that in the physician's opinion the minor
may safely engage in certain occupations as specified by the regulations
of the commissioner of education, the physician shall require a pledge
of employment and may issue to the minor a certificate of limited
physical fitness, and shall describe therein the physical disability of
the minor and shall indicate the particular employer and the occupation
in which the minor may engage. A limited employment certificate issued
to a minor from fourteen to eighteen years of age who has presented a
certificate of limited physical fitness shall be valid for not more than
six months from the date of its issuance and shall bear on the face of
the certificate the date of its expiration and the particular employer
and occupation to which the employment of the minor is limited;
provided, however, that the examining physician may indicate upon the
certificate of limited physical fitness that the physical disability of
the minor is of a permanent nature, in which case such certificate shall
not expire at the end of six months but shall remain valid for so long
as the nature and type of work set forth in the pledge of employment
remain substantially the same.
 3. A record made of the physical examination shall show whether a
certificate of physical fitness has been issued or withheld. Such record
shall be sent to the certificating official.
 4. A certificate of physical fitness issued in another state to a
minor seeking employment in this state may be accepted in lieu of the
certificate of physical fitness required by subdivision one of this
section, provided the standards for issuing such certificates in the
other state are deemed substantially equivalent to those of this state
in accordance with regulations adopted by the commissioner of education.
 * NB Repealed May 9, 2027
 * § 3221. Pledge of employment. The pledge of employment shall be
signed by the initial prospective employer or his authorized
representative and shall show his name and place of business, the
minor's name, the number of days per week and the number of hours per
day and per week during which he will be employed, the hours of the
beginning and the ending of work, and the nature and type of the
employment.
 * NB Effective until May 9, 2027
 * § 3221. Pledge of employment. The pledge of employment shall be
completed in the method prescribed pursuant to section one hundred
thirty-five of the labor law by the initial prospective employer or
their authorized representative and shall show their name and place of
business, the minor's name, the number of days per week and the number
of hours per day and per week during which they will be employed, the
hours of the beginning and the ending of work, and the nature and type
of the employment.
 * NB Effective May 9, 2027
 § 3222. Schooling record. 1. By whom issued. The schooling record
shall be issued by the principal of the school the minor attends or last
attended, or by a teacher deputized by the principal or by a supervising
official, and during the months of July and August, and at other times
in extraordinary circumstances and emergencies, by one or more public
school officials deputized in writing by the chancellor in New York city
and elsewhere by the superintendent of schools or by the district
superintendent of schools.
 2. Procedure. On application of the person in parental relation, a
schooling record shall be issued promptly to a minor who complies with
the following conditions:
 a. Presents a certificate of physical fitness. Upon receipt of an
application for a schooling record the person authorized to issue such
record shall request that an examination be made of the minor for a
certificate of physical fitness in accordance with the requirements
herein prescribed.
 b. Meets the specified age requirement.
 3. Such schooling record shall show, when practicable, the name of the
school and grade or class which the minor is then attending or last
attended.
 4. Upon notification by the division of criminal justice services that
a child has been listed as a missing child, a school in which the child
is currently or was previously enrolled shall flag the schooling record
of the child in such a manner that whenever a copy of or information
concerning the schooling record is requested, the person authorized to
issue such record shall be alerted to the fact that the child has been
reported as a missing child. The school shall immediately report to the
local law enforcement authority and the division of criminal justice
services any request concerning flagged schooling records or knowledge
as to the whereabouts of any missing child. Upon notification by the
division of criminal justice services that a reported missing child has
been recovered, the school shall remove the flag from the person's
schooling record.
 5. Upon notification by the division of criminal justice services that
a child who may be listed as a missing child is currently enrolled in
and believed to be attending a New York school, such school shall
immediately notify the division of criminal justice services.
 * § 3223. Duties of employers. The employer of any minor required to
have an employment certificate:
 1. Shall satisfy himself that the minor presenting an employment
certificate is in fact the minor named therein.
 2. Shall before employment begins, file at the place of the minor's
employment such certificate so that it may be readily accessible to any
authorized person to examine such document.
 3. Shall, upon termination of the minor's employment, return the
employment certificate to the minor.
 * NB Effective until May 9, 2027
 * § 3223. Duties of employers. The employer of any minor required to
have an employment certificate:
 1. Shall personally confirm that the minor presenting an employment
certificate is in fact the minor named therein.
 2. Shall before employment begins, physically or electronically file
at the place of the minor's employment such certificate so that it may
be readily accessible to any authorized person to examine such document.
 3. Shall, upon termination of the minor's employment, destroy any
physical or electronic copies of such certificate.
 * NB Effective May 9, 2027
 * § 3224. Temporary services. a. If an employer is engaged in a
business of assigning employees for temporary services at another
establishment, and the employer compensates the employee for such
services rendered the employer shall keep on file in his office the
employment certificate and shall cause to be delivered to each
establishment where the child will perform his services a true copy of
such employment certificate. Such delivery shall be deemed compliance
with sections thirty-two hundred sixteen and thirty-two hundred
twenty-three of this chapter. The owner of each establishment to which
the child is assigned shall keep on file in his office such copy of the
employment certificate, which shall be deemed compliance with sections
thirty-two hundred sixteen and thirty-two hundred twenty-three of this
chapter, and shall return such copy to the employer at the conclusion of
the child's assignment. Such employer shall note on the original
employment certificate the existence of each copy.
 b. As used in this section, the term "establishment" includes a
factory, mercantile establishment, business office, restaurant, hotel
and any other trade, business or service.
 c. The commissioner of education may promulgate rules and regulations
as he deems necessary to insure that employment under the provisions of
this section shall not be harmful or undesirable from the point of view
of the welfare, development, or proper education of the child.
 * NB Effective until May 9, 2027
 * § 3224. Temporary services. a. If an employer is engaged in a
business of assigning employees for temporary services at another
establishment, and the employer compensates the employee for such
services rendered the employer shall keep on file physically in office
or electronically and readily accessible the employment certificate and
shall cause to be delivered to each establishment where the child will
perform the services a true copy of such employment certificate. Such
delivery shall be deemed compliance with sections thirty-two hundred
sixteen and thirty-two hundred twenty-three of this part and section one
hundred thirty-five of the labor law. The owner of each establishment to
which the child is assigned shall also retain a copy of the employment
certificate and shall return such copy to the employer at the conclusion
of the child's assignment. Such employer shall note on the original
employment certificate the existence of each copy.
 b. As used in this section, the term "establishment" includes a
factory, mercantile establishment, business office, restaurant, hotel
and any other trade, business or service.
 c. The commissioner of education may promulgate rules and regulations
as they deem necessary to ensure that employment under the provisions of
this section shall not be harmful or undesirable from the point of view
of the welfare, development, or proper education of the child.
 * NB Effective May 9, 2027
 * § 3225. Special employment certificate. 1. A special employment
certificate may be issued to a minor fifteen years of age, found to be
incapable of profiting by further instruction available upon compliance
with the same requirements as in the case of a full-time employment
certificate.
 2. The fact that a minor is incapable of profiting from further
instruction available shall be determined in accordance with the
provisions of section thirty-two hundred eight of this article and the
regulations of the commissioner of education.
 3. A special employment certificate shall not authorize the employment
of a minor in or in connection with or for a factory.
 * NB Repealed May 9, 2027
 * § 3226. Farm work permits. 1. A farm work permit may be issued to a
minor fourteen or fifteen years of age authorizing employment in farm
service.
 2. A farm work permit also may be issued to a minor over twelve years
of age for employment in assisting in the hand work harvest of berries,
fruits and vegetables pursuant to paragraph e of subdivision two of
section one hundred thirty of the labor law.
 3. To obtain a farm work permit a minor shall present to the issuing
officer the following:
 a. Evidence of age;
 b. Written consent of the parent or guardian; and
 c. A certificate of physical fitness.
 4. Such permit shall be valid only when signed by the employer and
subject only to the condition that it shall not be valid for work in or
in connection with a factory.
 5. A farm work permit shall not be required for the employment of a
minor sixteen years of age or over in farm service.
 * NB Effective until May 9, 2027
 * § 3226. Farm work permits. 1. A farm work permit may be issued to a
minor fourteen or fifteen years of age authorizing employment in farm
service.
 2. A farm work permit also may be issued to a minor over twelve years
of age for employment in assisting in the hand work harvest of berries,
fruits and vegetables pursuant to paragraph e of subdivision two of
section one hundred thirty of the labor law.
 3. To obtain a farm work permit a minor shall present to the issuing
officer the following:
 a. Evidence of age; and
 b. Written consent of the person in parental relation as defined in
section thirty-two hundred twelve of this article.
 4. Such permit shall be valid only when signed by the employer and
subject only to the condition that it shall not be valid for work in or
in connection with a factory.
 5. A farm work permit shall not be required for the employment of a
minor sixteen years of age or over in farm service.
 * NB Effective May 9, 2027
 * § 3227. Street trades. 1. Definition. A street trade for the
purposes of part one of this article shall include the carrying,
selling, exposing or offering for sale of newspapers or periodicals, and
work as a bootblack, but shall not include the occupation engaged in by
a newspaper carrier as defined in subdivision one of section thirty-two
hundred twenty-eight of this chapter.
 2. Application. The provisions of this section shall apply to all
school districts.
 3. No minor under fourteen years of age shall be engaged in a street
trade; and no minor from fourteen to eighteen years of age shall be so
engaged unless a street trades permit has been lawfully issued to the
minor.
 4. A street trades permit shall be issued in the same manner and with
the same requirements as in the case of an employment certificate. Such
a permit shall expire two years from the date of its issuance.
 5. A minor to whom a street trades permit has been issued shall carry
it on his or her person while engaged in a street trade. Such a permit
shall not be transferred to another minor or used by another if
transferred.
 6. No minor shall be engaged in a street trade before six o'clock in
the morning nor after seven o'clock in the evening, nor during the time
the minor is required to attend upon instruction, nor more than four
hours in any one day when school is in session, nor more than five hours
in any one day when school is not in session.
 7. The police shall enforce the provisions of this section except with
respect to the issuance and revocation of street trades permits. The
industrial commissioner shall have concurrent power to enforce this
section except with respect to the issuance and revocation of street
trades permits.
 8. The school authorities may revoke the permit for cause after due
notice.
 * NB Repealed May 9, 2027
 * § 3228. Newspaper carrier. 1. Definition: A "newspaper carrier" is a
minor between the ages of eleven and eighteen years of age who engages
in the occupation of delivering, or selling and delivering, newspapers,
shopping papers or periodicals to customers at their homes or places of
business. For purposes of this section shopping papers shall mean those
community publications distributed, for the purposes of advertising and
public information, to the consumer without consideration being paid
therefor by the consumer.
 Such papers shall:
 (i) be distributed to the public on a community-wide basis;
 (ii) be published at stated intervals at least fifty times a year;
 (iii) have continuity as to title and general nature of content from
issue to issue;
 (iv) contain in each issue community notices or editorial comment or
articles by different authors; and
 (v) contain in each issue advertisements from numerous unrelated
advertisers including non-commercial advertisements.
 The term "shopping papers" shall not include mail order and other
catalogs, advertising fliers, travel brochures, house organs, theatre
programs, telephone directories, shopping and restaurant guides, racing
tip and form sheets, shopping center advertising sheets and similar
publications.
 2. A "newspaper carrier" shall possess a newspaper carrier permit and
shall carry it upon his or her person when engaged in the occupation of
delivering, or selling and delivering, newspapers, shopping papers or
periodicals to homes or places of business.
 3. A newspaper carrier permit shall be issued on a form prescribed by
the commissioner of education to a minor qualified to participate in
physical training as provided for in section thirty-two hundred four of
this chapter. Minors that are not participating in physical training may
be issued a permit with the approval of the school physician.
 4. No newspaper carrier shall be engaged in delivering, or selling and
delivering, newspapers, shopping papers or periodicals before five
o'clock in the morning nor after seven o'clock in the evening or thirty
minutes prior to sunset, whichever is later, nor during the time the
minor is required to attend upon instruction, nor for more than four
hours in any one day when school is in session, nor more than five hours
in any one day when school is not in session.
 5. No minor under eleven years of age may engage in the occupation of
delivering, or selling and delivering, newspapers, shopping papers or
periodicals to customers at their homes or places of business.
 6. The school authorities may revoke the permit for cause after due
notice.
 7. Enforcement. The police shall enforce the provisions of this
section except with respect to the issuance and revocation of permits.
The industrial commissioner shall have concurrent power to enforce this
section except with respect to the issuance and revocation of permits.
 8. It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation to wilfully and
knowingly deliver or cause to be delivered newspapers, shopping papers
or periodicals to a newspaper carrier who is not in compliance with the
provisions of this section.
 * NB Repealed May 9, 2027
 § 3230. School district meetings and activities. 1. The board of
education or trustees of each school district shall ensure that at any
meeting or activity which is conducted by the board of education,
trustees, school district or a district school which is specific to a
child's educational program and which parents or persons in parental
relationship who are deaf or hard of hearing, as defined by the
commissioner, attend, the board of education or trustees shall provide
interpreter services at no charge to such persons, provided a written
request therefor is made to the school district within a reasonable time
prior to the scheduled meeting or activity. In the event interpreter
services are requested, the school district shall appoint an interpreter
of the deaf to interpret the proceedings of the meeting or activity. In
the event that an interpreter is unavailable, other reasonable
accommodations shall be made which are satisfactory to the parents or
guardians.
 2. Each board of education or trustees shall adopt a policy which
shall establish the time limitation for requesting interpreter services,
examples of what constitutes reasonable accommodations and how the
regulations of the commissioner promulgated pursuant to this chapter
shall be implemented.
 3. For the purposes of this section "meeting" or "activity" shall
include those school-initiated meetings or activities which parents or
persons in parental relationship who are deaf or hard of hearing attend
which are specific to the academic and/or disciplinary aspects of their
child's educational program including parent-teacher conferences and
other such meetings and activities as defined by the commissioner.
 § 3232. Courts having jurisdiction. 1. Courts sitting as courts of
special sessions or as magistrates' courts shall have concurrent
jurisdiction with family courts to hear, try and determine charges of
violation of the provisions of part one of this article, within their
respective jurisdiction. In the counties of Cortland and Westchester
and in the city of New York family courts shall have exclusive original
jurisdiction in such proceedings. Notwithstanding other provisions of
law, family courts shall have jurisdiction, for the purposes of part one
of this article, of minors.
 2. A prosecution instituted under the provisions of part one of this
article shall be deemed a bar to a prosecution under the labor law based
on the same state of facts.
 § 3233. Penalties. Except as otherwise provided, a violation of part
one of this article shall be punishable for the first offense by a fine
not exceeding ten dollars or ten days' imprisonment; for each subsequent
offense by a fine not exceeding fifty dollars, or by imprisonment not
exceeding thirty days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
 A violation of sections thirty-two hundred fifteen, thirty-two hundred
twenty-three and thirty-two hundred twenty-four of this article shall be
punishable for a first offense by a fine of not less than twenty nor
more than fifty dollars; for a second offense by a fine of not less than
fifty nor more than two hundred fifty dollars, or by imprisonment for
not more than thirty days or by both such fine and imprisonment; for a
third offense by a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars, or
by imprisonment for not more than sixty days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
 Any person who knowingly makes a false statement in or in relation to
any application made for an employment certificate or permit as to any
matter required by this chapter to appear in any affidavit, record,
transcript, certificate or permit therein provided for, is guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished, except as in this
chapter or in the penal law otherwise provided, for a first offense by a
fine of not more than one hundred dollars; for a second offense by a
fine of not less than one hundred nor more than five hundred dollars, or
by imprisonment for not more than thirty days or by both such fine and
imprisonment; for a subsequent offense by a fine of not less than three
hundred dollars, or by imprisonment for not more than sixty days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment.
 § 3234. Enforcement; withholding state moneys by commissioner of
education. 1. The commissioner of education shall supervise the
enforcement of part one of this article and he may withhold one-half of
all public school moneys from any city or district, which, in his
judgment, wilfully omits and refuses to enforce the provisions of part
one of this article, after due notice, so often and so long as such
wilful omission and refusal shall, in his judgment, occur, or continue.
 2. If the provisions of part one of this article are complied with at
any time within one year from the date on which said moneys were
withheld, the money so withheld shall be paid over by said commissioner
of education to such district or city, otherwise forfeited to the state.
 PART II
 SCHOOL CENSUS
Section 3240. School census in the cities of New York, Buffalo and
 Rochester.
 3241. School census in cities, except in cities having a
 population of one hundred twenty-five thousand or more.
 3242. School census in school districts.
 3243. Penalty for withholding information.
 3244. Education of children in foster care.
 § 3240. School census in the cities of New York, Buffalo and
Rochester. In the cities of New York, Buffalo and Rochester provision
shall be made by the board of education for taking a school census in
connection with the work of enforcing part one of this article.
 § 3241. School census in cities, except in cities having a population
of one hundred twenty-five thousand or more. 1. The board of education
of each city, except in cities having a population of one hundred
twenty-five thousand or more, shall constitute a permanent census board
in such city. Such board shall, under its regulations, cause a census of
the children in its city to be taken and to be amended from day to day,
as changes of residence shall occur among persons in such cities within
the ages prescribed in subdivision two of this section and as other
persons shall come within the ages prescribed therein and as other
persons within such ages shall become residents of such cities, so that
there shall always be on file with such board a complete census giving
the facts and information required in subdivision two of this section;
provided, however, that for pre-school students from birth to five years
of age, such census may be prepared and filed biennially on or before
the fifteenth day of October.
 2. Such census shall include all persons between birth and eighteen
years of age and in the case of physically or mentally handicapped
children between birth and twenty-one years of age, their names, their
respective residences by street and number, the day of the month and the
year of their birth, the names of the persons in parental relation to
them, such information relating to physical or mental defects, to
illiteracy, to employment and to the enforcement of the law relating to
child labor and compulsory education as the education department and the
board of education of each such city shall require and also such further
information as such board of education shall require.
 3. Such board shall provide to the commissioner of education upon
written request therefor and in such form as shall be prescribed by him,
a report containing the names, ages and addresses of those children who
are blind or deaf and those having serious physical or mental defects.
In addition such report shall indicate whether such children are being
educated within the public schools of the district or, if they are not,
where such education is being furnished them.
 4. It shall be the duty of persons in parental relation to any person
between such ages residing within the limits of any such city to make
such reports as the board of education of such city shall require. Such
reports shall contain the following information:
 a. Two weeks before any child shall become of the compulsory school
age, the name of such child, its residence, the name of the person or
persons in parental relation thereto, and the name and location of the
school to which such child shall have been or shall be sent as a pupil.
 b. In case a child of compulsory school age shall, for any cause, be
removed from one school and sent to another school, or sent to work in
accordance with the labor law, all the facts in relation thereto.
 c. In case the residence of a child shall be removed from one police
precinct to another police precinct, the new residence and the other
facts required in paragraphs a and b of this subdivision.
 d. In case a child between birth and eighteen years of age shall
become a resident of such city for the first time, the name, residence
and such other facts as the board of education shall require.
 § 3242. School census in school districts. The trustees or board of
education of every school district may cause a census to be taken of all
children between birth and eighteen years of age, including all such
facts and information as are required in the census provided for in
section thirty-two hundred forty-one of this part. Such census shall be
prepared biennially for children between ages five and eighteen who are
entitled to attend the public schools without payment of tuition in
duplicate in their respective school districts, and one copy thereof
filed with the teacher or principal and the other copy filed with the
district superintendent or superintendent on or before the fifteenth day
of October. For pre-school students from birth to five years of age,
such census may be prepared and filed biennially on or before the
fifteenth day of October. Such census shall include the reports and
information required from cities as provided in section thirty-two
hundred forty-one of this part. All information regarding a student with
a disability under the age of twenty-one years shall be filed annually
with the superintendent of the board of cooperative educational services
of which said district may be a part.
 § 3243. Penalty for withholding information. A parent, guardian or
other person having under his control or charge a child between birth
and eighteen years of age who withholds or refuses to give information
in his possession relating to such child and required under part two of
this article, or any such parent, guardian or other person who gives
false information in relation thereto, shall be liable to and punished
by a fine not exceeding twenty dollars or by imprisonment not exceeding
thirty days.
 § 3244. Education of children in foster care. 1. Definitions. For
purposes of this section only, the following definitions shall apply:
 a. Child or youth in foster care. For the purposes of this article,
the term "child or youth in foster care" shall mean a child who is in
the care and custody or custody and guardianship of a local commissioner
of social services or the commissioner of the office of children and
family services.
 b. School district of origin. The term "school district of origin"
shall mean the school district within the state of New York in which the
child or youth in foster care was attending a public school or preschool
on a tuition-free basis or was entitled to attend at the time of
placement into foster care when the social services district or the
office of children and family services assumed care and custody or
custody and guardianship of such child or youth, which is different from
the school district of residence.
 c. School district of residence. The term "school district of
residence" shall mean the public school district within the state of New
York in which the foster care placement is located, which is different
from the school district of origin.
 d. Feeder school. The term "feeder school" shall mean:
 (1) a preschool whose students are entitled to attend a specified
elementary school or group of elementary schools upon completion of that
preschool;
 (2) a school whose students are entitled to attend a specified
elementary, middle, intermediate, or high school or group of specified
elementary, middle, intermediate, or high schools upon completion of the
terminal grade of such school; or
 (3) a school that sends its students to a receiving school in a
neighboring school district pursuant to section two thousand forty of
this chapter.
 e. Preschool. The term "preschool" shall mean a publicly funded
pre-kindergarten program administered by the department or a local
educational agency or a Head Start program administered by a local
educational agency and/or services under the Individuals with
Disabilities Education Act administered by a local educational agency.
 f. Receiving school. The term "receiving school" shall mean:
 (1) a school that enrolls students from a specified or group of
preschools, elementary schools, middle schools, intermediate schools, or
high schools; or
 (2) a school that enrolls students from a feeder school in a
neighboring local educational agency pursuant to section two thousand
forty of this chapter.
 g. School of origin. The term "school of origin" shall mean a public
school that a child or youth attended at the time of placement into
foster care, or the school in which the child or youth was last
enrolled, including a preschool or a charter school. Provided that, for
a child or youth in foster care who completes the final grade level
served by the school of origin, the term "school of origin" shall
include the designated receiving school at the next grade level for all
feeder schools. Where the child is eligible to attend school in the
school district of origin because the child was placed in foster care
after such child is eligible to apply, register, or enroll in the public
preschool or kindergarten or the child is living with a school-age
sibling who attends school in the school district of origin, the school
of origin shall include any public school or preschool in which such
child would have been entitled or eligible to attend based on such
child's last residence before the circumstances arose which caused such
child to be placed in foster care.
 2. Choice of district and school. a. Notwithstanding any other
provision of law to the contrary, the social services district, in
consultation with the appropriate local educational agency or agencies,
shall designate either the school district of origin or the school
district of residence within which the child in foster care shall be
entitled to attend in accordance with a best interest determination made
by the applicable social services district or voluntary authorized
agency, as defined in paragraph (a) of subdivision ten of section three
hundred seventy-one of the social services law, in accordance with the
regulations of the office of children and family services. The child
shall be entitled to attend the school of origin or any school that
children and youth who live in the attendance area in which the foster
care placement is located are eligible to attend, including a preschool,
subject to a best interest determination made by the applicable social
services district or voluntary authorized agency, as defined in
paragraph (a) of subdivision ten of section three hundred seventy-one of
the social services law, for the duration of the child's placement in
foster care and until the end of the school year in which such child is
no longer in foster care and for one additional year if that year
constitutes the child's terminal year in such building.
 b. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, where
the school district of origin or school of origin that a child was
attending on a tuition-free basis or was entitled to attend when such
child entered foster care is located in New York state and the child's
foster care placement is located in a contiguous state, the child shall
be entitled to attend the school of origin or any school that children
and youth who live in the attendance area in which the foster care
placement is located are eligible to attend, including a preschool,
subject to a best interest determination made by the applicable social
services district or voluntary authorized agency, as defined in
paragraph (a) of subdivision ten of section three hundred seventy-one of
the social services law, for the duration of the child's placement in
foster care and until the end of the school year in which such child is
no longer in foster care and for one additional year if that year
constitutes the child's terminal year in such building.
 c. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph a or b of this
subdivision, a child in foster care who is moved from one foster care
placement to another shall be entitled to continue to attend the school
of origin or the social services district may designate that the child
in foster care attend any school that children and youth who live in the
attendance area in which the foster care placement is located are
eligible to attend, including a preschool, subject to a best interest
determination made by the applicable social services district or
voluntary authorized agency, as defined in paragraph (a) of subdivision
ten of section three hundred seventy-one of the social services law, for
the duration of the child's placement in foster care and until the end
of the school year in which the child is no longer in such foster care
placement and for one additional year if that year constitutes the
child's terminal year in such building.
 d. Upon notification of the designation made by the social services
district for a foster care youth, the designated school district of
attendance shall immediately:
 (1) enroll the child or youth in foster care even if the child or
youth is unable to produce records normally a requirement for
enrollment, such as previous academic records, records of immunization
and/or other required health records, proof of residency or other
documentation and/or even if the child has missed application or
enrollment deadlines during any period of placement in foster care, if
applicable. Provided that nothing herein shall be construed to require
the immediate attendance of an enrolled student lawfully excluded from
school temporarily pursuant to section nine hundred six of this chapter
because of a communicable or infectious disease that imposes a
significant risk of infection of others;
 (2) treat the child or youth in foster care as a resident for all
purposes; and
 (3) make a written request to the school district where the child's
records are located for a copy of such records.
 e. Within five days of receipt of a request for records in accordance
with subparagraph three of paragraph d of this subdivision, the school
district shall forward, in a manner consistent with state and federal
law, a complete copy of the records of the child or youth in foster care
including, but not limited to, proof of age, academic records,
evaluations, immunization records, and guardianship papers, if
applicable.
 f. Where the school of origin is a charter school, the school district
designated pursuant to this subdivision shall be deemed to be the school
district of residence of such child for purposes of fiscal and
programmatic responsibility under article fifty-six of this chapter and
shall be responsible for transportation of the child in foster care. If
the designated school district of attendance is not the school district
of origin, the designated school district of attendance may seek
reimbursement from the school district of origin in accordance with the
provisions of subdivision four of section thirty-two hundred two of this
article.
 g. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, each
local educational agency, as such term is defined in subsection
twenty-six of section ninety-one hundred one of the Elementary and
Secondary Education Act of 1965, as amended by the Every Student
Succeeds Act of 2015, shall designate a local educational agency point
of contact for children and youth in foster care. Provided that such
point of contact shall not be the same as the liaison designated
pursuant to the subtitle B of title VII of the McKinney-Vento Assistance
Act, unless the McKinney-Vento liaison has sufficient ability to carry
out the responsibilities of the McKinney-Vento liaison in addition to
the responsibilities of the point of contact for children and youth in
foster care.
 3. Reimbursement. The tuition costs of the education of such child or
youth in foster care shall be borne in accordance with the provisions of
paragraph d of subdivision four of section thirty-two hundred two of
this article.
 4. Transportation. a. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any
child or youth in foster care who requires transportation in order to
attend a school of origin designated pursuant to subdivision two of this
section, shall be entitled to receive such transportation pursuant to
this paragraph. The designated school district of attendance shall
provide transportation to and from the child's foster care placement
location and the school of origin. Any cost incurred for such
transportation that is allowable up to fifty miles each way pursuant to
the applicable provision of parts two and three of article seventy-three
of this chapter or herein, shall be aidable pursuant to subdivision
seven of section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter, provided that
the approved transportation expense shall not exceed an amount
determined by the commissioner to be the total cost for providing the
most cost-effective mode of such transportation in a manner consistent
with the commissioner's regulations.
 b. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, where any child or
youth in foster care attends the school district of residence and such
child does not attend the school of origin, such school district shall
provide transportation to such child on the same basis as a resident
student. Any cost incurred for such transportation that is allowable
pursuant to the applicable provisions of parts two and three of article
seventy-three of this chapter or herein, shall be aidable pursuant to
subdivision seven of section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter,
provided that the approved transportation expense shall not exceed an
amount determined by the commissioner to be the total cost for providing
the most cost-effective mode of such transportation in a manner
consistent with the commissioner's regulations.
 c. Excess allowable transportation costs beyond those reimbursed in
paragraphs a and b of this subdivision resulting from the attendance of
a child or youth in foster care shall be shared between the social
services district responsible for the foster care costs of the child or
youth and the designated school district of attendance equally. Excess
transportation costs shall mean the difference between what a school
district otherwise would spend to transport a student to his or her
assigned school and the cost of transporting a child in foster care to
his or her school of origin; except as otherwise reimbursed under
paragraph a or b of this subdivision and as further defined in
regulations of the commissioner. The school district and local social
services district are expected to consider and utilize all allowable
funding sources, including any available federal funds, to cover
additional transportation costs. Provided however that school districts
and social services districts that have written agreements relating to
how excess transportation costs should be funded, that both entities
have agreed to and are consistent with the requirements in subparagraph
five of paragraph c of section one thousand one hundred twelve of title
twenty of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965, as amended
by the Every Student Succeeds Act of 2015, filed with the department and
the office of children and family services shall not be subject to this
paragraph. In the absence of such a shared agreement, such school
districts and local departments of social services are subject to the
provisions of this paragraph.
 d. Where the child has been placed in foster care in a contiguous
state and has designated a school of origin located in the state of New
York, the designated school district of attendance in New York state
shall collaborate with the social services district to arrange for
transportation.
 5. Each child or youth in foster care to be assisted under this
section shall be provided services comparable to services offered to
other students in the school selected under this section, including the
following: transportation services; educational services for which the
child or youth meets the eligibility criteria, such as services provided
under Title I of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 or
similar state or local programs; educational programs for children with
disabilities; educational programs for English learners; programs in
career and technical education; programs for gifted and talented
students; and school nutrition programs.
 6. The commissioner, in consultation with the office of children and
family services, may promulgate regulations to carry out the purposes of
this section.
 ARTICLE 66
 INTERSTATE COMPACT ON EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITY FOR MILITARY CHILDREN
Section 3300. Short title.
 3301. Purpose.
 3302. Definitions.
 3303. Applicability.
 3304. Educational records and enrollment.
 3304-a. Advance enrollment.
 3305. Placement and attendance.
 3306. Eligibility.
 3307. Graduation.
 3308. State coordination.
 3309. Interstate commission on educational opportunity for
 military children.
 3310. Powers and duties of the interstate commission.
 3311. Organization and operation of the interstate commission.
 3312. Rulemaking functions of the interstate commission.
 3313. Oversight, enforcement, and dispute resolution.
 3314. Financing of the interstate commission.
 3315. Member states, effective date and amendment.
 3316. Withdrawal and dissolution.
 3317. Severability and construction.
 3318. Binding effect of compact and other laws.
 § 3300. Short title. This article shall be known and may be cited as
the "interstate compact on educational opportunity for military
children".
 § 3301. Purpose. It is the purpose of this compact to remove barriers
to educational success imposed on children of military families because
of frequent moves and deployment of their parents by:
 1. Facilitating the timely enrollment of children of military families
and ensuring that they are not placed at a disadvantage due to
difficulty in the transfer of education records from the previous school
district or districts or variations in entrance/age requirements.
 2. Facilitating the student placement process through which children
of military families are not disadvantaged by variations in attendance
requirements, scheduling, sequencing, grading, course content or
assessment.
 3. Facilitating the qualification and eligibility for enrollment,
educational programs, and participation in extracurricular academic,
athletic, and social activities.
 4. Facilitating the on-time graduation of children of military
families.
 5. Providing for the promulgation and enforcement of administrative
rules implementing the provisions of this compact.
 6. Providing for the uniform collection and sharing of information
between and among member states, schools and military families under
this compact.
 7. Promoting coordination between this compact and other compacts
affecting military children.
 8. Promoting flexibility and cooperation between the educational
system, parents and the student in order to achieve educational success
for the student.
 § 3302. Definitions. As used in this compact, unless the context
clearly requires a different meaning:
 1. "Active duty" means full-time duty status in the active uniformed
service of the United States, including members of the National Guard
and Reserve on active duty orders pursuant to 10 U.S.C. sections 1209
and 1211.
 2. "Children of military families" means a school-aged child or
children, enrolled in kindergarten through twelfth grade, in the
household of an active duty member.
 3. "Compact commissioner" means the voting representative of each
compacting state appointed pursuant to section thirty-three hundred nine
of this article.
 4. "Deployment" means the period one month prior to the service
members' departure from their home station on military orders through
six months after return to their home station.
 5. "Education records" or "educational records" means those official
records, files, and data directly related to a student and maintained by
the school or local educational agency, including but not limited to
records encompassing all the material kept in the student's cumulative
folder such as general identifying data, records of attendance and of
academic work completed, records of achievement and results of
evaluative tests, health data, disciplinary status, test protocols, and
individualized education programs.
 6. "Extracurricular activities" means a voluntary activity sponsored
by the school or local educational agency or an organization sanctioned
by the local educational agency. Extracurricular activities include, but
are not limited to, preparation for and involvement in public
performances, contests, athletic competitions, demonstrations, displays,
and club activities.
 7. "Interstate commission on educational opportunity for military
children" means the commission that is created under section
thirty-three hundred nine of this article, which is generally referred
to in this article as the "interstate commission".
 8. "Local educational agency" means a public authority legally
constituted by the state as an administrative agency to provide control
of and direction for kindergarten through twelfth grade public
educational institutions. In New York state, a local educational agency
means a public school district located within New York state.
 9. "Member state" means a state that has enacted this compact.
 10. "Military installation" means a base, camp, post, station, yard,
center, homeport facility for any ship, or other activity under the
jurisdiction of the department of defense, including any leased
facility, which is located within any of the several states, the
District of Columbia, the commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the United States
Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, the Northern Marianas Islands and
any other United States territory. Such term does not include any
facility used primarily for civil works, rivers and harbors projects, or
flood control projects.
 11. "Non-member state" means a state that has not enacted this
compact.
 12. "Receiving state" means the state to which a child of a military
family is sent, brought, or caused to be sent or brought.
 13. "Rule" means a written statement by the interstate commission
promulgated pursuant to section thirty-three hundred twelve of this
article that is of general applicability, implements, interprets or
prescribes a policy or provision of the compact, or an organizational,
procedural, or practice requirement of the interstate commission.
 14. "Sending state" means the state from which a child of a military
family is sent, brought, or caused to be sent or brought.
 15. "State" means a state of the United States, the District of
Columbia, the commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the United States Virgin
Islands, Guam, American Samoa, the Northern Marianas Islands and any
other United States territory.
 16. "Student" means the child of a military family for whom the local
educational agency receives public funding and who is formally enrolled
in kindergarten through twelfth grade.
 17. "Transition" means (a) the formal and physical process of
transferring from school to school as a result of military orders or (b)
the period of time in which a student moves from one school in the
sending state to another school in the receiving state.
 18. "Uniformed service" or "uniformed services" means the Army, Navy,
Air Force, Marine Corps, Space Force, Coast Guard as well as the
Commissioned Corps of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, and Public Health Services.
 19. "Veteran" means a person who served in the uniformed services and
who was discharged or released therefrom under conditions other than
dishonorable.
 § 3303. Applicability. 1. Except as otherwise provided in subdivision
two of this section, this compact shall apply to the children of:
 (a) active duty members of the uniformed services as defined in this
compact, including members of the National Guard and Reserve on active
duty orders pursuant to 10 U.S.C. sections 1209 and 1211;
 (b) members or veterans of the uniformed services who are severely
injured and medically discharged or retired for a period of one year
after medical discharge or retirement; and
 (c) members of the uniformed services who die on active duty or as a
result of injuries sustained on active duty for a period of one year
after death.
 2. The provisions of this interstate compact shall only apply to local
educational agencies as defined in this compact.
 3. The provisions of this compact shall not apply to the children of:
 (a) inactive members of the national guard and military reserves;
 (b) members of the uniformed services now retired, except as provided
in subdivision one of this section;
 (c) veterans of the uniformed services, except as provided in
subdivision one of this section; and
 (d) other United States department of defense personnel and other
federal agency civilian and contract employees not defined as active
duty members of the uniformed services.
 § 3304. Educational records and enrollment. 1. In the event that
official education records cannot be released to the parents for the
purpose of transfer, the custodian of the records in the sending state
shall prepare and furnish to the parent a complete set of unofficial
educational records, to the extent feasible, and using any template
developed by the interstate commission. Upon receipt of the unofficial
education records by a school in the receiving state, the school shall
enroll and appropriately place the student based on the information
provided in the unofficial records pending validation by the official
records, as quickly as possible.
 2. Simultaneous with the enrollment and conditional placement of the
student, the school in the receiving state shall request the student's
official education record from the school in the sending state. Upon
receipt of this request, the school in the sending state will process
and furnish the official education records to the school in the
receiving state within ten days or within such time as is reasonably
determined under the rules promulgated by the interstate commission.
 3. Notwithstanding any provisions of subdivision seven of section
twenty-one hundred sixty-four of the public health law to the contrary,
compacting states shall give thirty days from the date of enrollment or
within such time as is reasonably determined under the rules promulgated
by the interstate commission, for students transferring from a school in
a sending state to obtain any immunizations required by the receiving
state. For a series of immunizations, initial vaccinations must be
obtained within thirty days or within such time as is reasonably
determined under the rules promulgated by the interstate commission.
 4. For purposes of ensuring a smooth educational transition, students
transferring from a local educational agency in a sending state shall
initially be allowed to continue their enrollment at grade level in the
receiving state commensurate with their grade level from a local
educational agency in the sending state at the time of transition,
regardless of age. A student that has satisfactorily completed the
prerequisite grade level in the local educational agency in the sending
state shall initially be eligible for enrollment in the next highest
grade level in the receiving state, regardless of age. A student
transferring after the start of the school year in the receiving state
shall enter the school in the receiving state on their validated level
from an accredited school in the sending state. Nothing in this
subdivision shall prohibit a local educational agency in the receiving
state from performing subsequent evaluations to ensure appropriate
placement of the student.
 § 3304-a. Advance enrollment. A student whose parent or guardian is
being relocated to the state under military orders and is transferred or
is pending transfer to a military installation within the state shall be
deemed to be a resident pupil of a school district for the purposes of
enrollment pursuant to section three thousand two hundred two of this
title, provided that such parent or guardian provides a school district
an address that the student will reside within the boundaries of the
district in which the student is to be enrolled. A school district shall
permit a student to enroll preliminarily by remote registration without
charge and shall not require the student or the parent or guardian of
the student to physically appear at a location within the district for
the purpose of enrolling the student provided the parent or guardian of
the student provide a school district with military orders that a parent
or guardian will be stationed in this state during the current or
following school year and an address within the boundaries of the
district in which the student will reside and is to be enrolled.
 § 3305. Placement and attendance. 1. When the student transfers before
or during the school year, the receiving state school shall initially
honor placement of the student in educational courses based on the
student's enrollment in the sending state school and/or educational
assessments conducted at the school in the sending state if the courses
are offered and there is space available as determined by the local
educational agency. Course placement includes but is not limited to
honors, international baccalaureate, advanced placement, vocational,
technical and career pathways courses. Where the local educational
agency contracts with a board of cooperative educational services to
deliver such courses, the local educational agency and the board of
cooperative educational services shall arrange to enroll the student in
the applicable board of cooperative educational services program where
there is space available. Continuing the student's academic program from
the previous school and promoting placement in academically and career
challenging courses should be paramount when considering placement. This
does not preclude the school in the receiving state from performing
subsequent evaluations to ensure appropriate placement and continued
enrollment of the student in the courses.
 2. The receiving state school shall initially honor placement of the
student in educational programs based on current educational assessments
conducted at the school in the sending state or participation/placement
in like programs in the sending state, provided that the programs and/or
courses exist and there is space available, as determined by the local
educational agency. Such programs include, but are not limited to,
gifted and talented programs and English as a second language. Nothing
in this subdivision shall preclude the school in the receiving state
from performing subsequent evaluations to ensure appropriate placement
of the student.
 3. (a) In compliance with the federal requirements of the individuals
with disabilities education act, 20 U.S.C.A. section 1400 et seq, the
receiving state shall initially provide comparable services to a student
with disabilities based on his or her current individualized education
program; and
 (b) In compliance with the requirements of section 504 of the
rehabilitation act, 29 U.S.C.A. section 794, and with title II of the
Americans with disabilities act, 42 U.S.C.A. sections 12131-12165, the
receiving state shall make reasonable accommodations and modifications
to address the needs of incoming students with disabilities, subject to
an existing 504 or title II plan, to provide the student with equal
access to education. This does not preclude the school in the receiving
state from performing subsequent evaluations to ensure appropriate
placement of the student.
 4. Local educational agency administrative officials shall have
flexibility in waiving course or program prerequisites, or other
preconditions for placement in courses or programs offered under the
jurisdiction of the local educational agency.
 5. A student whose parent or legal guardian is an active duty member
of the uniformed services, as defined by the compact, and has been
called to duty for, is on leave from, or immediately returned from
deployment to a combat zone or combat support posting, shall be granted
additional excused absences at the discretion of the local educational
agency superintendent to visit with his or her parent or legal guardian
relative to such leave or deployment of the parent or guardian.
 § 3306. Eligibility. 1. (a) When properly executed under applicable
law, a special power of attorney, relative to the guardianship of a
military child, shall be considered sufficient for the sole purpose of
establishing residency of a transferring student into a local
educational agency and for all other actions in the local educational
agency requiring parental participation and consent, for the duration of
the guardianship. For students attending school in New York, a special
designation of person in parental relation pursuant to title fifteen-A
of article five of the general obligations law, in the form prescribed
in paragraph (b) of this subdivision, shall constitute a special power
of attorney for such purpose, provided that notwithstanding any other
provision of law to the contrary, such delegation shall remain in effect
until revoked or the child re-establishes residence with a parent.
 (b) A local educational agency shall be prohibited from charging local
tuition to a transitioning military child placed in the care of a
non-custodial parent or other person standing in loco parentis with a
special designation of person in parental relation pursuant to title
fifteen-A of article five of the general obligations law and this
paragraph who lives in a jurisdiction other than that of the custodial
parent. The special designation of person in parental relation shall be
in the form prescribed by section 5-1552 of the general obligations law,
except that it shall clearly identify the student as a transitioning
military child and shall provide that the designation shall continue in
effect until revoked or the child re-establishes residence with a
parent. Notwithstanding any provisions of law to the contrary, such
designation shall not be for a fixed period and shall result in a change
in the school district of residence for purposes of this chapter to the
school district in which the designee resides.
 (c) A transitioning military child, placed in the care of a
non-custodial parent or other person standing in loco parentis who lives
in a jurisdiction other than that of the custodial parent, may continue
to attend the school within New York in which he or she was enrolled
while residing with the custodial parent until the child completes the
highest grade level in such school. Nothing in this paragraph shall be
construed to require a local educational agency to provide
transportation services to such student while residing outside of the
district for distances greater than the maximum transportation limit
established under school district policy.
 2. State and local educational agencies shall facilitate the
opportunity for transitioning military children's inclusion in
extracurricular activities, regardless of application deadlines, to the
extent they are otherwise qualified.
 § 3307. Graduation. In order to facilitate the on-time graduation of
children of military families, states and local educational agencies
shall incorporate the following procedures:
 1. Local educational agency administrative officials shall waive
specific courses required for graduation if similar coursework has been
satisfactorily completed in another local educational agency or shall
provide reasonable justification for denial. Should a waiver not be
granted to a student who would qualify to graduate from the sending
school, the local educational agency shall provide an alternative means
of acquiring required coursework so that graduation may occur on time.
 2. States shall accept (a) exit or end-of-course exams required for
graduation from the sending state, (b) national norm referenced
achievement tests or (c) alternative testing, in lieu of testing
requirements for graduation in the receiving state. In the event the
above alternatives cannot be accommodated by the receiving state for a
student transferring in his or her senior year, then the provisions of
subdivision three of this section shall apply.
 3. Should a military student transferring at the beginning or during
his or her senior year be ineligible to graduate from the receiving
local educational agency after all alternatives have been considered,
the sending and receiving local educational agencies shall ensure the
receipt of a diploma from the sending local educational agency, if the
student meets the graduation requirements of the sending local
educational agency. In the event that one of the states in question is
not a member of this compact, the member state shall use best efforts to
facilitate the on-time graduation of the student in accordance with
subdivisions one and two of this section.
 § 3308. State coordination. 1. Each member state shall, through the
creation of a state council or use of an existing body or board, provide
for the coordination among its agencies of government, local educational
agencies and military installations concerning the state's participation
in, and compliance with, this compact and interstate commission
activities. In New York, the state council shall include the
commissioner or his or her designee, the commissioner of the New York
state department of veterans' services or his or her designee, the
adjutant general of the state of New York or his or her designee, a
superintendent of a school district with a high concentration of
military children appointed by the commissioner, a district
superintendent of schools of a board of cooperative educational services
serving an area with a high concentration of military children appointed
by the commissioner, a representative from a military installation
appointed by the governor, a representative of military families
appointed by the governor, a public member appointed by the governor and
one representative each appointed by the speaker of the assembly, the
temporary president of the senate and the governor.
 2. The state council of each member state shall appoint or designate a
military family education liaison to assist military families and the
state in facilitating the implementation of this compact.
 3. The compact commissioner responsible for the administration and
management of the state's participation in the compact shall be
appointed by the governor or as otherwise determined by each member
state.
 4. The compact commissioner and the military family education liaison
designated herein shall be ex-officio members of the state council,
unless either is already a full voting member of the state council.
 § 3309. Interstate commission on educational opportunity for military
children. The member states hereby create the "interstate commission on
educational opportunity for military children". The activities of the
interstate commission are the formation of public policy and are a
discretionary state function. The interstate commission shall:
 1. Be a body corporate and joint agency of the member states and shall
have all the responsibilities, powers and duties set forth herein.
 2. Consist of one interstate commission voting representative from
each member state who shall be that state's compact commissioner.
 (a) Each member state represented at a meeting of the interstate
commission is entitled to one vote.
 (b) A majority of the total member states shall constitute a quorum
for the transaction of business, unless a larger quorum is required by
the bylaws of the interstate commission.
 (c) A representative shall not delegate a vote to another member
state. In the event the compact commissioner is unable to attend a
meeting of the interstate commission, the governor or state council may
delegate voting authority to another person from their state for a
specified meeting.
 (d) The bylaws may provide for meetings of the interstate commission
to be conducted by telecommunication or electronic communication.
 3. Consist of ex-officio, non-voting representatives who are members
of interested organizations. Such ex-officio members, as defined in the
bylaws, may include but not be limited to, members of the representative
organizations of military family advocates, local educational agency
officials, parent and teacher groups, the United States department of
defense, the education commission of the states, the interstate
agreement on the qualification of educational personnel and other
interstate compacts affecting the education of children of military
members.
 4. Meet at least once each calendar year. The chairperson may call
additional meetings and, upon the request of a simple majority of the
member states, shall call additional meetings.
 5. Establish an executive committee, whose members shall include the
officers of the interstate commission and such other members of the
interstate commission as determined by the bylaws. Members of the
executive committee shall serve a one year term. Members of the
executive committee shall be entitled to one vote each. The executive
committee shall have the power to act on behalf of the interstate
commission, with the exception of rulemaking, during periods when the
interstate commission is not in session. The executive committee shall
oversee the day-to-day activities of the administration of the compact
including enforcement and compliance with the provisions of the compact,
its bylaws and rules, and other such duties as deemed necessary. The
United States department of defense, shall serve as an ex-officio,
non-voting member of the executive committee.
 6. Establish bylaws and rules that provide for conditions and
procedures under which the interstate commission shall make its
information and official records available to the public for inspection
or copying. The interstate commission may exempt from disclosure
information or official records to the extent they would adversely
affect personal privacy rights or proprietary interests.
 7. Give public notice of all meetings and all meetings shall be open
to the public, except as set forth in the rules or as otherwise provided
in the compact. The interstate commission and its committees may close a
meeting, or portion thereof, where it determines by two-thirds vote that
an open meeting would be likely to:
 (a) Relate solely to the interstate commission's internal personnel
practices and procedures;
 (b) Disclose matters specifically exempted from disclosure by federal
and state statute;
 (c) Disclose trade secrets or commercial or financial information
which is privileged or confidential;
 (d) Involve accusing a person of a crime, or formally censuring a
person;
 (e) Disclose information of a personal nature where disclosure would
constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy;
 (f) Disclose investigative records compiled for law enforcement
purposes; or
 (g) Specifically relate to the interstate commission's participation
in a civil action or other legal proceeding.
 8. Shall cause its legal counsel or designee to certify that a meeting
may be closed and shall reference each relevant exemptible provision for
any meeting, or portion of a meeting, which is closed pursuant to this
provision. The interstate commission shall keep minutes which shall
fully and clearly describe all matters discussed in a meeting and shall
provide a full and accurate summary of actions taken, and the reasons
therefor, including a description of the views expressed and the record
of a roll call vote. All documents considered in connection with an
action shall be identified in such minutes. All minutes and documents of
a closed meeting shall remain under seal, subject to release by a
majority vote of the interstate commission.
 9. Shall collect standardized data concerning the educational
transition of the children of military families under this compact as
directed through its rules which shall specify the data to be collected,
the means of collection and data exchange and reporting requirements.
Such methods of data collection, exchange and reporting shall, in so far
as is reasonably possible, conform to current technology and coordinate
its information functions with the appropriate custodian of records as
identified in the bylaws and rules, and shall in all cases be consistent
with all applicable privacy laws.
 10. Shall create a process that permits military officials, education
officials and parents to inform the interstate commission if and when
there are alleged violations of the compact or its rules or when issues
subject to the jurisdiction of the compact or its rules are not
addressed by the state or local educational agency. This section shall
not be construed to create a private right of action against the
interstate commission or any member state.
 § 3310. Powers and duties of the interstate commission. The interstate
commission shall have the following powers:
 1. To provide for dispute resolution among member states.
 2. To promulgate rules and take all necessary actions to effect the
goals, purposes and obligations as enumerated in this compact.
 3. To issue, upon request of a member state, advisory opinions
concerning the meaning or interpretation of the interstate compact, its
bylaws, rules and actions.
 4. To enforce compliance with the compact provisions, the rules
promulgated by the interstate commission, and the bylaws, using all
necessary and proper means, including but not limited to the use of
judicial process.
 5. To establish and maintain offices which shall be located within one
or more of the member states.
 6. To purchase and maintain insurance and bonds.
 7. To borrow, accept, hire or contract for services of personnel.
 8. To establish and appoint committees including, but not limited to,
an executive committee as required by subdivision five of section
thirty-three hundred nine of this article which shall have the power to
act on behalf of the interstate commission in carrying out its powers
and duties hereunder.
 9. To elect or appoint such officers, attorneys, employees, agents, or
consultants, and to fix their compensation, define their duties and
determine their qualifications; and to establish the interstate
commission's personnel policies and programs relating to conflicts of
interest, rates of compensation, and qualifications of personnel.
 10. To accept any and all donations and grants of money, equipment,
supplies, materials, and services, and to receive, utilize, and dispose
of it.
 11. To lease, purchase, accept contributions or donations of, or
otherwise to own, hold, improve or use any property, real, personal, or
mixed.
 12. To sell, convey, mortgage, pledge, lease, exchange, abandon, or
otherwise dispose of any property, real, personal or mixed.
 13. To establish a budget and make expenditures.
 14. To adopt a seal and bylaws governing the management and operation
of the interstate commission.
 15. To report annually to the legislatures, governors, judiciary, and
state councils of the member states concerning the activities of the
interstate commission during the preceding year. Such reports shall also
include any recommendations that may have been adopted by the interstate
commission.
 16. To coordinate education, training and public awareness regarding
the compact, its implementation and operation for officials and parents
involved in such activity.
 17. To establish uniform standards for the reporting, collecting and
exchanging of data.
 18. To maintain corporate books and records in accordance with the
bylaws.
 19. To perform such functions as may be necessary or appropriate to
achieve the purposes of this compact.
 20. To provide for the uniform collection and sharing of information
between and among member states, schools and military families under
this compact consistent with all applicable privacy laws.
 § 3311. Organization and operation of the interstate commission. 1.
The interstate commission shall, by a majority of the members present
and voting, within twelve months after the first interstate commission
meeting, adopt bylaws to govern its conduct as may be necessary or
appropriate to carry out the purposes of the compact, including, but not
limited to:
 (a) Establishing the fiscal year of the interstate commission;
 (b) Establishing an executive committee, and such other committees as
may be necessary;
 (c) Providing for the establishment of committees and for governing
any general or specific delegation of authority or function of the
interstate commission;
 (d) Providing reasonable procedures for calling and conducting
meetings of the interstate commission, and ensuring reasonable notice of
each such meeting;
 (e) Establishing the titles and responsibilities of the officers and
staff of the interstate commission;
 (f) Providing a mechanism for concluding the operations of the
interstate commission and the return of surplus funds that may exist
upon the termination of the compact after the payment and reserving of
all of its debts and obligations; and
 (g) Providing "start up" rules for initial administration of the
compact.
 2. The interstate commission shall, by a majority of the members,
elect annually from among its members a chairperson, a vice-chairperson,
and a treasurer, each of whom shall have such authority and duties as
may be specified in the bylaws. The chairperson or, in the chairperson's
absence or disability, the vice-chairperson, shall preside at all
meetings of the interstate commission. The officers so elected shall
serve without compensation or remuneration from the interstate
commission; provided that, subject to the availability of budgeted
funds, the officers shall be reimbursed for ordinary and necessary costs
and expenses incurred by them in the performance of their
responsibilities as officers of the interstate commission.
 3. (a) The executive committee shall have such authority and duties as
may be set forth in the bylaws, including but not limited to:
 (i) Managing the affairs of the interstate commission in a manner
consistent with the bylaws and purposes of the interstate commission;
 (ii) Overseeing an organizational structure within, and appropriate
procedures for the interstate commission to provide for the creation of
rules, operating procedures, and administrative and technical support
functions; and
 (iii) Planning, implementing, and coordinating communications and
activities with other state, federal and local government organizations
in order to advance the goals of the interstate commission.
 (b) The executive committee may, subject to the approval of the
interstate commission, appoint or retain an executive director for such
period, upon such terms and conditions and for such compensation, as the
interstate commission may deem appropriate. The executive director shall
serve as secretary to the interstate commission, but shall not be a
member of the interstate commission. The executive director shall hire
and supervise such other persons as may be authorized by the interstate
commission.
 4. The interstate commission's executive director and its employees
shall be immune from suit and liability, either personally or in their
official capacity, for a claim for damage to or loss of property or
personal injury or other civil liability caused or arising out of or
relating to an actual or alleged act, error, or omission that occurred,
or that such person had a reasonable basis for believing occurred,
within the scope of interstate commission employment, duties, or
responsibilities; provided, that such person shall not be protected from
suit or liability for damage, loss, injury, or liability caused by the
intentional or willful and wanton misconduct of such person.
 (a) The liability of the interstate commission's executive director
and employees or interstate commission representatives, acting within
the scope of such person's employment or duties for acts, errors, or
omissions occurring within such person's state may not exceed the limits
of liability set forth under the constitution and laws of that state for
state officials, employees, and agents. The interstate commission is
considered to be an instrumentality of the states for the purposes of
any such action. Nothing in this section shall be construed to protect
such person from suit or liability for damage, loss, injury, or
liability caused by the intentional or willful and wanton misconduct of
such person.
 (b) The interstate commission shall defend the executive director and
its employees and, subject to the approval of the attorney general or
other appropriate legal counsel of the member state represented by an
interstate commission representative, shall defend such interstate
commission representative in any civil action seeking to impose
liability arising out of an actual or alleged act, error or omission
that occurred within the scope of interstate commission employment,
duties or responsibilities, or that the defendant had a reasonable basis
for believing occurred within the scope of interstate commission
employment, duties, or responsibilities, provided that the actual or
alleged act, error, or omission did not result from intentional or
willful and wanton misconduct on the part of such person.
 (c) To the extent not covered by the state involved, member state, or
the interstate commission, the representatives or employees of the
interstate commission shall be held harmless in the amount of a
settlement or judgment, including attorney's fees and costs, obtained
against such persons arising out of an actual or alleged act, error, or
omission that occurred within the scope of interstate commission
employment, duties, or responsibilities, or that such persons had a
reasonable basis for believing occurred within the scope of interstate
commission employment, duties, or responsibilities, provided that the
actual or alleged act, error, or omission did not result from
intentional or willful and wanton misconduct on the part of such
persons.
 § 3312. Rulemaking functions of the interstate commission. 1. The
interstate commission shall promulgate reasonable rules in order to
effectively and efficiently achieve the purposes of this compact.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event the interstate commission
exercises its rulemaking authority in a manner that is beyond the scope
of the purposes of this article, or conflicts with the laws of a member
state, or the powers granted hereunder, then such an action by the
interstate commission shall be invalid and have no force or effect.
 2. Rules shall be made pursuant to a rulemaking process that
substantially conforms to section two hundred two of the state
administrative procedure act as may be appropriate to the operations of
the interstate commission.
 3. Not later than thirty days after a rule is promulgated, any person
may file a petition for judicial review of the rule; provided, that the
filing of such a petition shall not stay or otherwise prevent the rule
from becoming effective unless the court finds that the petitioner has a
substantial likelihood of success. The court shall give deference to the
actions of the interstate commission consistent with applicable law and
shall not find the rule to be unlawful if the rule represents a
reasonable exercise of the interstate commission's authority.
 4. If a majority of the legislatures of the compacting states rejects
a rule by enactment of a statute or resolution in the same manner used
to adopt the compact, then such rule shall have no further force and
effect in any compacting state.
 § 3313. Oversight, enforcement, and dispute resolution. 1. (a) All
courts shall take judicial notice of the compact and the rules in any
judicial or administrative proceeding in a member state pertaining to
the subject matter of this compact which may affect the powers,
responsibilities or actions of the interstate commission.
 (b) The interstate commission shall be entitled to receive all service
of process in any such proceeding, and shall have standing to intervene
in the proceeding for all purposes. Failure to provide service of
process to the interstate commission shall render a judgment or order
void as to the interstate commission, this compact or promulgated rules.
 2. If the interstate commission determines that a member state has
defaulted in the performance of its obligations or responsibilities
under this compact, or the bylaws or promulgated rules, the interstate
commission shall:
 (a) Provide written notice to the defaulting state and other member
states, of the nature of the default, the means of curing the default
and any action taken by the interstate commission. The interstate
commission shall specify the conditions by which the defaulting state
must cure its default.
 (b) Provide remedial training and specific technical assistance
regarding the default.
 (c) If the defaulting state fails to cure the default, the defaulting
state shall be terminated from the compact upon an affirmative vote of a
majority of the member states and all rights, privileges and benefits
conferred by this compact shall be terminated from the effective date of
termination. A cure of the default does not relieve the offending state
of obligations or liabilities incurred during the period of the default.
 (d) Suspension or termination of membership in the compact shall be
imposed only after all other means of securing compliance have been
exhausted. Notice of intent to suspend or terminate shall be given by
the interstate commission to the governor, the majority and minority
leaders of the defaulting state's legislature, and each of the member
states.
 (e) The state which has been suspended or terminated is responsible
for all assessments, obligations and liabilities incurred through the
effective date of suspension or termination including obligations, the
performance of which extends beyond the effective date of suspension or
termination.
 (f) The interstate commission shall not bear any costs relating to any
state that has been found to be in default or which has been suspended
or terminated from the compact, unless otherwise mutually agreed upon in
writing between the interstate commission and the defaulting state.
 (g) The defaulting state may appeal the action of the interstate
commission by petitioning the United States district court for the
District of Columbia or the federal district where the interstate
commission has its principal offices. The prevailing party shall be
awarded all costs of such litigation including reasonable attorney's
fees.
 3. (a) The interstate commission shall attempt, upon the request of a
member state, to resolve disputes which are subject to the compact and
which may arise among member states and between member and non-member
states.
 (b) The interstate commission shall promulgate a rule providing for
both mediation and binding dispute resolution for disputes as
appropriate.
 4. (a) The interstate commission, in the reasonable exercise of its
discretion, shall enforce the provisions and rules of this compact.
 (b) The interstate commission, may by majority vote of the members,
initiate legal action in the United States district court for the
District of Columbia or, at the discretion of the interstate commission,
in the federal district where the interstate commission has its
principal offices, to enforce compliance with the provisions of the
compact, its promulgated rules and bylaws, against a member state in
default. The relief sought may include both injunctive relief and
damages. In the event judicial enforcement is necessary the prevailing
party shall be awarded all costs of such litigation including reasonable
attorney's fees.
 (c) The remedies herein shall not be the exclusive remedies of the
interstate commission. The interstate commission may avail itself of any
other remedies available under state law or the regulation of a
profession.
 § 3314. Financing of the interstate commission. 1. The interstate
commission shall pay, or provide for the payment of the reasonable
expenses of its establishment, organization and ongoing activities.
 2. The interstate commission may levy on and collect an annual
assessment from each member state to cover the cost of the operations
and activities of the interstate commission and its staff which must be
in a total amount sufficient to cover the interstate commission's annual
budget as approved each year. The aggregate annual assessment amount
shall be allocated based upon a formula to be determined by the
interstate commission, which shall promulgate a rule binding upon all
member states.
 3. The interstate commission shall not incur obligations of any kind
prior to securing the funds adequate to meet the same; nor shall the
interstate commission pledge the credit of any of the member states,
except by and with the authority of the member state.
 4. The interstate commission shall keep accurate accounts of all
receipts and disbursements. The receipts and disbursements of the
interstate commission shall be subject to the audit and accounting
procedures established under its bylaws. However, all receipts and
disbursements of funds handled by the interstate commission shall be
audited yearly by a certified or licensed public accountant and the
report of the audit shall be included in and become part of the annual
report of the interstate commission.
 § 3315. Member states, effective date and amendment. 1. Any state is
eligible to become a member state.
 2. The compact shall become effective and binding upon legislative
enactment of the compact into law by no less than ten of the states.
Thereafter it shall become effective and binding as to any other member
state upon enactment of the compact into law by that state. The
governors of non-member states or their designees shall be invited to
participate in the activities of the interstate commission on a
nonvoting basis prior to adoption of the compact by all states.
 3. The interstate commission may propose amendments to the compact for
enactment by the member states. No amendment shall become effective and
binding upon the interstate commission and the member states unless and
until it is enacted into law by unanimous consent of the member states.
 § 3316. Withdrawal and dissolution. 1. Once effective, the compact
shall continue in force and remain binding upon each and every member
state; provided that a member state may withdraw from the compact by
specifically repealing the statute, which enacted the compact into law.
 2. Withdrawal from this compact shall be by the enactment of a statute
repealing the same, but shall not take effect until written notice of
the withdrawal has been given by the withdrawing state to the governor
of each other member jurisdiction.
 3. The withdrawing state shall immediately notify the chairperson of
the interstate commission in writing upon the introduction of
legislation repealing this compact in the withdrawing state. The
interstate commission shall notify the other member states of the
withdrawing state's intent to withdraw within sixty days of its receipt
thereof.
 4. The withdrawing state is responsible for all assessments,
obligations and liabilities incurred through the effective date of
withdrawal, including obligations, the performance of which extend
beyond the effective date of withdrawal.
 5. Reinstatement following withdrawal of a member state shall occur
upon the withdrawing state reenacting the compact or upon such later
date as determined by the interstate commission.
 § 3317. Severability and construction. 1. The provisions of this
compact shall be severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence or
provision is deemed unenforceable, the remaining provisions of the
compact shall be enforceable.
 2. The provisions of this compact shall be liberally construed to
effectuate its purposes.
 3. Nothing in this compact shall be construed to prohibit the
applicability of other interstate compacts to which the states are
members.
 § 3318. Binding effect of compact and other laws. 1. All agreements
between the interstate commission and the member states are binding in
accordance with their terms.
 2. In the event any provision of this compact exceeds the
constitutional limits imposed on the legislature of any member state,
such provision shall be ineffective to the extent of the conflict with
the constitutional provision in question in that member state.