 TITLE IV
 TEACHERS AND PUPILS
Article 61 Teachers and supervisory and administrative staff
 (§§ 3001-3036).
 63 Salaries of teachers and supervisors (§§ 3101--3109-A).
 65 Compulsory education and school census (§§ 3201-3243).
 Part I--Compulsory education (§§ 3201-3234).
 Part II--School census (§§ 3240-3243).
 66 Interstate compact on educational opportunity for military
 children (§§ 3300-3318).
 ARTICLE 65
 COMPULSORY EDUCATION AND SCHOOL CENSUS
 PART I
 COMPULSORY EDUCATION
Section 3201. Discrimination on account of race, creed, color or
 national origin prohibited.
 3201-a. Discrimination on account of sex.
 3202. Public schools free to resident pupils; tuition from
 nonresident pupils.
 3203. Selection of school for attendance of children when
 district line intersects a dwelling.
 3204. Instruction required.
 3205. Attendance of minors upon full time day instruction.
 3206. Attendance of minors upon part time instruction.
 3207. Attendance upon evening instruction.
 3207-a. Service of persons seventeen years of age as election
 inspectors or poll clerks.
 3208. Attendance; screening of new entrants; prohibition
 against mandatory medication.
 3208-a. Special proceeding to determine physical capacity of
 student to participate in athletic programs.
 3209. Education of homeless children.
 3209-a. Child abuse prevention.
 3210. Amount and character of required attendance.
 3211. Records of attendance upon instruction.
 3211-a. Reports of reading tests.
 3212. Definition of persons in parental relation and their
 duties; duties of certain other persons.
 3212-a. Records of telephone numbers.
 3213. Supervisors of attendance; attendance teachers;
 attendance officers; appointment, compensation, powers
 and duties.
 3214. Student placement, suspensions and transfers.
 3215. Unlawful employment.
 3215-a. General certification provisions.
 3216. Employment certificates.
 3217. Procedure for issuance of employment certificates.
 3218. Evidence of age.
 3219. Consent of parent or guardian.
 3220. Certificate of physical fitness.
 3221. Pledge of employment.
 3222. Schooling record.
 3223. Duties of employers.
 3224. Temporary services.
 3225. Special employment certificate.
 3226. Farm work permits.
 3227. Street trades.
 3228. Newspaper carrier.
 3230. School district meetings and activities.
 3232. Courts having jurisdiction.
 3233. Penalties.
 3234. Enforcement; withholding state moneys by commissioner of
 education.
 § 3201. Discrimination on account of race, creed, color or national
origin prohibited. 1. No person shall be refused admission into or be
excluded from any public school in the state of New York on account of
race, creed, color or national origin.
 2. Except with the express approval of a board of education having
jurisdiction, a majority of the members of such board having been
elected, no student shall be assigned or compelled to attend any school
on account of race, creed, color or national origin, or for the purpose
of achieving equality in attendance or increased attendance or reduced
attendance, at any school, of persons of one or more particular races,
creeds, colors, or national origins; and no school district, school zone
or attendance unit, by whatever name known, shall be established,
reorganized or maintained for any such purpose, provided that nothing
contained in this section shall prevent the assignment of a pupil in the
manner requested or authorized by his parents or guardian, and further
provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect, in any
way, the right of a religious or denominational educational institution
to select its pupils exclusively or primarily from members of such
religion or denomination or from giving preference to such selection to
such members or to make such selection to its pupils as is calculated to
promote the religious principle for which it is established.
 § 3201-a. Discrimination on account of sex. Notwithstanding any
general, special, local law or rule or regulation of the education
department to the contrary, no person shall be refused admission into or
be excluded from any course of instruction offered in the state public
and high school systems by reason of that person's sex. No person shall
be disqualified from state public and high school athletic teams, by
reason of that person's sex, except pursuant to regulations promulgated
by the state commissioner of education.
 § 3202. Public schools free to resident pupils; tuition from
nonresident pupils. 1. A person over five and under twenty-one years of
age who has not received a high school diploma is entitled to attend the
public schools maintained in the district in which such person resides
without the payment of tuition. Provided further that such person may
continue to attend the public school in such district in the same
manner, if temporarily residing outside the boundaries of the district
when relocation to such temporary residence is a consequence of such
person's parent or person in parental relationship being called to
active military duty, other than training. Notwithstanding any other
provision of law to the contrary, the school district shall not be
required to provide transportation between a temporary residence located
outside of the school district and the school the child attends. A
veteran of any age who shall have served as a member of the armed forces
of the United States and who (a) shall have been discharged therefrom
under conditions other than dishonorable, or (b) has a qualifying
condition, as defined in section one of the veterans' services law, and
has received a discharge other than bad conduct or dishonorable from
such service, or (c) is a discharged LGBT veteran, as defined in section
one of the veterans' services law, and has received a discharge other
than bad conduct or dishonorable from such service, may attend any of
the public schools of the state upon conditions prescribed by the board
of education, and such veterans shall be included in the pupil count for
state aid purposes. A nonveteran under twenty-one years of age who has
received a high school diploma shall be permitted to attend classes in
the schools of the district in which such person resides or in a school
of a board of cooperative educational services upon payment of tuition
under such terms and conditions as shall be established in regulations
promulgated by the commissioner; provided, however, that a school
district may waive the payment of tuition for such nonveteran, but in
any case such a nonveteran who has received a high school diploma shall
not be counted for any state aid purposes. Nothing herein contained
shall, however, require a board of education to admit a child who
becomes five years of age after the school year has commenced unless his
or her birthday occurs on or before the first of December.
 1-a. No pupil over the compulsory attendance age in his or her school
district shall be dropped from enrollment unless he or she has been
absent twenty consecutive school days and the following procedure is
complied with: The principal or superintendent shall schedule and
notify, in writing and at the last known address, both the student and
the person in parental relation to the student of an informal
conference. At the conference the principal or superintendent shall
determine both the reasons for the pupil's absence and whether
reasonable changes in the pupil's educational program would encourage
and facilitate his or her re-entry or continuance of study. The pupil
and the person in parental relation shall be informed orally and in
writing of the pupil's right to re-enroll at any time in the public
school maintained in the district where he or she resides, if otherwise
qualified under this section. If the pupil and the person in parental
relationship fail, after reasonable notice, to attend the informal
conference, the pupil may be dropped from enrollment provided that he or
she and the person in parental relation are notified in writing of the
right to re-enter at any time, if otherwise qualified under this
section.
 2. Nonresidents of a district, if otherwise competent, may be admitted
into the school or schools of a district or city, upon the consent of
the trustees or the board of education, upon terms prescribed by such
trustees or board.
 3. The school authorities of a district or city must deduct from the
tuition of a nonresident pupil, whose parent or guardian owns property
in such district or city and pays a tax thereon for the support of the
schools maintained in such district or city, the amount of such tax.
 4. a. Definitions. For purposes of this subdivision only, the
following definitions shall apply.
 (i) The term "school district of origin" shall mean the school
district within the state of New York in which the child or youth in
foster care was attending a public school or preschool on a tuition-free
basis or was entitled to attend when the social services district or
office of children and family services assumed responsibility for the
placement, support and maintenance of such child or youth, which is
different from the school district of residence.
 (ii) School district of residence. The term "school district of
residence" shall mean the public school district within the state of New
York in which the foster care placement is located, which is different
from the school district of origin.
 b. Except as provided in subdivision five of this section, the cost of
instruction of children in foster care shall be borne by the school
district of origin. Where a school district other than the school
district of origin is designated in accordance with paragraph e of
subdivision two of section thirty-two hundred forty-four of this
article, the cost of instruction shall be borne by the school district
of origin and the tuition paid to the designated school district of
attendance shall be computed as provided in paragraph d of this
subdivision, except that, where the foster care placement receives
program support from a child care institution affiliated with a special
act school district as defined in subdivision eight of section four
thousand one of this chapter, and the designated school district of
attendance, upon the recommendation of its committee on special
education, contracts for such pupil's education pursuant to paragraph c,
d, e, or f of subdivision two of section forty-four hundred one of this
chapter or for a nonresidential placement pursuant to paragraph l of
such subdivision, costs incurred shall be reimbursed in accordance with
paragraph e of this subdivision. Notwithstanding any inconsistent
provision of law, where the permanent residence of a pupil is outside of
the state, the school district in which the pupil was located at the
time the public agency placed such pupil shall be deemed the school
district of origin of such pupil for purposes of this subdivision and
shall be responsible for the cost of instruction of such pupil.
 c. Children cared for in free family homes and children cared for in
family homes at board, when such family homes shall be the actual and
only residence of such children and when such children are not supported
and maintained at the expense of a social services district or of a
state department or agency, shall be deemed residents of the school
district in which such family home is located.
 d. For the purposes of this subdivision, tuition shall be fixed in an
amount which represents the additional operating cost to the designated
school district of attendance resulting from the attendance of a child
for whom tuition is required, computed in accordance with a formula
established by the commissioner of education.
 e. Where the designated school district of attendance for a child or
youth in foster care that receives program support from a child care
institution affiliated with a special act school district, other than
the board of the pupil's school district of origin as defined in
paragraph a of this subdivision, upon the recommendation of its
committee on special education, contracts for the instruction of such
pupil pursuant to paragraph c, d, e, or f of subdivision two of section
forty-four hundred one of this chapter or for a nonresidential placement
pursuant to paragraph l of such subdivision, such board shall submit a
claim to the commissioner for current year reimbursement of costs
incurred for such pupil. The commissioner shall pay such claim in
accordance with the applicable provisions of section thirty-six hundred
nine-b of this chapter and shall be reimbursed by the school district
identified as the pupil's school district of origin as defined in
paragraph a of this subdivision. The commissioner shall deduct the
amount of such claim from moneys otherwise due the school district of
origin.
 f. The identity of the school district of origin shall be established
in accordance with the following procedure:
 (i) Within ten days of the placement of such pupil, the public agency
or its designee shall give written notice of such placement to the board
of education of the school district believed to be the school district
of origin. Such notification shall include the name of the pupil and any
particulars about the pupil that pertain to the identification of the
school district as the school district of origin as defined in paragraph
a of this subdivision.
 (ii) A board of education of a school district which receives
notification pursuant to subparagraph (i) of this paragraph may submit
to the public agency, within ten days of its receipt of such notice,
additional evidence to establish that it is not the pupil's district of
origin as defined in paragraph a of this subdivision. Any evidence so
submitted shall be considered by the agency prior to making its final
determination, which shall be made no later than five days after the
agency's receipt of such additional evidence. In the event such school
district fails to submit additional evidence within such ten day period,
the determination of the public agency shall be final and the
notification provided pursuant to subparagraph (i) of this paragraph
shall be deemed final notification of such determination.
 (iii) If, upon its review, the public agency determines that the
school district notified pursuant to subparagraph (i) of this paragraph
was not the pupil's district of origin, the public agency shall send
notification to the correct school district, in the form prescribed by
subparagraph (i) of this paragraph. Alternatively, if, upon its review,
the public agency determines that the school district originally
designated pursuant to subparagraph (i) of this paragraph is the pupil's
district of origin, the public agency shall notify such district in
writing of its final determination.
 (iv) The board of education of the school district finally determined
by the public agency to be the pupil's school district of origin may
appeal such determination to the commissioner within thirty days of its
receipt of final notification pursuant to this paragraph. Such an appeal
shall be conducted in the same manner as an appeal from the actions of
local school officials pursuant to section three hundred ten of this
chapter, except that the factual allegations of the petitioner shall not
be deemed true in the event the public agency elects not to appear in
the appeal. The petitioner shall join as a party to the appeal any other
school district suspected to be the pupil's actual school district of
origin.
 (v) If the commissioner finds that the school district notified
pursuant to subparagraph (i) or (iii) of this paragraph was not the
pupil's school district of origin as defined in paragraph a of this
subdivision and that the correct school district was not joined as a
party to the appeal, the commissioner shall direct the public agency to
notify the correct school district pursuant to subparagraph (i) of this
paragraph.
 (vi) Notwithstanding any inconsistent provisions of law, during the
pendency of all proceedings to review a denial of financial
responsibility, the commissioner shall issue an interim order assigning
such financial responsibility to the school district or, alternatively,
upon a determination that the public agency failed to make reasonable
efforts to identify the school district of origin of such child, to the
public agency. In the event the public agency fails to provide timely
notice pursuant to subparagraph (i) of this paragraph, or fails to
render its final determination in a timely manner, the public agency
responsible for such pupil's residential placement shall reimburse the
commissioner for the payments made to the district furnishing
instruction pursuant to this paragraph during the pendency of all
proceedings or for the duration of the current school year, whichever is
longer, and the state comptroller shall withhold such amount from any
moneys due the county or the city of New York, on vouchers certified or
approved by the commissioner, in the manner prescribed by law or shall
transfer such amount from the account of such state department or agency
upon certification of the commissioner, and such funds shall be credited
to the general support for public schools local assistance account of
the department.
 (vii) Any final determination or order of the commissioner concerning
the school district of origin of any pupil under this section may only
be reviewed in a proceeding brought in the supreme court pursuant to
article seventy-eight of the civil practice law and rules. In any such
proceeding under such article seventy-eight, the court may grant any
relief authorized by the provisions of section seventy-eight hundred six
of such law and rules and may also, in its discretion, remand the
proceedings to the commissioner. A local social services commissioner or
any state department or agency placing pupils pursuant to this
subdivision is a proper party in any such appeal or proceeding.
 (viii) Upon completion of all proceedings to review the denial of
financial responsibility for the costs of instruction pursuant to this
paragraph, the commissioner shall refund any payments made by a party
cleared of such responsibility and shall collect any payments owed by a
party found to have such responsibility. Where such transactions involve
a school district liable for reimbursement pursuant to paragraph e of
this subdivision, the commissioner shall appropriately increase or
decrease the moneys due a school district by such amount in accordance
with the provisions of section thirty-six hundred nine-b of this
chapter. Where such transactions involve the public agency making a
placement pursuant to this subdivision, the comptroller shall increase
or decrease the moneys due such public agency by such amount upon
certification of the commissioner, transferring such amount to or from
the account of such state department or agency to or from the general
support for public schools local assistance account of the department.
 g. If within ninety days from the entry of an order or judgment of a
court of competent jurisdiction or the receipt of a decision of the
commissioner pursuant to section three hundred ten of this chapter,
determining the responsibility of a school district to pay tuition for a
pupil in accordance with the provisions of paragraph a of this
subdivision or of section five hundred four of the executive law, such
school district has not made payment to the designated school district
of attendance, the school district entitled to such payment may make
application to the commissioner to receive a sum in the amount of such
tuition from the apportionment of public money payable to the school
district required to pay such tuition. The application for payment shall
be accompanied by a certified copy of the order or judgment of a court,
or a copy of the decision of the commissioner, and by proof of service
by first class mail of a copy of such application upon the school
district required to pay such tuition. Unless the school district
required to pay such tuition shall have notified the commissioner of
such payment within thirty days from the receipt of such application,
the commissioner shall withhold an amount equal to the tuition for such
pupil from the public money payable to the school district responsible
for such tuition and shall pay such amount to the school district which
has provided instruction to such pupil. The commissioner is authorized
to promulgate regulations to implement the provisions of this paragraph.
 5. a. Children who reside in a school for individuals with
developmental disabilities operated by the department of mental hygiene
and for whom the department has assumed responsibility for support and
maintenance prior to July one, nineteen hundred seventy-seven and who
are placed in a family home at board, a duly incorporated orphan asylum
or other institution for the care, custody and treatment of children
shall be admitted to the schools of the school district in which such
family home or institution is located. The department is authorized to
reimburse each school district furnishing educational services to such
children for the direct cost of such services in accordance with
regulations promulgated by the commissioner and approved by the director
of the budget. The educational costs for these children shall not be
otherwise aidable or reimbursable.
 b. Children who reside in a school for individuals with developmental
disabilities operated by the department of mental hygiene and for whose
support and maintenance the department assumes responsibility on or
after July one, nineteen hundred seventy-seven and who are thereafter
placed in a family home at board, a duly incorporated orphan asylum or
other institution for the care, custody and treatment of children shall
be admitted to the schools of the school district in which such family
home or institution is located. The department is authorized to
reimburse each school district furnishing educational services to such
children for the direct cost of such services in accordance with
regulations promulgated by the commissioner and approved by the director
of the budget. The educational costs for these children shall not be
otherwise aidable or reimbursable. The school district in which the
child resided at the time the department of mental hygiene assumed
responsibility for the support and maintenance of such child shall
reimburse the education department for its expenditure on behalf of such
child in an amount equal to the school district basic contribution, as
such term is defined in subdivision eight of section forty-four hundred
one of this chapter. The comptroller may deduct from any state funds
which become due to a school district an amount equal to the
reimbursement required to be made by such school district in accordance
with this paragraph, and the amount so deducted shall not be included in
the operating expense of such district for the purpose of computing the
approved operating expense pursuant to paragraph t of subdivision one of
section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter. The department of mental
hygiene shall notify the department of the name of the child, the
location of the family home or institution where the child is to be
placed and the name of the school district in which such child resided
at the time the department of mental hygiene assumed responsibility for
his or her support and maintenance.
 c. (1) The department is authorized to reimburse each school district
furnishing educational services to children residing in schools for
individuals with developmental disabilities operated by the office for
people with developmental disabilities for the direct cost of such
services in accordance with regulations promulgated by the commissioner
and approved by the director of the budget.
 (2) The school district in which each such child resided at the time
the office for people with developmental disabilities assumed
responsibility for the support and maintenance of such child shall
reimburse the department for its expenditures on behalf of such child,
in an amount equal to the school district basic contribution as such
term is defined in subdivision eight of section forty-four hundred one
of this chapter, for any such child admitted to a state school for
individuals with developmental disabilities on or after July first,
nineteen hundred seventy-eight. The comptroller may deduct from any
state funds which become due to a school district an amount equal to the
reimbursement required to be made by such school district in accordance
with this paragraph and the amount so deducted shall not be included in
the approved operating expense of such district for the purpose of
computing the approved operating expenses pursuant to paragraph t of
subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter.
 d. (1) Children who reside in an intermediate care facility for
individuals with developmental disabilities, other than a state operated
school for individuals with developmental disabilities, as defined in
regulations of the office for people with developmental disabilities,
shall be admitted to the public schools, except as otherwise provided in
subparagraph fourteen of this paragraph. The trustees or board of
education of the school district in which such facility is located shall
receive such children in the school or schools of the district for
instruction and for the provision of necessary related services for a
compensation to be fixed by the trustees or board of education, unless
such trustees or board of education shall establish to the satisfaction
of the commissioner that there are valid and sufficient reasons for
refusal to receive such children. Evaluation of the educational needs of
such children and placement in appropriate educational programs shall be
made in accordance with article eighty-nine of this chapter.
 (2) A child who resides in an individualized residential alternative
as defined in regulations of the office for people with developmental
disabilities which is located in a school district other than the school
district in which such child's parent or person in parental relation
resided at the time such child was placed in an institution under the
auspices of such office shall be deemed to reside in an intermediate
care facility for purposes of this subdivision to the extent such child
is enrolled in a home and community based waiver program approved by the
Health Care Financing Administration.
 (3) Such intermediate care facility is authorized to contract with the
trustees or board of education of such school district for the provision
of services, including transportation.
 (4) The education department shall reimburse the school district in
which such intermediate care facility is located for the full cost of
all services, which shall, notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of
law, include transportation services provided pursuant to a contract
authorized by this paragraph. Provided, however, that notwithstanding
any other law, rule or regulation to the contrary, that no reimbursement
shall be payable pursuant to this subparagraph for due process costs
incurred on or after July first, two thousand nine. Such reimbursement
shall be for the period from September first through June thirtieth, and
state reimbursement for July and August programs shall be in accordance
with subdivision one of section forty-four hundred eight of this
chapter. The provisions of subdivision two of such section forty-four
hundred eight shall apply to all July and August programs provided
pursuant to this section.
 (5) The school district in which the child resided at the time of
placement in such intermediate care facility shall reimburse the
education department for its expenditure on behalf of such child in an
amount equal to the school district's basic contribution, as such term
is defined in subdivision eight of section forty-four hundred one of
this article for any child first admitted to such intermediate care
facility, on or after July first, nineteen hundred seventy-nine.
 (6) Upon certification by the commissioner of education, the
comptroller may deduct from any state funds which become due to the
school district an amount equal to the reimbursement required to be made
by such school district in accordance with this paragraph, and the
amount so deducted shall not be included in the operating expense of
such district for the purpose of computing the approved operating
expenses pursuant to paragraph t of subdivision one of section
thirty-six hundred two of this article.
 (7) Within forty-five days of the placement of a child in a school
district, the intermediate care facility shall notify the school
district in which the child resided at time of entrance to the
intermediate care facility and the school district in which the facility
is located. Such notice shall include the name of the child, the
location of the intermediate care facility, and the name of the school
district in which such child resided at the time of placement.
 (8) A board of education of a school district which receives
notification that a child has been placed in an intermediate care
facility for individuals with developmental disabilities may deny
financial responsibility for any child by written notice within twenty
days of such notification to the school district furnishing instruction
and the intermediate care facility.
 (9) An intermediate care facility responsible for placing the child,
the school district furnishing instruction or the parent or guardian of
the child involved may appeal a denial of responsibility to the
commissioner of education. If the commissioner finds that the child was
not a resident of the school district that was notified that the child
was a resident therein, the commissioner shall request the intermediate
care facility to ascertain the correct school district and notify such
school district pursuant to subparagraph six of this paragraph. The
commissioner shall review and determine responsibility for the child in
question. If the commissioner finds that a child has no residence in
this state, he shall determine that there is no local contribution for
such child.
 (10) If the intermediate care facility fails to make a reasonable
effort to identify the residence of such a child, such agency shall be
responsible for the local contribution and, upon notification by the
commissioner of education, shall pay such amount to the commissioner of
education.
 (11) If the intermediate care facility rejects the finding of the
committee on special education of the school district of attendance, or
a finding affirmed or revised on appeal, such facility shall retain
responsibility for payment of the cost of instruction of such child.
 (12) Any final determination or order of the commissioner concerning
residence or placement of any child under this paragraph may only be
reviewed in a proceeding brought in the supreme court pursuant to
article seventy-eight of the civil practice law and rules. In any such
proceeding, the court may grant any relief authorized by the provisions
of section seventy-eight hundred six of such law and rules or may, in
its discretion, remand the proceedings to the commissioner. An
intermediate care facility attempting to place a child pursuant to this
paragraph shall be considered a proper party to any such proceeding.
 (13) The school district providing educational services to children
placed pursuant to this paragraph shall provide a report on the status
of each such child with a handicapping condition annually to the
committee on special education of the school district in which the child
resided at the time of admission to the intermediate care facility for
individuals with developmental disabilities. Such report shall also be
sent to the parent or guardian of the child and the office for people
with developmental disabilities.
 (14) The board of education responsible for providing appropriate
educational services for a child receiving care in an intermediate care
facility developed pursuant to the residential school bed development
program, as authorized by chapter fifty-four of the laws of nineteen
hundred eighty-five or any subsequent enactment extending such program,
shall be the board of education of the school district in which such
child would be deemed to reside but for such child's placement in such
an intermediate care facility. The department shall reimburse such
school district of residence for all nonfederally reimbursable costs of
such educational services in accordance with subparagraph four of this
paragraph as if such district were the school district in which the
intermediate care facility is located, and such school district of
residence shall be responsible for reimbursement of the department for
its expenditure on behalf of the child in an amount equal to the school
district basic contribution, as defined in subdivision eight of section
four thousand four hundred one of this chapter. The comptroller may
deduct the amount of such reimbursement from any state funds due the
district in the manner prescribed in subparagraph six of this paragraph.
 e. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph a of subdivision five
of section thirty-six hundred four of this chapter, the commissioner
shall be authorized to grant a waiver excusing the late filing of claims
submitted for costs incurred pursuant to this subdivision, upon findings
that the school district has submitted a timely request for a waiver and
has submitted proof satisfactory to the commissioner that the delay in
filing was caused by a party other than the school district. A request
for such a waiver, together with all supporting documentation, shall be
submitted to the commissioner within sixty days after the date on which
this paragraph was enacted, or within fourteen months after the end of
the school year in which services were provided pursuant to this
subdivision, whichever is later.
 6. Except as provided in subdivision five of this section or by
article eighty-one of this chapter, children cared for in a hospital or
other institution for the care, custody and treatment of children, other
than a school and excepting children of the officers and employees of
such hospital or institution, shall not, by reason of their presence in
such hospital or institution, be deemed to be residents of the school
district in which such hospital or institution is located. The trustees
or board of education of the school district of their residence shall
provide educational services for such children. Such services may be
provided by a tutor employed by the district, by contract with a school
connected with such hospital or institution, or by contract with the
local public school district in which such hospital or institution is
located. Such contracts shall be limited to the cost of educational
services and shall not include maintenance or medical services.
Provided, however, if such children are supported and maintained at the
expense of a social services district, the cost of said instruction
shall be paid by the social services district which is liable for
payment of the cost of their support and maintenance. In the case of
hospitals or institutions located in the state of New York, the trustees
or board of education of a school district in which such a hospital or
institution is located shall receive such children in the school or
schools of the district for instruction for a compensation to be fixed
by the trustee or board of education, unless such trustees or board of
education shall establish to the satisfaction of the commissioner of
education that there are valid and sufficient reasons for refusal to
receive such children.
 6-a. Notwithstanding subdivision six of this section or any other law
to the contrary, the commissioner of the office of children and family
services shall be responsible for the secular education of youth under
the jurisdiction of the office and may contract for such education with
the trustees or board of education of the school district wherein a
facility for the residential care of such youth is located or with the
board of cooperative educational services at which any such school
district is a component district for special education programs, related
services and career and technical education services and music, art and
foreign language programs in accordance with subparagraph eight of
paragraph (h) of subdivision four of section nineteen hundred fifty of
this chapter. A youth attending a local public school while in residence
at such facility shall be deemed a resident of the school district where
his parent or guardian resides at the commencement of each school year
for the purpose of determining which school district shall be
responsible for the youth's tuition pursuant to section five hundred
four of the executive law.
 7. Youth incarcerated in county correctional facilities or youth
shelters. a. A person under twenty-one years of age who has not received
a high school diploma and who is incarcerated in a correctional facility
maintained by a county or by the city of New York or in a youth shelter
is eligible for educational services pursuant to this subdivision and in
accordance with the regulations of the commissioner. Such services shall
be provided by the school district in which the facility or youth
shelter is located, within the limits of the funds allocated by the
commissioner for such purposes pursuant to section thirty-six hundred
two of this chapter and pursuant to a plan approved by the commissioner.
School districts shall submit such plan by July fifteenth of each school
year. Boards of education are authorized to contract for the provision
of such educational services by a board of cooperative educational
services or by another public school district.
 b. Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, the school district
in which the child resided at the time of the child's commitment to the
custody of the sheriff or local commissioner of corrections or youth
shelter shall reimburse the education department for its expenditure for
the full time equivalent attendance of such child pursuant to
subdivision thirteen of section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter
on behalf of such child, in an amount equal to the product of such full
time equivalent attendance and the school district basic contribution,
as such term is defined in subdivision eight of section forty-four
hundred one of this chapter, provided, however, that such basic
contribution shall be multiplied by the full time equivalent attendance
multiplied by one hundred twenty per centum for such children attending
programs which operate between July first and June thirtieth. If at the
applicable time specified in this paragraph a school district other than
the school district in which the child resides is responsible for the
cost of instruction of the child or for reimbursement of the state for
its expenditure on behalf of the child pursuant to any provision of this
chapter, then such other school district shall be responsible for
reimbursement of the education department in accordance with this
paragraph. Upon certification by the commissioner, the comptroller shall
deduct from any state funds which become due to a school district an
amount equal to the reimbursement required to be made by such school
district in accordance with this paragraph, and the amount so deducted
shall not be included in the operating expense of such district for the
purpose of computing the approved operating expense pursuant to
paragraph t of subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this
chapter.
 c. After admission of a child eligible for educational services
pursuant to this subdivision, but within a time prescribed by the
commissioner in regulations, the correctional facility maintained by the
county or the city of New York shall furnish such child with information
concerning the availability of such educational services and shall
submit a request for educational services to the school district in
which the facility is located. Such request shall conform to
requirements prescribed by the commissioner by regulation in
consultation with the state commission of correction and shall include,
but shall not be limited to, notice of: the name of the child, the name
and location of the facility in which such child is incarcerated, the
last grade completed by the child as reported by the child, the
anticipated duration of the incarceration and the last known residence
of such child at the time of the child's commitment to custody. The
school district in which the facility is located shall notify other
appropriate agencies, including, but not limited to, the education
department and the school district identified as being responsible for
the educational costs of such child pursuant to paragraph b of this
subdivision, that such a request for educational services has been
received. The commissioner shall promulgate regulations specifying the
time within which such notice shall be provided and the contents of such
notice, and establishing a procedure by which a school district may
request the commissioner to review its identification as the school
district responsible for the educational costs of such child.
 d. Upon release or discharge of a child eligible for educational
services pursuant to this subdivision, the correctional facility shall
apprise such child that further educational services may be available
pursuant to this section through the school district in which the child
resides or in which the child is otherwise entitled to attend school,
and shall, at the request of the student, notify such district of the
child's desire to enroll in such district.
 e. The state commission of correction shall promulgate rules and
regulations in consultation with the commissioner which shall require
each correctional facility operated by a county or the city of New York
to cooperate with the school district or board of cooperative
educational services providing educational services and to comply with
the requirements of this subdivision.
 f. As used in this subdivision, "youth shelter" shall mean an
alternative residential facility for the incarceration of youths between
the ages of sixteen and twenty-one who are remanded by the criminal
courts.
 8. Homeless children. A homeless child, as defined in subdivision one
of section thirty-two hundred nine of this article, over the age of five
and under twenty-one years of age, who has not received a high school
diploma, shall be entitled to attend a public school without the payment
of tuition, in accordance with the provisions of section thirty-two
hundred nine of this article.
 § 3203. Selection of school for attendance of children when district
line intersects a dwelling. 1. The owner of taxable property that is so
located that the boundary line between two school districts intersects
(a) the dwelling on said property or (b), in the case of an
owner-occupied single family dwelling unit, the property on which the
dwelling unit is located may designate the school in either of such
districts to which the children lawfully residing in said dwelling on
said property shall attend by filing with the district clerk of each of
such districts a notice of such designation on or before August first in
any year and thereafter or, in the case of a single family unit, when
such dwelling unit is built or when its owner-occupant's first child
commences attending school from such residence and thereafter whenever
the ownership of such taxable property changes hands in an arms length
transaction or, likewise, the first child of its new owner-occupant
first commences attending school from such residence and, until a
subsequent designation shall be made and filed, such children shall be
deemed to be resident children of the district designated and shall be
entitled to the school privileges of such district as resident pupils
without the payment of tuition.
 2. School taxes on such property shall continue to be levied and
collected without reference to the aforesaid designation, but the school
authorities of the district that levies and collects a tax upon such
property and does not furnish instructional service to the children
residing on such property shall pay to the district designated, in which
such children are received and instructed, the amount of the tax on such
property so levied and collected. If any such district shall fail or
refuse on demand to pay the amount of any tax so collected, the school
authorities of the district designated and furnishing the instructional
service may recover the amount in an action therefor.
 3. A designation made as provided in this section shall continue until
a new designation is made or until the district superintendent or
superintendents having jurisdiction over the districts affected shall
otherwise order in a proceeding for the alteration of the boundaries of
the districts, but no subsequent designation may be made in any school
year after August first until the close of that school year.
 § 3204. Instruction required. 1. Place of instruction. A minor
required to attend upon instruction by the provisions of part one of
this article may attend at a public school or elsewhere. The
requirements of this section shall apply to such a minor, irrespective
of the place of instruction.
 2. Quality and language of instruction; text-books. (i) Instruction
may be given only by a competent teacher. In the teaching of the
subjects of instruction prescribed by this section, English shall be the
language of instruction, and text-books used shall be written in
English, except that for a period of three years, which period may be
extended by the commissioner with respect to individual pupils, upon
application therefor by the appropriate school authorities, to a period
not in excess of six years, from the date of enrollment in school,
pupils who, by reason of foreign birth or ancestry have limited English
proficiency, shall be provided with instructional programs as specified
in subdivision two-a of this section and the regulations of the
commissioner. The purpose of providing such pupils with instruction
shall be to enable them to develop academically while achieving
competence in the English language. Instruction given to a minor
elsewhere than at a public school shall be at least substantially
equivalent to the instruction given to minors of like age and
attainments at the public schools of the city or district where the
minor resides.
 (ii) For purposes of considering substantial equivalence pursuant to
this subdivision for nonpublic elementary and middle schools that are:
(1) non-profit corporations, (2) have a bi-lingual program, and (3) have
an educational program that extends from no later than nine a.m. until
no earlier than four p.m. for grades one through three, and no earlier
than five thirty p.m. for grades four through eight, on the majority of
weekdays, the department shall consider the following, but not limited
to: if the curriculum provides academically rigorous instruction that
develops critical thinking skills in the school's students, taking into
account the entirety of the curriculum, over the course of elementary
and middle school, including instruction in English that will prepare
pupils to read fiction and nonfiction text for information and to use
that information to construct written essays that state a point of view
or support an argument; instruction in mathematics that will prepare
pupils to solve real world problems using both number sense and fluency
with mathematical functions and operations; instruction in history by
being able to interpret and analyze primary text to identify and explore
important events in history, to construct written arguments using the
supporting information they get from primary source material,
demonstrate an understating of the role of geography and economics in
the actions of world civilizations, and an understanding of civics and
the responsibilities of citizens in world communities; and instruction
in science by learning how to gather, analyze and interpret observable
data to make informed decisions and solve problems mathematically, using
deductive and inductive reasoning to support a hypothesis, and how to
differentiate between correlational and causal relationships.
 (iii) For purposes of considering substantial equivalence pursuant to
this subdivision for nonpublic high schools that: (1) are established
for pupils in high school who have graduated from an elementary school
that provides instruction as described in this section, (2) are a
non-profit corporation, (3) have a bi-lingual program, and (4) have an
educational program that extends from no later than nine a.m. until no
earlier than six p.m. on the majority of weekdays the department shall
consider the following but not limited to: if the curriculum provides
academically rigorous instruction that develops critical thinking skills
in the school's students, the outcomes of which, taking into account the
entirety of the curriculum, result in a sound basic education.
 (iv) Nothing herein shall be construed to entitle or permit any school
to receive an increase in mandated services aid pursuant to 8 NYCRR 176
on account of providing a longer school day.
 (v) The commissioner shall be the entity that determines whether
nonpublic elementary and secondary schools are in compliance with the
academic requirements set forth in paragraphs (ii) and (iii) of this
subdivision.
 2-a. Instructional programs for pupils of limited English proficiency.
1. Each school district which is receiving total foundation aid shall
develop a comprehensive plan consistent with requirements as the
commissioner may establish in regulations to meet the educational needs
of pupils of limited English proficiency. Such plan shall include a
description of the programs, activities and services used to meet the
educational needs of pupils of limited English proficiency that comply
with the regulations of the commissioner governing such programs. By
July first, two thousand eight, the commissioner shall develop
guidelines for the enhancement of services for such pupils, which shall
include but not be limited to the replication of existing model programs
that have been effective in meeting the needs of such pupils, and shall
establish eligibility standards for incentive grants to improve services
to such pupils and the competitive process that will be used to award
such grants. On or before March first of each year commencing with March
first, two thousand nine, the commissioner shall submit a report to the
governor, the director of the budget, the speaker of the assembly, the
temporary president of the senate, the chair of the fiscal committees of
the senate and assembly on the expenditure of state, local and federal
funds by school districts in the prior school year on programs,
activities and services for pupils of limited English proficiency, along
with recommendations for improvement of such programs.
 2. The board of education of each school district receiving such funds
shall provide a program of bilingual education or English as a second
language for eligible pupils and may contract with a board of
cooperative educational services or another school district to provide
such program, provided that in a city having a population of one million
or more, the community school boards shall provide such program in the
schools within their jurisdiction.
 3. Eligibility for such programs shall be based on the following
criteria. A pupil who by reason of foreign birth or ancestry speaks a
language other than English, and either understands and speaks little or
no English, or who has been identified by any English language
assessment instrument approved by the commissioner as a pupil of limited
English proficiency, shall receive a program of bilingual education or
English as a second language in accordance with standards established by
the commissioner. A pupil's proficiency in the English language shall be
measured annually by such language assessment instrument in order to
determine further participation in bilingual education or English as a
second language program in accordance with standards established by the
commissioner, subject to the provisions of subdivision two of this
section. The parent or guardian of a pupil designated as limited English
proficient shall be informed by the local school authorities of the
pupil's placement in an instructional program.
 4. Bilingual programs shall be designed to:
 (a) provide content instruction for children of limited English
proficiency using the child's native language and English;
 (b) provide native language instruction; and
 (c) provide English as a second language instruction.
 5. English as a second language program shall be designed to develop
skills in listening, speaking, reading and writing the English language,
and assist in the learning of content areas through monolingual
instruction in English.
 6. The commissioner shall establish, by regulation, standards for
approved programs for pupils of limited English proficiency.
 7. After a pupil is enrolled in a regular instructional program, he
may receive additional instruction in his native language.
 8. A school district which provides a program of bilingual education
or English as a second language designed to meet the needs of pupils of
limited English proficiency, shall be empowered to:
 (a) impart to pupils a knowledge of the history and culture associated
with their native languages;
 (b) establish closer cooperation between the school and the home;
 (c) provide early childhood educational programs related to the
purposes of this section and designed to improve the potential for
profitable learning activities by children;
 (d) offer adult education programs related to the purposes of this
section, particularly for parents of pupils with limited English
proficiency;
 (e) provide programs designed for dropouts or potential dropouts
having need of such programs; and
 (f) provide other activities deemed desirable to further the purposes
of this section.
 9. Any duly authorized local educational agency or agencies is hereby
empowered to make application for any grant or grants in furtherance of
this section under any public law enacted by the United States Congress.
 2-b. Gifted instruction in schools. The governing board of any school
district and any community school district is hereby empowered to
determine the circumstances wherein instruction shall be given to meet
the special needs of gifted pupils as provided in this chapter.
 3. Courses of study. a. (1) The course of study for the first eight
years of full time public day schools shall provide for instruction in
at least the twelve common school branches of arithmetic, reading,
spelling, writing, the English language, geography, United States
history, civics, hygiene, physical training, the history of New York
state and science.
 (2) The courses of study and of specialized training beyond the first
eight years of full time public day schools shall provide for
instruction in at least the English language and its use, in civics,
hygiene, physical training, and American history including the
principles of government proclaimed in the Declaration of Independence
and established by the constitution of the United States.
 (3) The courses of study beyond the first eight years of full time
public day schools may provide a program for a course in "communism and
its methods and its destructive effects".
 b. For part time day schools. The course of study of a part time
public day school shall include such subjects as will enlarge the civic
and vocational intelligence and skill of the minors required to attend.
 c. For evening schools. In a public evening school instruction shall
be given in at least speaking, reading, and writing English.
 d. For parental schools. In a parental school provision shall be made
for vocational training and for instruction in other subjects
appropriate to the minor's age and attainments.
 e. Changes in courses of study. The state education department shall
have power to alter the subjects of instruction as prescribed in this
section.
 4. Length of school sessions. a. A full time day school or class,
except as otherwise prescribed, shall be in session for not less than
one hundred eighty days each year, exclusive of legal holidays that
occur during the term of said school and exclusive of Saturdays.
 b. A part time day school or class shall be in session each year for
at least four hours of each week during which the full time day schools
are in session.
 c. Evening schools shall be in session each year as follows:
 (1) In cities having a population of one hundred thousand or more, on
at least one hundred nights;
 (2) In cities having a population of fifty thousand but less than one
hundred thousand, on at least seventy-five nights;
 (3) In each other city, and in each school district where twenty or
more persons from seventeen to twenty-one years of age are required to
attend upon evening instruction, on at least fifty nights.
 4-a. Special education. Every pupil, having been determined to be a
"child with a handicapping condition" by a committee on the handicapped,
shall be offered an opportunity to receive the benefits of an
appropriate public education as prescribed in article eighty-nine of
this chapter.
 4-b. The board of education or the board of trustees of each school
district shall establish a policy and adopt procedures to allow any
student in such district to participate in the graduation ceremony of
the student's high school graduating class and all related activities if
such student has been awarded a skills and achievement commencement
credential or career development and occupational studies commencement
credential but has not otherwise qualified for a regents or local
diploma. The policy and procedures shall provide annual written notice
to all students and their parents or guardians about the school
district's policy and procedures adopted in accordance with this
subdivision. Nothing in this subdivision shall compel a student to
participate in the high school graduation ceremony and activities. For
purposes of this subdivision, a student's high school graduating class
shall be the twelfth grade class with which such student entered into
ninth grade.
 5. Subject to rules and regulations of the board of regents, a pupil
may, consistent with the requirements of public education and public
health, be excused from such study of health and hygiene as conflicts
with the religion of his parents or guardian. Such conflict must be
certified by a proper representative of their religion as defined by
section two of the religious corporations law.
 6. Notwithstanding any law, rule, or regulation to the contrary:
 (a) Instruction at a nonpublic school satisfies all the requirements
of this part applicable to instruction, including subdivision two of
this section, subdivision two of section thirty-two hundred ten of this
part, and any other requirements in this chapter applicable to
instruction, and shall thereby qualify as and be finally recognized to
be at least substantially equivalent to the instruction given to minors
of like age and attainments at the public schools of the city or
district where the minor resides, if such nonpublic school is:
 (i) a registered high school or nonpublic school serving grades one
through eight that has a registered high school;
 (ii) a state-approved private special education school or
state-operated or state-supported school established by the state
legislature pursuant to article eighty-five, eighty-seven or
eighty-eight of this chapter;
 (iii) a nonpublic school that is accredited or is awarded provisional
status by an accreditation body approved by the commissioner for
purposes of demonstrating compliance with the requirements of this
section, except that such provisional status shall only apply for the
first five years that such nonpublic school has been awarded provisional
status. An accreditation body shall have the knowledge and expertise to
properly evaluate the entirety of the day's curriculum of those schools
that it accredits and shall use a peer review process that includes
evaluation by leaders of similar nonpublic schools, appropriately train
all staff and peer reviewers who are involved in the accreditation
process, accredit based on publicly accessible documented standards,
perform a comprehensive onsite visit of any school seeking accreditation
while such school is in session, and periodically conduct a combination
of interim and full accreditation reviews of the nonpublic schools which
it accredits during at least a ten-year period. Additionally, such
accreditation body shall require nonpublic schools seeking accreditation
to have curriculum that is informed by research, document individual
student progress, and have mechanisms for monitoring, assessing, and
providing feedback on student progress. The commissioner may, at any
time, revoke such commissioner's approval of an accreditation body for
cause, upon notice and hearing;
 (iv) a nonpublic school that participates in the international
baccalaureate program;
 (v) a nonpublic school whose instruction is approved by the United
States government for instruction on a military base or service academy;
 (vi) a nonpublic school in which the percentage of students who score
"proficient" on a year-end summative or cumulative assessment and taken
in the same subject areas and for the same grade levels as the annual
New York state testing program to comply with the federal Every Student
Succeeds Act is equal to or greater than one of the following metrics,
and such school has declared the intended use of such metric at the
beginning of the school year:
 (1) the percentage of similarly situated public school students
scoring at the "proficient" level on New York state testing program
tests taken in the same subject areas and grade levels in the school
district that serves the same geographic area as the nonpublic school is
located; or
 (2) the percentage of similarly situated public school students
statewide scoring at the "proficient" level on New York state testing
program tests taken in the same subject areas and grade levels; or
 (vii) a nonpublic school that administers a year-end summative or
cumulative assessment taken in substantially the same subject areas and
same grade levels as the annual New York state testing program to comply
with the federal Every Student Succeeds Act, has a three-year average
participation rate that is equal to or greater than the three-year
statewide average participation rate, and uses the results to assess the
school's educational program and to seek to improve instruction and its
students' performance on such tests.
 (a-1) A nonpublic school's satisfaction of one or more criteria listed
in paragraph (a) of this subdivision in one school year shall not
automatically be deemed satisfaction of such criteria in later school
years if such school ceases to satisfy such criteria in such later
years.
 (b) (i) For purposes of subparagraphs (vi) and (vii) of paragraph (a)
of this subdivision, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
 (1) "Year-end summative or cumulative assessment" shall mean one or
more assessments selected by the nonpublic school that qualifies as (A)
a New York state testing program test; (B) an assessment approved by the
commissioner; or (C) a nationally-recognized, commercially published
norm-referenced achievement test that is: (I) recognized and used in at
least three other states; (II) selected by the nonpublic school from one
of the following: the Iowa Test of Basic Skills, the California
Achievement Test, the Stanford Achievement Test, the Comprehensive Test
of Basic Skills, the Metropolitan Achievement Test, i-Ready, a state
education department test, or; (III) another test approved by the state
education department. All assessments and materials used in connection
with such assessments shall be culturally competent and respectful of
cultural curricula and pedagogy. A nonpublic school shall not need to
use the same year-end summative or cumulative assessment across all
grades or years and may change assessments used at any time.
 (2) "Proficient" shall mean, as applicable, (A) a score of
"proficient" on a New York state testing program test; (B) a score
determined by the commissioner for an assessment approved by the
commissioner; or (C) a score of at least the thirty-third percentile on
a nationally-recognized, commercially published norm-referenced
achievement test, unless the commissioner approves a lower percentage
for such tests.
 (ii) To rely on subparagraph (vi) of paragraph (a) of this
subdivision, a nonpublic school shall demonstrate a student
participation rate on its year-end summative or cumulative assessment or
assessments equal to or greater than the three-year average statewide
participation rate.
 (iii) To allow for adequate preparation of students in connection with
subparagraphs (vi) and (vii) of paragraph (a) of this subdivision, a
phase-in period shall be established. During such phase-in period, a
nonpublic school and its affiliated schools shall be deemed to have met
the criteria in subparagraphs (vi) and (vii) of paragraph (a) of this
subdivision, for purposes of all components of this subdivision. Such
phase-in status shall commence upon the effective date of this
subdivision, including prior to the administration of any year-end
summative or cumulative assessment, and shall continue until the first
cohort entering second grade at such nonpublic school after such
effective date completes the year-end summative or cumulative assessment
for the third grade and shall further continue in the subsequent years,
as long as such nonpublic school continues administering a year-end
summative or cumulative assessment for the third grade and adds one
additional, higher grade each year until such nonpublic school is
administering a year-end summative or cumulative assessment for grades
three through ten. The phase-in period shall end after the two thousand
thirty-two--two thousand thirty-three school year. Prior to such cohorts
tested using year-end summative or cumulative assessments under
subparagraphs (vi) and (vii) of paragraph (a) of this subdivision, such
cohorts may be provided with practice and/or sample testing questions to
begin familiarizing themselves with standardized testing methodology.
The phase-in period shall be applicable to all nonpublic schools, and it
shall only be necessary for a nonpublic school to administer year-end
summative or cumulative assessments for the phased-in grades,
notwithstanding the nonpublic school's past or current administration of
such assessments for other grades.
 (iv) If a nonpublic school meets, or has been deemed pursuant to
subparagraph (iii) of this paragraph to have met, the criteria in
subparagraph (vi) or (vii) of paragraph (a) of this subdivision, then
during the phase-in period of subparagraph (iii) of this paragraph, all
affiliated schools shall be deemed to have met such criteria. Affiliated
schools are those with one of the following: the same office of
religious and independent school support (ORISS) code under a single
basic educational data system (BEDS) code; or the same organization with
a different BEDS code in the same location; or the same ORISS code and
leadership but may have physical buildings in different locations.
During the phase-in period of subparagraph (iii) of this paragraph, a
nonpublic school which meets the criteria of subparagraph (vii) of
paragraph (a) of this subdivision shall include its affiliated schools
when using the results of the year-end summative or cumulative
assessment to assess educational programming and improve instruction and
students' performance on such tests. During the phase-in period of
subparagraph (iii) of this paragraph, if a nonpublic school meets the
criteria in subparagraph (iii) of paragraph (a) of this subdivision with
respect to provisional status then all affiliated schools shall be
deemed to have met such criteria. If a nonpublic high school meets the
criteria in subparagraph (i) or (vi) of paragraph (a) of this
subdivision, then all affiliated middle or elementary schools shall be
deemed to have met such criteria.
 (c) Nothing in this subdivision shall preclude the commissioner from
defining by rule or regulation alternative criteria which may also be
used to demonstrate that instruction at a nonpublic school is in
compliance with this section. Compliance with this section may be
demonstrated through any one or more of the criteria established in this
subdivision and shall thereby qualify as and be finally recognized to be
substantially equivalent without any further requirements. A nonpublic
school's satisfaction of one or more criteria in one school year shall
not automatically be deemed satisfaction of such criteria in later
school years if such school ceases to satisfy such criteria in such
later years. A nonpublic school may elect at any time to select
different criteria. A nonpublic school's omission to satisfy one or more
criteria shall not affect a nonpublic school's ability to satisfy
another criteria, or such criteria at a later date.
 § 3205. Attendance of minors upon full time day instruction. 1. a. In
each school district of the state, each minor from six to sixteen years
of age shall attend upon full time instruction.
 b. Each minor from six to sixteen years of age on an Indian
reservation shall attend upon full time day instruction.
 c. For purposes of this article, a minor who becomes six years of age
on or before the first of December in any school year shall be required
to attend upon full time instruction from the first day that the
appropriate public schools are in session in September of such school
year, and a minor who becomes six years of age after the first of
December in any school year shall be required to attend upon full time
instruction from the first day of session in the following September;
and, except as otherwise provided in subdivision three of this section,
shall be required to remain in attendance until the last day of session
in the school year in which the minor becomes sixteen years of age.
 2. Exceptions. a. A minor who has completed a four-year high school
course of study shall not be subject to the provisions of part one of
this article in respect to required attendance upon instruction.
 b. A minor for whom application for a full-time employment certificate
has been made and who is eligible therefor may, though unemployed, be
permitted to attend part time school not less than twenty hours per week
instead of full time school.
 c. The board of education of every school district within the state is
hereby authorized to require minors who are five years of age on or
before December first to attend kindergarten instruction. However, the
provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to:
 (i) Minors whose parents elect not to enroll their children in school
until the following September.
 (ii) Students enrolled in non-public schools or in home instruction.
 3. In each school district, the board of education shall have power to
require minors from sixteen to seventeen years of age who are not
employed to attend upon full time day instruction until the last day of
session in the school year in which the student becomes seventeen years
of age.
 § 3206. Attendance of minors upon part time instruction. 1. The board
of education of a city or district shall have power to require each
employed minor from sixteen to seventeen years of age to attend upon
part time instruction in accordance with the provisions of this section.
 2. A minor who is a graduate of a four-year high school course of
study shall not be required to attend upon part time instruction.
 3. The attendance of an employed minor required to attend upon part
time instruction by a board of education in accordance with the
provisions of this section shall be for not less than four, nor more
than eight hours per week, and on such day or days of the week as the
school authorities may determine.
 4. An employed minor, while temporarily unemployed, or a minor
attending part time school under the provisions of subdivision two,
paragraph b, of section thirty-two hundred five, required to attend part
time instruction by a board of education in accordance with the
provisions of this section, shall attend upon part time instruction for
not less than twenty hours a week. An employed minor shall be deemed to
be temporarily unemployed until he reenters lawful employment or attends
upon full time day instruction.
 5. The absence of an employed minor during a rush season may be
permitted by the school authorities on condition that the minor attend a
greater number of hours per week thereafter until the absence is made
up, and provided that the minor's employer is a party to such an
agreement.
 6. An absence due to unlawful cause may be required to be made up by
attendance in excess of the number of hours per week otherwise required.
 7. The school authorities of a city or district shall have power after
a hearing to establish a half-time system or program of employment and
required attendance at part time schools for minors who are included by
the provisions of this section.
 8. Each minor above the age of sixteen years and under the age of
eighteen years, who is not in regular full-time day attendance at a
public, private or parochial school or who is regularly and lawfully
employed in some occupation or service, unless such minor has completed
a four year secondary course of instruction approved by the regents of
the university, shall attend a part-time school or class in the city or
district in which such minor resides or may be employed, provided the
board of education of such city or district has enacted appropriate
rules and regulations requiring attendance at such part-time schools
under the provisions of section forty-six hundred one. Such attendance
shall be subject to the provisions of article ninety-three of this
chapter.
 § 3207. Attendance upon evening instruction. In each city and school
district in which evening instruction is provided, under the provisions
of part one of this article, each person from seventeen to twenty-one
years of age who is unable to speak, read and write English as required
for the completion of the fifth year of the elementary school course of
study, and who is not attending upon equivalent day instruction, shall
attend upon such evening instruction.
 § 3207-a. Service of persons seventeen years of age as election
inspectors or poll clerks. A school district may permit an enrolled
student, with the consent of such student's parent, guardian, or other
person in parental relation, to serve as an election inspector or poll
clerk pursuant to section 3-400 of the election law (and other
applicable provisions of this chapter and the labor law). For the
purposes of attendance, any student so serving while school is in
session shall be recorded as in attendance.
 * § 3208. Attendance; screening of new entrants; prohibition against
mandatory medication. 1. A person included by the provisions of this
part shall be required to attend upon instruction only if in proper
mental and physical condition.
 2. A person whose mental or physical condition is such that his or her
attendance upon instruction under the provisions of this part would
endanger the health or safety of such person or of others shall not be
permitted to attend, provided that nothing in this section shall be
construed to authorize a denial of access to education based on
disability in violation of state or federal law.
 3. If a person's mental or physical condition, by virtue of which he
or she is not required or permitted to attend upon instruction, is due
to a mental or physical condition which may be remedied by the taking of
reasonable measures, such mental or physical condition shall justify
only the temporary failure of the person to attend.
 4. The determination of mental or physical condition under the
provisions of this part shall be based upon actual examination made by a
person or persons qualified by appropriate training and experience, in
accordance with regulations of the department. The department shall
designate persons having the required qualifications to make such mental
or physical examinations on behalf of any local school authorities,
except that in a city having a population of one million or more the
superintendent of schools shall designate such persons.
 4-a. Officers or employees of the state, a school district, a board of
cooperative educational services, a charter school, an approved private
school for the education of students with disabilities approved pursuant
to paragraph e, f, g or h of subdivision two of section forty-four
hundred one of this chapter, an approved provider of preschool special
education approved pursuant to section forty-four hundred ten of this
chapter or a state-supported school operating pursuant to article
forty-five of this chapter, shall be prohibited from requiring a child
who is entitled to attend school pursuant to subdivision one of section
thirty-two hundred two of this part to obtain a prescription for a
substance covered by the federal controlled substances act, section
eight hundred one of title twenty-one of the United States code, et
seq., as a condition of attending school, receiving an evaluation or
reevaluation pursuant to article eighty-nine of this chapter or any
other provision of law relating to students with disabilities or
receiving special education programs or services.
 5. a. Each board of education or trustees of each school district
shall provide for the screening of every new entrant to school to
determine which pupils are or may be children with disabilities or
gifted children, as well as all pupils who score below level two on
either the third grade English language arts or mathematics assessments
for New York state elementary schools, in accordance with regulations of
the commissioner to determine whether such pupils may have disabilities.
 b. Such screening shall include, but not be limited to:
 (1) A physical examination pursuant to the provisions of sections nine
hundred one, nine hundred three and nine hundred four of this chapter,
including proof of immunization as required by section twenty-one
hundred sixty-four of the public health law.
 (2) A language development assessment.
 c. If such screening indicates a suspected disability, which may
require the provision of special education services or programs, a
referral shall be made to the committee on special education.
 d. If such screening indicates a possibly gifted child, the name and
finding shall be reported to the superintendent of schools of such
district and to the parent or legal guardian of such child. Such
notification shall not be construed as an entitlement for services for
any such child identified as possibly gifted.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2027
 * § 3208. Attendance; proper mental and physical condition. 1. A
person included by the provisions of part one of this article shall be
required to attend upon instruction only if in proper mental and
physical condition.
 2. A person whose mental or physical condition is such that his
attendance upon instruction under the provisions of part one of this
article would endanger the health or safety of himself or of others
shall not be permitted to attend.
 3. If a person's mental or physical condition, by virtue of which he
is not required or permitted to attend upon instruction, is due to
physical defects or to a physical condition which may be remedied by the
taking of reasonable measures, such mental or physical condition shall
justify only the temporary failure of the person to attend.
 4. The determination of mental or physical condition under the
provisions of part one of this article shall be based upon actual
examination made by a person or persons qualified by appropriate
training and experience, in accordance with regulations of the state
education department. The state education department shall designate
persons having the required qualifications to make such mental or
physical examinations on behalf of any local school authorities, except
that in a city having a population of one million or more the
superintendent of schools shall designate such persons.
 5. a. Each board of education or trustees of each school district
shall provide for the screening of every new entrant to school to
determine which pupils are or may be children with handicapping
conditions or gifted, as well as all pupils who score below level two on
either the third grade reading or mathematics tests for New York state
elementary schools and all students who obtain a comparable percentile
score on the regents preliminary competency test, in accordance with
regulations of the commissioner to determine whether such pupils may
have handicapping conditions.
 b. Such screening shall include, but not be limited to:
 (1) A physical examination pursuant to the provisions of sections nine
hundred one, nine hundred three and nine hundred four of this chapter,
including proof of immunization as required by section twenty-one
hundred sixty-four of the public health law.
 (2) A language development assessment.
 c. If such screening indicates a suspected handicapping condition,
which may require the provision of special education services or
programs, a referral shall be made to the committee on special
education.
 d. If such screening indicates a possibly gifted child, the name and
finding shall be reported to the superintendent of schools of such
district and to the parent or legal guardian of such child. Such
notification shall not be construed as an entitlement for services for
any such child identified as possibly gifted.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2027
 § 3208-a. Special proceeding to determine physical capacity of student
to participate in athletic programs. 1. Upon a school district's
determination that a student shall not be permitted to participate in an
athletic program by reason of a physical impairment, based on a medical
examination conducted by the school physician, the student may commence
a special proceeding in the supreme court pursuant to the provisions of
article four of the civil practice law and rules to enjoin the school
district from prohibiting his participation. Such special proceeding
may be brought in the county in which the student resides or in the
county in which the school district is located.
 2. The petition in the proceeding shall be a verified petition of a
parent or guardian of the student. The petition shall have annexed
affidavits of at least two licensed physicians setting forth that in
their opinion the student is physically capable of participating in an
athletic program, that participation would be reasonably safe, and any
special or preventive measures or devices needed to protect the student.
 3. The court shall grant such petition if it is satisfied that it is
in the best interest of the student to participate in an athletic
program and that it is reasonably safe for him to do so.
 4. No school district shall be held liable for an injury sustained by
a student granted an order under this section provided such injury is
incurred during such student's actual participation in an athletic
program and, provided further, that such injury is attributable to the
physical impairment for which such court order was obtained.
 5. Unless specifically prohibited by the court, an order granted
pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be considered valid and
sufficient for subsequent years, provided that the student has not
changed athletic programs and, further, that two licensed physicians set
forth current affidavits that, in their opinion, the student's physical
impairment has not changed since the time of the original court order.
 6. In no event shall a successful petitioner be entitled to costs in
any proceeding brought pursuant to this section.
 7. The school district shall not be responsible for providing or bear
the cost of, any special or preventive measures or devices needed to
protect the student unless such special or preventive measures or
devices are contained in a student's individual education plan
recommended by the school district committee on the handicapped and such
student is a child with a handicapping condition, as defined in section
forty-four hundred one of this chapter.
 8. A physically impaired child eligible to commence a special
proceeding as provided by this section shall be defined as any child
determined by a school physician as ineligible for participation on the
basis of the regulations of the state education department, the American
Medical Association Guide for Medical Evaluation for Candidates for
School Sports, or by any standard established by the school district
involved.
 9. An athletic program for the purpose of this section shall include
intramural activities, inter-school activities, extramural activities,
and organized practice as defined by section 135.1 by the commissioner
of education's regulations.
 § 3209. Education of homeless children. 1. Definitions.
 a. Homeless child. For the purposes of this article, the term
"homeless child" shall mean:
 (1) a child or youth who lacks a fixed, regular, and adequate
nighttime residence, including a child or youth who is:
 (i) sharing the housing of other persons due to a loss of housing,
economic hardship or a similar reason;
 (ii) living in motels, hotels, trailer parks or camping grounds due to
the lack of alternative adequate accommodations;
 (iii) abandoned in hospitals; or
 (iv) a migratory child, as defined in subsection two of section
thirteen hundred nine of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of
1965, as amended by the Every Student Succeeds Act of 2015, who
qualifies as homeless under any of the provisions of clauses (i) through
(iii) of this subparagraph or subparagraph two of this paragraph;
 (v) an unaccompanied youth, as defined in section seven hundred
twenty-five of subtitle B of title VII of the McKinney-Vento Homeless
Assistance Act; or
 (2) a child or youth who has a primary nighttime location that is:
 (i) a supervised publicly or privately operated shelter designed to
provide temporary living accommodations including, but not limited to,
shelters operated or approved by the state or local department of social
services, and residential programs for runaway and homeless youth
established pursuant to article nineteen-H of the executive law; or
 (ii) a public or private place not designed for, or ordinarily used
as, a regular sleeping accommodation for human beings, including a child
or youth who is living in a car, park, public space, abandoned building,
substandard housing, bus or train stations or similar setting.
 a-1. Exception. For the purposes of this article the term "homeless
child" shall not include a child in a foster care placement or receiving
educational services pursuant to subdivision four, five, six, six-a or
seven of section thirty-two hundred two of this part or pursuant to
article eighty-one, eighty-five, eighty-seven or eighty-eight of this
chapter.
 b. Designator. The term "designator" shall mean:
 (1) the parent or the person in parental relation to a homeless child;
or
 (2) the homeless child, if no parent or person in parental relation is
available; or
 (3) the director of a residential program for runaway and homeless
youth established pursuant to article nineteen-H of the executive law,
in consultation with the homeless child, where such homeless child is
living in such program.
 c. School district of origin. The term "school district of origin"
shall mean the school district within the state of New York in which the
homeless child was attending a public school or preschool on a
tuition-free basis or was entitled to attend when circumstances arose
which caused such child to become homeless, which is different from the
school district of current location. School district of origin shall
also mean the school district in the state of New York in which the
child was residing when circumstances arose which caused such child to
become homeless if such child was eligible to apply, register, or enroll
in public preschool or kindergarten at the time such child became
homeless, or the homeless child has a sibling who attends a school in
the school district in which the child was residing when circumstances
arose which caused such child to become homeless.
 d. School district of current location. The term "school district of
current location" shall mean the public school district within the state
of New York in which the hotel, motel, shelter or other temporary
housing arrangement of a homeless child, or the residential program for
runaway and homeless youth, is located, which is different from the
school district of origin.
 e. Regional placement plan. The term "regional placement plan" shall
mean a comprehensive regional approach to the provision of educational
placements for homeless children which has been approved by the
commissioner.
 f. Feeder school. The term "feeder school" shall mean:
 (1) a preschool whose students are entitled to attend a specified
elementary school or group of elementary schools upon completion of that
preschool;
 (2) a school whose students are entitled to attend a specified
elementary, middle, intermediate, or high school or group of specified
elementary, middle, intermediate, or high schools upon completion of the
terminal grade of such school; or
 (3) a school that sends its students to a receiving school in a
neighboring school district pursuant to section two thousand forty of
this chapter.
 g. Preschool. The term "preschool" shall mean a publicly funded
prekindergarten program administered by the department or a local
educational agency or a Head Start program administered by a local
educational agency and/or services under the Individuals with
Disabilities Education Act administered by a local educational agency.
 h. Receiving school. The term "receiving school" shall mean:
 (1) a school that enrolls students from a specified or group of
preschools, elementary schools, middle schools, intermediate schools, or
high schools; or
 (2) a school that enrolls students from a feeder school in a
neighboring local educational agency pursuant to section two thousand
forty of this chapter.
 i. School of origin. The term "school of origin" shall mean a public
school that a child or youth attended when permanently housed, or the
school in which the child or youth was last enrolled, including a
preschool or a charter school. Provided that, for a homeless child or
youth who completes the final grade level served by the school of
origin, the term "school of origin" shall include the designated
receiving school at the next grade level for all feeder schools. Where
the child is eligible to attend school in the school district of origin
because the child becomes homeless after such child is eligible to
apply, register, or enroll in the public preschool or kindergarten or
the child is living with a school-age sibling who attends school in the
school district of origin, the school of origin shall include any public
school or preschool in which such child would have been entitled or
eligible to attend based on such child's last residence before the
circumstances arose which caused such child to become homeless.
 2. Choice of district and school.
 a. The designator shall have the right to designate one of the
following as the school district within which the homeless child shall
be entitled to attend upon instruction:
 (1) the school district of current location;
 (2) the school district of origin; or
 (3) a school district participating in a regional placement plan.
 b. The designator shall also have the right to designate one of the
following as the school where a homeless child seeks to attend for
instruction:
 (1) the school of origin; or
 (2) any school that nonhomeless children and youth who live in the
attendance area in which the child or youth is actually living are
eligible to attend, including a preschool.
 c. (1) Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary,
where the public school district in which a homeless child is
temporarily housed is the school district of origin, the homeless child
shall be entitled to attend the schools of such district without the
payment of tuition in accordance with subdivision one of section
thirty-two hundred two of this article for the duration of the
homelessness and until the end of the school year in which such child
becomes permanently housed and for one additional year if that year
constitutes the child's terminal year in such building.
 (2) Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, where
the school district of origin or school of origin that a homeless child
was attending on a tuition-free basis or was entitled to attend when
circumstances arose which caused the child to become homeless is located
in New York state and the homeless child's temporary housing arrangement
is located in a contiguous state, the homeless child shall be entitled
to attend the school of origin or any school that nonhomeless children
and youth who live in the attendance area in which the child or youth is
actually living are eligible to attend, including a preschool, subject
to a best interest determination pursuant to subparagraph three of
paragraph f of this subdivision, for the duration of the homelessness
and until the end of the school year in which such child becomes
permanently housed and for one additional year if that year constitutes
the child's terminal year in such building.
 (3) Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, where
the child's temporary housing arrangement is located in New York state,
the homeless child shall be entitled to attend the school of origin or
any school that nonhomeless children and youth who live in the
attendance area in which the child or youth is actually living are
eligible to attend, including a preschool, subject to a best interest
determination pursuant to subparagraph three of paragraph f of this
subdivision, for the duration of the homelessness and until the end of
the school year in which such child becomes permanently housed and for
one additional year if that year constitutes the child's terminal year
in such building.
 d. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph a of this subdivision,
a homeless child who has designated the school district of current
location as the district of attendance and who has relocated to another
temporary housing arrangement outside of such district, or to a
different attendance zone or community school district within such
district, shall be entitled to continue to attend in the same school
building or designate any school that nonhomeless children and youth who
live in the attendance area in which the child or youth is actually
living are eligible to attend, including a preschool, subject to a best
interest determination in accordance with subparagraph three of
paragraph f of this subdivision, for the duration of the homelessness
and until the end of the school year in which the child becomes
permanently housed and for one additional year if that year constitutes
the child's terminal year in such building.
 e. Such designation shall be made on forms specified by the
commissioner, and shall include the name of the child, the name of the
parent or person in parental relation to the child, the name and
location of the temporary housing arrangement, the name of the school
district of origin, the name of the school district where the child's
records are located, the complete address where the family was located
at the time circumstances arose which caused such child to become
homeless and any other information required by the commissioner. All
school districts, temporary housing facilities operated or approved by a
local social services district, and residential facilities for runaway
and homeless youth shall make such forms available and shall ensure that
the completed designation forms are given to the local educational
agency liaison for the local educational agency in which the designated
school is located in a timeframe prescribed by the commissioner in
regulations. Where the homeless child is located in a temporary housing
facility operated or approved by a local social services district, or a
residential facility for runaway and homeless youth, the director of the
facility or a person designated by the social services district, shall,
within two business days, assist the designator in completing the
designation forms and enrolling the homeless child in the designated
school district and shall forward the completed designation form to the
local educational agency liaison for the local educational agency in
which the designated school is located in a timeframe prescribed by the
commissioner in regulations.
 f. Upon receipt of the designation form, the designated school
district shall immediately:
 (1) review the designation form to ensure that it has been completed;
 (2) admit the homeless child even if the child or youth is unable to
produce records normally a requirement for enrollment, such as previous
academic records, records of immunization and/or other required health
records, proof of residency or other documentation and/or even if the
child has missed application or enrollment deadlines during any period
of homelessness, if applicable. Provided that nothing herein shall be
construed to require the immediate attendance of an enrolled student
lawfully excluded from school temporarily pursuant to section nine
hundred six of this chapter because of a communicable or infectious
disease that imposes a significant risk of infection of others;
 (3) determine whether the designation made by the designator is
consistent with the best interests of the homeless child or youth. In
determining a homeless child's best interest, a local educational agency
shall:
 (i) presume that keeping the homeless child or youth in the school of
origin is in the child's or youth's best interest, except when doing so
is contrary to the request of the child's parent or guardian, or in the
case of an unaccompanied youth, the youth;
 (ii) consider student-centered factors, including but not limited to
factors related to the impact of mobility on achievement, education, the
health and safety of the homeless child, giving priority to the request
of the child's or youth's parent or guardian or the youth in the case of
an unaccompanied youth;
 (iii) if after considering student-centered factors and conducting a
best interest school placement determination, the local educational
agency determines that it is not in the homeless child's best interest
to attend the school of origin or the school designated by the
designator, the local educational agency must provide a written
explanation of the reasons for its determination, in a manner and form
understandable to such parent, guardian, or unaccompanied youth. The
information must also include information regarding the right to a
timely appeal in accordance with regulations of the commissioner. The
homeless child or youth must be enrolled in the school in which
enrollment is sought by the designator during the pendency of all
available appeals;
 (4) treat the homeless child as a resident for all purposes;
 (5) make a written request to the school district where the child's
records are located for a copy of such records; and
 (6) forward the designation form to the school district of origin
where applicable.
 g. Within five days of receipt of a request for records pursuant to
subparagraph five of paragraph f of this subdivision, the school
district shall forward, in a manner consistent with state and federal
law, a complete copy of the homeless child's records including, but not
limited to, proof of age, academic records, evaluations, immunization
records, and guardianship papers, if applicable.
 h. Where the school of origin is a charter school, the school district
designated pursuant to this subdivision shall be deemed to be the school
district of residence of such child for purposes of fiscal and
programmatic responsibility under article fifty-six of this chapter and
shall be responsible for transportation of the homeless child if a
social services district is not otherwise responsible pursuant to
subdivision four of this section.
 i. The commissioner shall promulgate regulations setting forth the
circumstances pursuant to which a change in designation may be made and
establishing a procedure for the identification of the school district
of origin.
 2-a. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, each
local educational agency, as such term is defined in subsection
twenty-six of section ninety-one hundred one of the Elementary and
Secondary Education Act of 1965, as amended by the Every Student
Succeeds Act of 2015, shall designate a local educational agency liaison
for homeless children and youths and shall, consistent with the
provisions of this section, otherwise comply with the applicable
requirements of paragraphs three through seven of subsection (g) of
section seven hundred twenty-two of subtitle B of title VII of the
McKinney-Vento Assistance Act.
 3. Reimbursement.
 a. Where either the school district of current location or a school
district participating in a regional placement plan is designated as the
district in which the homeless child shall attend upon instruction and
such homeless child's school district of origin is within New York
state, the school district providing instruction, including preschool
instruction, shall be eligible for reimbursement by the department, as
approved by the commissioner, for the direct cost of educational
services, not otherwise reimbursed under special federal programs,
calculated pursuant to regulations of the commissioner for the period of
time for which such services are provided. The claim for such
reimbursement shall be in a form prescribed by the commissioner. The
educational costs for such children shall not be otherwise aidable or
reimbursable.
 b. The school district of origin shall reimburse the department for
its expenditure for educational services on behalf of a homeless child
pursuant to paragraph a of this subdivision in an amount equal to the
school district basic contribution, as such term is defined in
subdivision eight of section forty-four hundred one of this chapter,
pro-rated for the period of time for which such services were provided
in the base year by a school district other than the school district of
origin. Upon certification by the commissioner, the comptroller shall
deduct from any state funds which become due to the school district of
origin an amount equal to the reimbursement required to be made by such
school district in accordance with this paragraph, and the amount so
deducted shall not be included in the operating expense of such district
for the purpose of computing the approved operating expense pursuant to
paragraph t of subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this
chapter.
 4. Transportation.
 a. A social services district shall provide for the transportation of
each homeless child, including those in preschool and students with
disabilities identified pursuant to sections forty-four hundred one and
forty-four hundred two of this chapter whose individualized education
programs include special transportation services, who is eligible for
benefits pursuant to section three hundred fifty-j of the social
services law, to and from a temporary housing location in which the
child was placed by the social services district and the school attended
by such child pursuant to this section, if such temporary housing
facility is located outside of the designated school district pursuant
to paragraph a of subdivision two of this section. A social services
district shall be authorized to contract with a board of education or a
board of cooperative educational services for the provision of such
transportation. Where the social services district requests that the
designated school district of attendance provide or arrange for
transportation for a homeless child eligible for transportation pursuant
to this paragraph, the designated school district of attendance shall
provide or arrange for the transportation and the social services
district shall fully and promptly reimburse the designated school
district of attendance for the cost as determined by the designated
school district. This paragraph shall apply to placements made by a
social services district without regard to whether a payment is made by
the district to the operator of the temporary housing facility.
 b. The designated school district of attendance shall provide for the
transportation of each homeless child who is living in a residential
program for runaway and homeless youth established pursuant to article
nineteen-H of the executive law, to and from such residential program,
and the school attended by such child pursuant to this section, if such
temporary housing location is located outside the designated school
district. The designated district of attendance shall be authorized to
contract with a board of cooperative educational services or a
residential program for runaway and homeless youth for the provision of
such transportation. The department shall reimburse the designated
school district of attendance for the cost of transporting such child to
and from the residential program and the school attended by such child
to the extent funds are provided for such purpose, as determined by the
director of the budget.
 c. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any homeless child not
entitled to receive transportation pursuant to paragraphs a and b of
this subdivision who requires transportation in order to attend a school
of origin designated pursuant to subdivision two of this section, shall
be entitled to receive such transportation pursuant to this paragraph.
The designated school district of attendance shall provide
transportation to and from the child's temporary housing location and
the school of origin. Such transportation shall not be in excess of
fifty miles each way except where the commissioner certifies that
transportation in excess of fifty miles is in the best interest of the
child. Any cost incurred for such transportation that is allowable
pursuant to the applicable provision of parts two and three of article
seventy-three of this chapter or herein, shall be aidable pursuant to
subdivision seven of section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter,
provided that the approved transportation expense shall not exceed an
amount determined by the commissioner to be the total cost for providing
the most cost-effective mode of such transportation in a manner
consistent with commissioner's regulations. The commissioner shall
promulgate regulations setting forth the circumstances pursuant to which
parent accompaniment for transportation may be reimbursable, including
but not limited to: the age of the child; the distance of the
transportation; the cost-effectiveness of the transportation; and
whether the child has a handicapping condition.
 d. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, where a homeless child
designates the school district of current location as the district the
child will attend and such child does not attend the school of origin,
such school district shall provide transportation to such child on the
same basis as a resident student.
 e. Where the designated school district of attendance has recommended
that the homeless child attend a summer educational program and the lack
of transportation poses a barrier to such child's participation in the
summer educational program, the designated school district of attendance
shall provide transportation.
 f. The designated school district of attendance, or the social
services district if such child is eligible for transportation from the
social services district pursuant to paragraph a of this subdivision,
shall provide or arrange for transportation to extracurricular or
academic activities where:
 (1) the homeless child participates in or would like to participate in
an extracurricular or academic activity, including an after-school
activity, at the school;
 (2) the homeless child meets the relevant eligibility criteria for the
activity; and
 (3) the lack of transportation poses a barrier to such child's
participation in the activity.
 g. Where the homeless child is temporarily living in a contiguous
state and has designated a school of origin located in the state of New
York, the designated school district in New York state shall collaborate
with the local educational agency in which such child is temporarily
living to arrange for transportation in accordance with section
722(g)(1)(J)(iii)(II) of the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act.
 h. Where the homeless child is temporarily living in New York state
and continues to attend a school of origin located in a contiguous
state, the school district of current location shall coordinate with the
local educational agency where such child is attending school to arrange
for transportation in accordance with section 722(g)(1)(J)(iii)(II) of
the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act.
 i. Transportation as described in this subdivision must be provided to
the homeless child by the designated school district of attendance or
the social services district for the duration of homelessness. The
designated district of attendance must transport the child for the
remainder of the school year in which the child becomes permanently
housed and one additional year if that year constitutes the child's
terminal year in the designated school. Such transportation shall not be
in excess of fifty miles each way except where the commissioner
certifies that transportation in excess of fifty miles is in the best
interest of the child. The designated school district of attendance
shall be entitled to reimbursement from the current school district in
which the child becomes permanently housed for any cost incurred for
transportation for the remainder of the school year after the child
becomes permanently housed and one additional year if that year
constitutes the child's terminal year in the designated school.
 5. Each school district shall:
 a. establish procedures, in accordance with 42 U.S.C. section
11432(g)(3)(E), for the prompt resolution of disputes regarding school
selection or enrollment of a homeless child or youth, including, but not
limited to, disputes regarding transportation and/or a child's or
youth's status as a homeless child or unaccompanied youth;
 b. provide a written explanation, including a statement regarding the
right to appeal pursuant to 42 U.S.C. section 11432(g)(3)(E)(ii), the
name, post office address and telephone number of the local educational
agency liaison and the form petition for commencing an appeal to the
commissioner pursuant to section three hundred ten of this chapter of a
final determination regarding enrollment, school selection and/or
transportation, to the homeless child's or youth's parent or guardian,
if the school district declines to either enroll and/or transport such
child or youth to the school of origin or a school requested by the
parent or guardian; and
 c. shall immediately enroll the child or youth in the school in which
enrollment is sought pending final resolution of the dispute over the
school district's final determination of the child's or youth's homeless
status, including all available appeals within the local educational
agency and the commissioner pursuant to the provisions of section three
hundred ten of this chapter.
 6. a. By January thirty-first, nineteen hundred ninety-five, the
commissioner, the commissioner of the office of temporary and disability
assistance and the commissioner of the office of children and family
services shall develop a plan to ensure coordination and access to
education for homeless children and shall annually review such plan.
 b. The commissioner shall periodically monitor local school districts
to ensure their compliance with the provisions of this article, and that
such districts review and revise any local regulations, policies, or
practices that may act as barriers to the enrollment or attendance of
homeless children in school or their receipt of comparable services as
defined in Part B of Title VII of the Federal Stewart B. McKinney Act.
 c. School districts shall periodically report such information to the
commissioner as he or she may require to carry out the purposes of this
section.
 7. Public welfare officials, except as otherwise provided by law,
shall furnish indigent children with suitable clothing, shoes, books,
food, transportation and other necessaries to enable them to attend upon
instruction as required by law. Upon demonstration of need, such
necessaries shall also include transportation of indigent children for
the purposes of evaluations pursuant to section forty-four hundred ten
of this chapter and title II-A of article twenty-five of the public
health law.
 8. Information about a homeless child's or youth's living situation
shall be treated as a student educational record, and shall not be
deemed to be directory information, under the McKinney-Vento Homeless
Assistance Act, as amended by the Every Student Succeeds Act of 2015.
 9. Each homeless child to be assisted under this section shall be
provided services comparable to services offered to other students in
the school selected under this section, including the following:
transportation services; educational services for which the child or
youth meets the eligibility criteria, such as services provided under
Title I of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 or similar
state or local programs; educational programs for children with
disabilities; educational programs for English learners; programs in
career and technical education; programs for gifted and talented
students; and school nutrition programs.
 10. The commissioner may promulgate regulations to carry out the
purposes of this section.
 § 3209-a. Child abuse prevention. Each school district of the state
shall: (1) develop, maintain and disseminate written policies and
procedures pursuant to title six of article six of the social services
law and applicable provisions of article ten of the family court act,
regarding the mandatory reporting of child abuse or neglect, reporting
procedures and obligations of persons required to report, provisions for
taking a child into protective custody, mandatory reporting of deaths,
immunity from liability, penalties for failure to report and obligations
for the provision of services and procedures necessary to safeguard the
life or health of the child; and (2) establish, and implement on an
ongoing basis, a training program for all current and new school
officials regarding the policies and procedures established pursuant to
this section.
 § 3210. Amount and character of required attendance. 1. Regularity and
conduct. a. A minor required by the provisions of part one of this
article to attend upon instruction shall attend regularly as prescribed
where he resides or is employed, for the entire time the appropriate
public schools or classes are in session and shall be subordinate and
orderly while so attending.
 b. (i) Absence for religious observance and education shall be
permitted under rules that the commissioner shall establish.
 (ii) In addition, the board of education or trustees shall determine
whether school session should not be held at an individual public
school, or district-wide, on a day where, if school were in session,
absenteeism may result in the waste of educational resources because a
considerable proportion of the student population is unlikely to attend
because of a religious or cultural day of observance.
 c. In the event that a person requests the release of a minor required
by the provisions of part one of this article to attend upon
instruction, the identity of such person shall be verified against a
list of names provided by the person or persons in parental relation to
the minor, as defined in section two of this chapter, at the time of
such minor's enrollment. The school district may adopt appropriate
procedures for the purpose of submitting a list of names at a later date
or updating the list of names provided by the person or persons in
parental relation. If such person is identified as one of those persons
included on such list, such minor may be released from attendance. If
such person is identified as a person not included on such list, such
minor may not be released except in the event of an emergency as
determined in the sole discretion of the principal of the school, or his
designee, provided that the person or persons in parental relation to
the minor have been contacted and have agreed to such release. A school
district may presume that either parent of the student has authority to
obtain the release of said minor unless the school district has been
provided with a certified copy of the legally binding instrument such as
the court order or decree of divorce, separation or custody which
provides evidence to the contrary. No situation shall be deemed an
emergency until the facts of such situation have been verified by such
principal or his designee. No civil or criminal liability shall arise or
attach to any school district or employee thereof for any act or
omission to act as a result of, or in connection with, the duties or
activities authorized or directed by this paragraph. The foregoing
procedure shall not apply to release of a minor pursuant to the
protective custody provisions of the social services law and the family
court act.
 2. Attendance elsewhere than at a public school. a. Hours of
attendance. If a minor included by the provisions of part one of this
article attends upon instruction elsewhere than at a public school, he
shall attend for at least as many hours, and within the hours specified
therefor.
 b. Absence. Absence from required attendance shall be permitted only
for causes allowed by the general rules and practices of the public
schools. Absence for religious observance and education shall be
permitted under rules that the commissioner shall establish.
 c. Holidays and vacations. Holidays and vacations shall not exceed in
total amount and number those allowed by the public schools.
 d. Exception. In applying the foregoing requirements a minor required
to attend upon full time day instruction by the provisions of part one
of this article may be permitted to attend for a shorter school day or
for a shorter school year or for both, provided, in accordance with the
regulations of the state education department, the instruction he
receives has been approved by the school authorities as being
substantially equivalent in amount and quality to that required by the
provisions of part one of this article.
 § 3211. Records of attendance upon instruction. 1. Who shall keep
such record. The teacher of every minor required by the provisions of
part one of this article to attend upon instruction, or any other school
district employee as may be designated by the commissioner of education
under section three thousand twenty-four of this chapter, shall keep an
accurate record of the attendance and absence of such minor. Such record
shall be in such form as may be prescribed by the commissioner of
education.
 2. Certificates of attendance to be presumptive evidence. A duly
certified transcript of the record of attendance and absence of a child
which has been kept, as provided in this section, shall be accepted as
presumptive evidence of the attendance of such child in any proceeding
brought under the provisions of part one of this article.
 3. Inspection of records of attendance. An attendance officer, or any
other duly authorized representative of the school authorities, may at
any time during school hours, demand the production of the records of
attendance of minors required to be kept by the provisions of part one
of this article, and may inspect or copy the same and make all proper
inquiries of a teacher or principal concerning the records and the
attendance of such minors.
 4. Duties of principal or person in charge of the instruction of a
minor. The principal of a school, or other person in charge of the
instruction upon which a minor attends, as provided by part one of this
article, shall cause the record of his attendance to be kept and
produced and all appropriate inquiries in relation thereto answered as
hereinbefore required. He shall give prompt notification in writing to
the school authorities of the city or district of the discharge or
transfer of any such minor from attendance upon instruction, stating the
date of the discharge, its cause, the name of the minor, his date of
birth, his place of residence prior to and following discharge, if such
place of residence be known, and the name of the person in parental
relation to the minor.
 § 3211-a. Reports of reading tests. The results of any standardized
reading test administered by a district or school to determine the level
at which a pupil is capable of reading shall be reported to the parents
(including persons in parental relationship) of any pupil who shall
attain a score at the twenty-third percentile or below. Local school
districts shall determine the means of reporting these scores to
parents. If the parent requests an interpretation of such test results,
such scores shall be interpreted for the parent by a certified teacher
of reading, or, in the absence of a certified teacher of reading, by
other appropriate school district personnel.
 § 3212. Definition of persons in parental relation and their duties;
duties of certain other persons. 1. Definition. As used in this article,
a person in parental relation to another individual shall include his
father or mother, by birth or adoption, his step-father or step-mother,
his legally appointed guardian, or his custodian. A person shall be
regarded as the custodian of another individual if he has assumed the
charge and care of such individual because the parents or legally
appointed guardian of such individual have died, are imprisoned, are
mentally ill, or have been committed to an institution, or because, they
have abandoned or deserted such individual or are living outside the
state or their whereabouts are unknown, or have designated the person
pursuant to title fifteen-A of article five of the general obligations
law as a person in parental relation to the child.
 2. Duties of persons in parental relation. Every person in parental
relation to another individual included by the provisions of part one of
this article:
 a. Shall submit at the time such individual begins to attend upon
instruction evidence of age as required for the issuance of an
employment certificate, or show that such evidence cannot be produced.
When such evidence cannot be produced, or when circumstances exist which
reasonably indicate that such individual may be a missing child, the
superintendent of schools or his or her authorized representative shall
report and make inquiry to the statewide central register for missing
children pursuant to section eight hundred thirty-seven-e of the
executive law. If such child appears to match a child registered with
the statewide central register for missing children, or one registered
with the national crime information center register, the superintendent
or his or her authorized representative shall immediately contact the
local law enforcement authority. No civil or criminal liability shall
arise or attach to any school district or employee thereof for any act
or omission to act as a result of, or in connection with, the duties or
activities authorized or directed by this paragraph.
 b. Shall cause such individual to attend upon instruction as
hereinbefore required, and to comply with the provisions of part one of
this article with respect to the employment or occupation of minors in
any business or service whatever.
 c. Shall cause such individual to be placed in proper physical
condition to attend upon required instruction, if his physical condition
is remediable by the taking of reasonable measures.
 d. Shall furnish proof that an individual who is not attending upon
instruction at a public or parochial school in the city or district
where the person in parental relation resides is attending upon required
instruction elsewhere. Failure to furnish such proof shall be
presumptive evidence that such individual is not attending.
 e. Shall furnish, with respect to an individual from seventeen to
twenty-one years of age, on demand of a duly authorized representative
of the school authorities, satisfactory proof that he is able to speak,
read and write English as required for the completion of the fifth year
of the elementary school course of study, or cause such individual to
submit to an examination to determine his ability in these respects.
 3. Exception. A person in parental relation to another individual
included by the foregoing provisions of this section shall not be
subject thereto if it can be shown that he is unable to control such
individual.
 4. Duties of certain individuals from sixteen to twenty-one years of
age. An individual from sixteen to twenty-one years of age, if not under
the control of a person in parental relation, shall comply with such
requirements of part one of this article as are applicable.
 5. Duties of other persons.
 a. No person shall induce another individual to absent himself from
attendance upon required instruction or harbor him while he is absent or
aid or abet him in violating any provision of part one of this article.
 b. No person shall interfere with an attendance officer in the lawful
pursuit of his duties, or neglect or refuse to answer his lawful
inquiries.
 c. No person shall violate any provision of part one of this article
in relation to employment of minors, duties of employers, issuance or
transfer of any paper authorizing the employment of minors.
 d. No person shall make a false oral or written statement in or in
relation to any employment certificate or other paper required by part
one of this article as to any matter required to appear therein.
 f. No person shall present as his own any substitute, altered or
transferred certificate or badge.
 6. Birth certificates. For the purpose of part one of this article,
the board of health upon request shall furnish to the school
authorities, or to the person in parental relation to a minor, or to an
individual from seventeen to twenty-one years of age, a duly certified
transcript of the birth certificate, filed according to law, of an
individual from five to twenty-one years of age.
 § 3212-a. Records of telephone numbers. 1. Each school shall maintain
a record of the telephone number of each pupil enrolled in the school
and each person in parental relation to such pupil including the
residential and business telephone numbers of persons in parental
relation to pupils unless such person or pupil chooses not to supply
such numbers. The record of such telephone numbers shall, except as
otherwise provided by law, be accessible solely for emergency purposes.
 2. The provisions of this section shall not be applicable in any
school district in which the board of education has adopted a resolution
providing that the record otherwise required hereby shall not be
maintained.
 § 3213. Supervisors of attendance; attendance teachers; attendance
officers; appointment, compensation, powers and duties. 1. Appointment,
removal, compensation and supervision. a. To the end that children shall
not suffer through unnecessary failure to attend school for any cause
whatsoever, it shall be the duty of each attendance teacher and each
attendance supervisor to secure for every child his right to educational
opportunities which will enable him to develop his fullest
potentialities for education, physical, social and spiritual growth as
an individual and to provide for the school adjustment of any
nonattendant child in cooperation with school authorities, special
school services and community and social agencies.
 The school authorities of each city school district, union free school
district, central school district, central high school district, or
common school district whose limits include in whole or in part an
incorporated village, shall appoint and may remove one or more
supervisors of attendance or attendance teachers of such district. A
supervisor of attendance shall be appointed in accordance with the civil
service law and rules, unless he or she is a licensed attendance teacher
or a teacher licensed to teach in New York state, with such further
qualifications as the board of regents shall establish. On and after
July first, nineteen hundred fifty-five no full-time supervisor of
attendance shall be appointed unless he or she holds a license as
attendance teacher. Such supervisors of attendance and those holding
full-time positions who are similarly licensed teachers or who hold
attendance teacher licenses shall be assigned to the step in the salary
schedule of the school district commensurate with the salary being paid
such supervisors or teachers. Such persons shall be paid thereafter in
accordance with such schedule. If the amount of salary received on said
July first, nineteen hundred fifty-five is less than the minimum step of
the salary schedule, such supervisor or teacher shall be paid until June
thirtieth, nineteen hundred fifty-six at the rate of the first step and
in accordance with the schedule thereafter.
 No supervisor of attendance or attendance teacher shall be appointed
who is not twenty-one years of age and in proper physical condition.
 In the establishment of an eligible list advanced education related to
attendance service shall be taken into consideration in the grading of
the candidates. Experience in teaching, in social service and welfare
work, and in business or in the professional field shall likewise be
taken into consideration.
 Paragraph a of subdivision one of this section shall apply to a city
in which attendance supervisors are appointed from an eligible list now
prepared by a board of examiners.
 Supervisors of attendance in a city having a board of examiners shall
be licensed as attendance teachers only when they comply with the
regulations for such license as established by the commissioner of
education and any additional requirements which may be established by
the board of examiners.
 The board of education shall fix the compensation of part-time
supervisors of attendance and prescribe their duties not inconsistent
with part one of this article and make rules and regulations for the
performance thereof. The superintendent of schools or district
superintendent of schools shall supervise the enforcement of part one of
this article within such city or school district.
 b. The town board of each town, with the approval, in writing, of the
district superintendent, shall appoint, on or before August first of
each year, one or more attendance officers and shall fix their
compensation. During the school year it shall also fill promptly any
vacancy after notification thereof by the district superintendent. The
district superintendent shall promptly notify the town board of his
approval or disapproval of an appointment. If within one month a town
board shall not comply with the foregoing provisions, the district
superintendent, subject to appeal to the commissioner of education,
shall exercise the powers and duties of the town board with respect
thereto. An attendance officer appointed for a town shall have
jurisdiction over all school districts of the town which are not
otherwise provided for by this section. He shall be removable at the
pleasure of the district superintendent. His compensation and his
necessary expenses in attending conferences called by the district
superintendent shall be a town charge.
 c. In case a school district shall include territory lying within the
boundaries of more than one town, the attendance officer appointed by
the town in which the schoolhouse is located shall have jurisdiction
over the entire school district.
 2. Powers and duties. a. Arrest of truants. A supervisor of
attendance, attendance teacher or attendance officer, as the case may
be, may arrest without warrant any minor who is unlawfully absent from
attendance upon instruction. He shall forthwith place the minor so
arrested in attendance upon required instruction and shall notify the
parent or guardian of the minor, and he may then begin proceedings for
his commitment as a school delinquent or arraign him before a court
having jurisdiction. Where a minor resides in one school district and
attends school in another school district, the supervisor of attendance,
attendance teacher or attendance officer of the district where the minor
resides and the supervisor of attendance, attendance teacher or
attendance officer of the district where said minor attends school shall
have concurrent jurisdiction with reference to said minor and to the
person or persons in parental relation to him.
 b. Right of entry.
 (1) A supervisor of attendance, attendance teacher or attendance
officer, as the case may be, in the performance of his duties, may enter
during business hours any factory, mercantile or other establishment, or
other place in which a minor is believed to be employed within the city
or school district in which he is appointed, and shall be entitled to
examine on demand the employment certificates or work permits of minors
therein employed, for whose lawful employment such certificates or
permits are required by the provisions of part one of this article.
 (2) He may also enter any public place during the hours in which the
public have access thereto, to ascertain if any minor is therein who is
required to attend upon instruction by the provisions of part one of
this article, or engaged in a street trade contrary to the provisions of
part one of this article, or to collect information required for the
school census.
 c. Notification upon absence. It shall be the duty of every school
district to inform persons in parental relation to elementary school
pupils of such person's right to be notified when such pupil is deemed
absent from attendance at his designated school. Persons in parental
relation to elementary school pupils shall, if such notification is
desired, forward a request in writing to the principal of the pupil's
designated school. Such request shall contain the telephone number of
person or persons in parental relation to the pupil or other information
to facilitate communication with such persons by the most expedient
means available. No civil or criminal liability shall arise or attach to
any school district or employee thereof for any act or omission to act
as a result of, or in connection with, the duties or activities
authorized or directed by this paragraph.
 d. Notification when deemed absent. A supervisor of attendance,
attendance teacher, attendance officer, or other person authorized by
the school district, as the case may be, shall, where a request for
notification has been made pursuant to paragraph c of this subdivision,
notify a person in parental relation to any elementary school pupil by
the means designated in such request when such pupil is deemed absent
from required attendance at his designated school without prior
notification and consent to such absence by the person in parental
relation. No civil or criminal liability shall arise or attach to any
school district or employee thereof for any act or omission to act as a
result of, or in connection with, the duties or activities authorized or
directed by this paragraph.
 e. To the extent that supervisors of attendance, attendance teachers
and attendance officers act pursuant to this subdivision and subdivision
one of this section for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of
part one of this article, they shall be deemed to have acted within the
scope of their employment. Such personnel shall continue to have all the
powers, duties and responsibilities conferred on them by law prior to
the date on which the provisions of this paragraph become effective.
 § 3214. Student placement, suspensions and transfers. 1. School
delinquent. A minor under seventeen years of age, required by any of the
provisions of part one of this article to attend upon instruction, who
is an habitual truant from such instruction or is irregular in such
attendance or insubordinate or disorderly or disruptive or violent
during such attendance, is a school delinquent.
 2. Special day schools. The school authorities of any city or school
district may establish schools or set apart rooms in public school
buildings for the instruction of school delinquents, and fix the number
of days per week and the hours per day of required attendance, which
shall not be less than is required of minors attending the full time day
schools.
 2-a. a. Violent pupil. For the purposes of this section, a violent
pupil is an elementary or secondary student under twenty-one years of
age who:
 (1) commits an act of violence upon a teacher, administrator or other
school employee;
 (2) commits, while on school district property, an act of violence
upon another student or any other person lawfully upon said property;
 (3) possesses, while on school district property, a gun, knife,
explosive or incendiary bomb, or other dangerous instrument capable of
causing physical injury or death;
 (4) displays, while on school district property, what appears to be a
gun, knife, explosive or incendiary bomb or other dangerous instrument
capable of causing death or physical injury;
 (5) threatens, while on school district property, to use any
instrument that appears capable of causing physical injury or death;
 (6) knowingly and intentionally damages or destroys the personal
property of a teacher, administrator, other school district employee or
any person lawfully upon school district property; or
 (7) knowingly and intentionally damages or destroys school district
property.
 b. Disruptive pupil. For the purposes of this section, a disruptive
pupil is an elementary or secondary student under twenty-one years of
age who is substantially disruptive of the educational process or
substantially interferes with the teacher's authority over the
classroom.
 3. Suspension of a pupil. a. The board of education, board of trustees
or sole trustee, the superintendent of schools, district superintendent
of schools or principal of a school may suspend the following pupils
from required attendance upon instruction:
 A pupil who is insubordinate or disorderly or violent or disruptive,
or whose conduct otherwise endangers the safety, morals, health or
welfare of others.
 b. (1) The board of education, board of trustees, or sole trustee,
superintendent of schools, district superintendent of schools and the
principal of the school where the pupil attends shall have the power to
suspend a pupil for a period not to exceed five school days. In the case
of such a suspension, the suspending authority shall provide the pupil
with notice of the charged misconduct. If the pupil denies the
misconduct, the suspending authority shall provide an explanation of the
basis for the suspension. The pupil and the person in parental relation
to the pupil shall, on request, be given an opportunity for an informal
conference with the principal at which the pupil and/or person in
parental relation shall be authorized to present the pupil's version of
the event and to ask questions of the complaining witnesses. The
aforesaid notice and opportunity for an informal conference shall take
place prior to suspension of the pupil unless the pupil's presence in
the school poses a continuing danger to persons or property or an
ongoing threat of disruption to the academic process, in which case the
pupil's notice and opportunity for an informal conference shall take
place as soon after the suspension as is reasonably practicable.
 (2) A teacher shall immediately report and refer a violent pupil to
the principal or superintendent for a violation of the code of conduct
and a minimum suspension period pursuant to section twenty-eight hundred
one of this chapter.
 c. * (1) No pupil may be suspended for a period in excess of five
school days unless such pupil and the person in parental relation to
such pupil shall have had an opportunity for a fair hearing, upon
reasonable notice, at which such pupil shall have the right of
representation by counsel, with the right to question witnesses against
such pupil and to present witnesses and other evidence on his or her
behalf. Where the pupil is a student with a disability or a student
presumed to have a disability, the provisions of paragraph g of this
subdivision shall also apply. Where a pupil has been suspended in
accordance with this subparagraph by a superintendent of schools,
district superintendent of schools, or community superintendent, the
superintendent shall personally hear and determine the proceeding or
may, in his or her discretion, designate a hearing officer to conduct
the hearing. The hearing officer shall be authorized to administer oaths
and to issue subpoenas in conjunction with the proceeding before him or
her. A record of the hearing shall be maintained, but no stenographic
transcript shall be required and a tape recording shall be deemed a
satisfactory record. The hearing officer shall make findings of fact
and recommendations as to the appropriate measure of discipline to the
superintendent. The report of the hearing officer shall be advisory
only, and the superintendent may accept all or any part thereof. An
appeal will lie from the decision of the superintendent to the board of
education who shall make its decision solely upon the record before it.
The board may adopt in whole or in part the decision of the
superintendent of schools. Where the basis for the suspension is, in
whole or in part, the possession on school grounds or school property by
the student of any firearm, rifle, shotgun, dagger, dangerous knife,
dirk, razor, stiletto or any of the weapons, instruments or appliances
specified in subdivision one of section 265.01 of the penal law, the
hearing officer or superintendent shall not be barred from considering
the admissibility of such weapon, instrument or appliance as evidence,
notwithstanding a determination by a court in a criminal or juvenile
delinquency proceeding that the recovery of such weapon, instrument or
appliance was the result of an unlawful search or seizure.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2027
 * (1) No pupil may be suspended for a period in excess of five school
days unless such pupil and the person in parental relation to such pupil
shall have had an opportunity for a fair hearing, upon reasonable
notice, at which such pupil shall have the right of representation by
counsel, with the right to question witnesses against such pupil and to
present witnesses and other evidence on his behalf. Where a pupil has
been suspended in accordance with this subdivision by a superintendent
of schools, district superintendent of schools, or community
superintendent, the superintendent shall personally hear and determine
the proceeding or may, in his discretion, designate a hearing officer to
conduct the hearing. The hearing officer shall be authorized to
administer oaths and to issue subpoenas in conjunction with the
proceeding before him. A record of the hearing shall be maintained, but
no stenographic transcript shall be required and a tape recording shall
be deemed a satisfactory record. The hearing officer shall make findings
of fact and recommendations as to the appropriate measure of discipline
to the superintendent. The report of the hearing officer shall be
advisory only, and the superintendent may accept all or any part
thereof. An appeal will lie from the decision of the superintendent to
the board of education who shall make its decision solely upon the
record before it. The board may adopt in whole or in part the decision
of the superintendent of schools. Where the basis for the suspension is,
in whole or in part, the possession on school grounds or school property
by the student of any firearm, rifle, shotgun, dagger, dangerous knife,
dirk, razor, stiletto or any of the weapons, instruments or appliances
specified in subdivision one of section 265.01 of the penal law, the
hearing officer or superintendent shall not be barred from considering
the admissibility of such weapon, instrument or appliance as evidence,
notwithstanding a determination by a court in a criminal or juvenile
delinquency proceeding that the recovery of such weapon, instrument or
appliance was the result of an unlawful search or seizure.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2027
 (2) Where a pupil has been suspended in accordance with this section
by a board of education, the board may in its discretion hear and
determine the proceeding or appoint a hearing officer who shall have the
same powers and duties with respect to the board that a hearing officer
has with respect to a superintendent where the suspension was ordered by
him. The findings and recommendations of the hearing officer conducting
the proceeding shall be advisory and subject to final action by the
board of education, each member of which shall before voting review the
testimony and acquaint himself with the evidence in the case. The board
may reject, confirm or modify the conclusions of the hearing officer.
 d. (1) Consistent with the federal gun-free schools act, any public
school pupil who is determined under this subdivision to have brought a
firearm to or possessed a firearm at a public school shall be suspended
for a period of not less than one calendar year and any nonpublic school
pupil participating in a program operated by a public school district
using funds from the elementary and secondary education act of nineteen
hundred sixty-five who is determined under this subdivision to have
brought a firearm to or possessed a firearm at a public school or other
premises used by the school district to provide such programs shall be
suspended for a period of not less than one calendar year from
participation in such program. The procedures of this subdivision shall
apply to such a suspension of a nonpublic school pupil. A superintendent
of schools, district superintendent of schools or community
superintendent shall have the authority to modify this suspension
requirement for each student on a case-by-case basis. The determination
of a superintendent shall be subject to review by the board of education
pursuant to paragraph c of this subdivision and the commissioner
pursuant to section three hundred ten of this chapter. Nothing in this
subdivision shall be deemed to authorize the suspension of a student
with a disability in violation of the individuals with disabilities
education act or article eighty-nine of this chapter. A superintendent
shall refer the pupil under the age of sixteen who has been determined
to have brought a weapon or firearm to school in violation of this
subdivision to a presentment agency for a juvenile delinquency
proceeding consistent with article three of the family court act except
a student fourteen or fifteen years of age who qualifies for juvenile
offender status under subdivision forty-two of section 1.20 of the
criminal procedure law. A superintendent shall refer any pupil sixteen
years of age or older or a student fourteen or fifteen years of age who
qualifies for juvenile offender status under subdivision forty-two of
section 1.20 of the criminal procedure law, who has been determined to
have brought a weapon or firearm to school in violation of this
subdivision to the appropriate law enforcement officials.
 (2) Nothing in this paragraph shall be deemed to mandate such action
by a school district pursuant to subdivision one of this section where
such weapon or firearm is possessed or brought to school with the
written authorization of such educational institution in a manner
authorized by article two hundred sixty-five of the penal law for
activities approved and authorized by the trustees or board of education
or other governing body of the public school and such governing body
adopts appropriate safeguards to ensure student safety.
 (3) As used in this paragraph:
 (i) "firearm" shall mean a firearm as defined in subsection a of
section nine hundred twenty-one of title eighteen of the United States
Code; and
 (ii) "weapon" shall be as defined in paragraph 2 of subsection g of
section nine hundred thirty of title eighteen of the United States Code.
 e. Procedure after suspension. Where a pupil has been suspended
pursuant to this subdivision and said pupil is of compulsory attendance
age, immediate steps shall be taken for his or her attendance upon
instruction elsewhere or for supervision or detention of said pupil
pursuant to the provisions of article seven of the family court act.
Where a pupil has been suspended for cause, the suspension may be
revoked by the board of education whenever it appears to be for the best
interest of the school and the pupil to do so. The board of education
may also condition a student's early return to school and suspension
revocation on the pupil's voluntary participation in counseling or
specialized classes, including anger management or dispute resolution,
where applicable.
 f. Whenever the term "board of education or superintendent of schools"
is used in this subdivision, it shall be deemed to include community
boards of education and community superintendents governing community
districts in accordance with the provisions of article fifty-two-A of
this chapter.
 * g. Discipline of students with disabilities and students presumed to
have a disability for discipline purposes. (1) Notwithstanding any other
provision of this subdivision to the contrary, a student with a
disability as such term is defined in section forty-four hundred one of
this chapter and a student presumed to have a disability for discipline
purposes, may be suspended or removed from his or her current
educational placement for violation of school rules only in accordance
with the procedures established in this section, the regulations of the
commissioner implementing this paragraph, and subsection (k) of section
fourteen hundred fifteen of title twenty of the United States code and
the federal regulations implementing such statute, as such federal law
and regulations are from time to time amended. Nothing in this paragraph
shall be construed to confer greater rights on such students than are
conferred under applicable federal law and regulations, or to limit the
ability of a school district to change the educational placement of a
student with a disability in accordance with the procedures in article
eighty-nine of this chapter.
 (2) As used in this paragraph:
 (1) a "student presumed to have a disability for discipline purposes"
shall mean a student who the school district is deemed to have knowledge
was a student with a disability before the behavior that precipitated
disciplinary action under the criteria in subsection (k) (5) of section
fourteen hundred fifteen of title twenty of the United States code and
the federal regulations implementing such statute; and
 (ii) a "manifestation team" means a representative of the school
district, the parent or person in parental relation, and relevant
members of the committee on special education, as determined by the
parent or person in parental relation and the district.
 (3) In applying the federal law consistent with this section:
 (i) in the event of a conflict between the procedures established in
this section and those established in subsection (k) of section fourteen
hundred fifteen of title twenty of the United States code and the
federal regulations implementing such statute, such federal statute and
regulations shall govern.
 (ii) the trustees or board of education of any school district, a
district superintendent of schools or a building principal shall have
authority to order the placement of a student with a disability into an
appropriate interim alternative educational setting, another setting or
suspension for a period not to exceed five consecutive school days where
such student is suspended pursuant to this subdivision and, except as
otherwise provided in clause (vi) of this subparagraph, the suspension
does not result in a change in placement under federal law.
 (iii) the superintendent of schools of a school district, either
directly or upon recommendation of a hearing officer designated pursuant
to paragraph c of this subdivision, may order the placement of a student
with a disability into an interim alternative educational setting,
another setting or suspension for up to ten consecutive school days,
inclusive of any period in which the student is placed in an appropriate
interim alternative educational setting, another setting or suspension
pursuant to clause (ii) of this subparagraph for the behavior, where the
superintendent determines in accordance with the procedures set forth in
this subdivision that the student has engaged in behavior that warrants
a suspension, and, except as otherwise provided in clause (vi) of this
subparagraph, the suspension does not result in a change in placement
under federal law.
 (iv) the superintendent of schools of a school district, either
directly or upon recommendation of a hearing officer designated pursuant
to paragraph c of this subdivision, may order the change in placement of
a student with a disability to an interim alternative educational
setting for up to forty-five school days under the circumstances
specified in subsection (k)(1)(G) of section fourteen hundred fifteen of
title twenty of the United States code and the federal regulations
implementing such statute or a longer period where authorized by federal
law under the circumstances specified in subsection (k)(1)(C) of section
fourteen hundred fifteen of title twenty of the United States code and
the federal regulations implementing such statute, but in neither case
shall such period exceed the period of suspension ordered by a
superintendent in accordance with this subdivision.
 (v) the terms "day," "business day," and "school day" shall be as
defined in section 300.11 of title thirty-four of the code of federal
regulations.
 (vi) notwithstanding any other provision of this subdivision to the
contrary, upon a determination by a manifestation team that the behavior
of a student with a disability was not a manifestation of the student's
disability, such student may be disciplined pursuant to this section in
the same manner and for the same duration as a nondisabled student,
except that such student shall continue to receive services to the
extent required under federal law and regulations, and such services may
be provided in an interim alternative educational setting.
 (vii) an impartial hearing officer appointed pursuant to subdivision
one of section forty-four hundred four of this chapter may order a
change in placement of a student with a disability to an appropriate
interim alternative educational setting for not more than forty-five
school days under the circumstances specified in subsections (k)(3) and
(k)(4) of section fourteen hundred fifteen of title twenty of the United
States code and the federal regulations implementing such statutes,
provided that such procedure may be repeated, as necessary.
 (viii) nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the
suspension or removal of a student with a disability from his or her
current educational placement for violation of school rules following a
determination by a manifestation team that the behavior is a
manifestation of the student's disability, except as authorized under
federal law and regulations.
 (ix) the commissioner shall implement this paragraph by adopting
regulations which coordinate the procedures required for discipline of
students with disabilities, and students presumed to have a disability
for discipline purposes, pursuant to subsection (k) of section fourteen
hundred fifteen of title twenty of the United States code and the
federal regulations implementing such statute, with the general
procedures for student discipline under this section.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2027
 * g. Discipline of students with disabilities and students presumed to
have a disability for discipline purposes. (1) Notwithstanding any other
provision of this subdivision to the contrary, a student with a
disability as such term is defined in section forty-four hundred one of
this chapter and a student presumed to have a disability for discipline
purposes, may be suspended or removed from his or her current
educational placement for violation of school rules only in accordance
with the procedures established in this section, the regulations of the
commissioner implementing this paragraph, and subsection (k) of section
fourteen hundred fifteen of title twenty of the United States code and
the federal regulations implementing such statute, as such federal law
and regulations are from time to time amended. Nothing in this paragraph
shall be construed to confer greater rights on such students than are
conferred under applicable federal law and regulations, or to limit the
ability of a school district to change the educational placement of a
student with a disability in accordance with the procedures in article
eighty-nine of this chapter.
 (2) As used in this paragraph, a "student presumed to have a
disability for discipline purposes" shall mean a student who the school
district is deemed to have knowledge was a student with a disability
before the behavior that precipitated disciplinary action under the
criteria in subsection (k)(8) of section fourteen hundred fifteen of
title twenty of the United States code and the federal regulations
implementing such statute.
 (3) In applying the federal law consistent with this section:
 (i) in the event of a conflict between the procedures established in
this section and those established in subsection (k) of section fourteen
hundred fifteen of title twenty of the United States code and the
federal regulations implementing such statute, such federal statute and
regulations shall govern.
 (ii) the trustees or board of education of any school district, a
district superintendent of schools or a building principal shall have
authority to order the placement of a student with a disability into an
appropriate interim alternative educational setting, another setting or
suspension for a period not to exceed five consecutive school days where
such student is suspended pursuant to this subdivision and, except as
otherwise provided in clause (vi) of this subparagraph, the suspension
does not result in a change in placement under federal law.
 (iii) the superintendent of schools of a school district, either
directly or upon recommendation of a hearing officer designated pursuant
to paragraph c of this subdivision, may order the placement of a student
with a disability into an interim alternative educational setting,
another setting or suspension for up to ten consecutive school days,
inclusive of any period in which the student is placed in an appropriate
interim alternative educational placement, another setting or suspension
pursuant to clause (ii) of this subparagraph for the behavior, where the
superintendent determines in accordance with the procedures set forth in
this subdivision that the student has engaged in behavior that warrants
a suspension, and, except as otherwise provided in clause (vi) of this
subparagraph, the suspension does not result in a change in placement
under federal law.
 (iv) the superintendent of schools of a school district, either
directly or upon recommendation of a hearing officer designated pursuant
to paragraph c of this subdivision, may order the change in placement of
a student with a disability to an interim alternative educational
setting for up to forty-five days, but not to exceed the period of
suspension ordered by a superintendent in accordance with this
subdivision, under the circumstances specified in subsection (k)(1) of
section fourteen hundred fifteen of title twenty of the United States
code and the federal regulations implementing such statute.
 (v) the terms "day," "business day," and "school day" shall be as
defined in section 300.9 of title thirty-four of the code of federal
regulations.
 (vi) notwithstanding any other provision of this subdivision to the
contrary, upon a determination by the committee on special education
that the behavior of a student with a disability was not a manifestation
of the student's disability, such student may be disciplined pursuant to
this section in the same manner as a nondisabled student, except that
such student shall continue to receive services to the extent required
under federal law and regulations.
 (vii) an impartial hearing officer appointed pursuant to subdivision
one of section forty-four hundred four of this chapter may order a
change in placement of a student with a disability to an appropriate
interim alternative educational setting for not more than forty-five
days under the circumstances specified in subsections (k)(2) and (k)(7)
of section fourteen hundred fifteen of title twenty of the United States
code and the federal regulations implementing such statutes, provided
that such procedure may be repeated, as necessary.
 (viii) nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the
suspension or removal of a student with a disability from his or her
current educational placement for violation of school rules following a
determination by the committee on special education that the behavior is
a manifestation of the student's disability, except as authorized under
federal law and regulations.
 (ix) the commissioner shall implement this paragraph by adopting
regulations which coordinate the procedures required for discipline of
students with disabilities, and students presumed to have a disability
for discipline purposes, pursuant to subsection (k) of section fourteen
hundred fifteen of title twenty of the United States code and the
federal regulations implementing such statute, with the general
procedures for student discipline under this section.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2027
 3-a. Teacher removal of a disruptive pupil. In addition, any teacher
shall have the power and authority to remove a disruptive pupil, as
defined in subdivision two-a of this section, from such teacher's
classroom consistent with discipline measures contained in the code of
conduct adopted by the board pursuant to section twenty-eight hundred
one of this chapter. The school authorities of any school district shall
establish policies and procedures to ensure the provision of continued
educational programming and activities for students removed from the
classroom pursuant to this subdivision and provided further that nothing
in this subdivision shall authorize the removal of a pupil in violation
of any state or federal law or regulation. No pupil shall return to the
classroom until the principal makes a final determination pursuant to
paragraph c of this subdivision, or the period of removal expires,
whichever is less.
 a. Such teacher shall inform the pupil and the school principal of the
reasons for the removal. If the teacher finds that the pupil's continued
presence in the classroom does not pose a continuing danger to persons
or property and does not present an ongoing threat of disruption to the
academic process, the teacher shall, prior to removing the student from
the classroom, provide the student with an explanation of the basis for
the removal and allow the pupil to informally present the pupil's
version of relevant events. In all other cases, the teacher shall
provide the pupil with an explanation of the basis for the removal and
an informal opportunity to be heard within twenty-four hours of the
pupil's removal, provided that if such twenty-four hour period does not
end on a school day, it shall be extended to the corresponding time on
the next school day.
 b. The principal shall inform the person in parental relation to such
pupil of the removal and the reasons therefor within twenty-four hours
of the pupil's removal, provided that if such twenty-four hour period
does not end on a school day, it shall be extended to the corresponding
time on the next school day. The pupil and the person in parental
relation shall, upon request, be given an opportunity for an informal
conference with the principal to discuss the reasons for the removal. If
the pupil denies the charges, the principal shall provide an explanation
of the basis for the removal and allow the pupil and/or person in
parental relation to the pupil an opportunity to present the pupil's
version of relevant events. Such informal hearing shall be held within
forty-eight hours of the pupil's removal, provided that if such
forty-eight hour period does not end on a school day, it shall be
extended to the corresponding time on the second school day next
following the pupil's removal. For purposes of this subdivision, "school
day" shall mean a school day as defined pursuant to clause (v) of
subparagraph three of paragraph g of subdivision three of this section.
 c. The principal shall not set aside the discipline imposed by the
teacher unless the principal finds that the charges against the pupil
are not supported by substantial evidence or that the pupil's removal is
otherwise in violation of law or that the conduct warrants suspension
from school pursuant to this section and a suspension will be imposed.
The principal's determination made pursuant to this paragraph shall be
made by the close of business on the school day next succeeding the end
of the forty-eight hour period for an informal hearing contained in
paragraph b of this subdivision.
 d. The principal may, in his or her discretion, designate a school
district administrator, to carry out the functions required of the
principal under this subdivision.
 4. Expense. a. The expense attending the commitment and costs of
maintenance of any school delinquent shall be a charge against the city
or district where he resides, if such city or district employs a
superintendent of schools; otherwise it shall be a county charge.
 b. The school authorities may institute proceedings before a court
having jurisdiction to determine the liability of a person in parental
relation to contribute towards the maintenance of a school delinquent
under sixteen years of age ordered to attend upon instruction under
confinement. If the court shall find the person in parental relation
able to contribute towards the maintenance of such a minor, it may issue
an order fixing the amount to be paid weekly.
 5. Involuntary transfers of pupils who have not been determined to be
a student with a disability or a student presumed to have a disability
for discipline purposes.
 a. The board of education, board of trustees or sole trustee, the
superintendent of schools, or district superintendent of schools may
transfer a pupil who has not been determined to be a student with a
disability as defined in section forty-four hundred one of this chapter,
or a student presumed to have a disability for discipline purposes as
defined in paragraph g of subdivision three of this section from regular
classroom instruction to an appropriate educational setting in another
school upon the written recommendation of the school principal and
following independent review thereof. For purposes of this section of
the law, "involuntary transfer" does not include a transfer made by a
school district as part of a plan to reduce racial imbalance within the
schools or as a change in school attendance zones or geographical
boundaries.
 b. A school principal may initiate a non-requested transfer where it
is believed that such a pupil would benefit from the transfer, or when
the pupil would receive an adequate and appropriate education in another
school program or facility.
 No recommendation for pupil transfer shall be initiated by the
principal until such pupil and a person in parental relation has been
sent written notification of the consideration of transfer
recommendation. Such notice shall set a time and place of an informal
conference with the principal and shall inform such person in parental
relation and such pupil of their right to be accompanied by counsel or
an individual of their choice.
 c. After the conference and if the principal concludes that the pupil
would benefit from a transfer or that the pupil would receive an
adequate and appropriate education in another school program or
facility, the principal may issue a recommendation of transfer to the
superintendent. Such recommendation shall include a description of
behavior and/or academic problems indicative of the need for transfer; a
description of alternatives explored and prior action taken to resolve
the problem. A copy of that letter shall be sent to the person in
parental relation and to the pupil.
 d. Upon receipt of the principal's recommendation for transfer and a
determination to consider that recommendation, the superintendent shall
notify the person in parental relation and the pupil of the proposed
transfer and of their right to a fair hearing as provided in paragraph c
of subdivision three of this section and shall list community agencies
and free legal assistance which may be of assistance. The written notice
shall include a statement that the pupil or person in parental relation
has ten days to request a hearing and that the proposed transfer shall
not take effect, except upon written parental consent, until the ten day
period has elapsed, or, if a fair hearing is requested, until after a
formal decision following the hearing is rendered, whichever is later.
 Parental consent to a transfer shall not constitute a waiver of the
right to a fair hearing.
 6. Transfer of a pupil. Where a suspended pupil is to be transferred
pursuant to subdivision five of this section, he or she shall remain on
the register of the original school for two school days following
transmittal of his or her records to the school to which he or she is to
be transferred. The receiving school shall immediately upon receiving
those records transmitted by the original school, review them to insure
proper placement of the pupil. Staff members who are involved in the
pupil's education must be provided with pertinent records and
information relating to the background and problems of the pupil before
the pupil is placed in a classroom.
 7. Transfer of disciplinary records. Notwithstanding any other
provision of law to the contrary, each local educational agency, as such
term is defined in subsection thirty of section eighty-one hundred one
of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965, as amended, shall
establish procedures in accordance with section eighty-five hundred
thirty-seven of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965, as
amended, and the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974, to
facilitate the transfer of disciplinary records relating to the
suspension or expulsion of a student to any public or nonpublic
elementary or secondary school in which such student enrolls or seeks,
intends or is instructed to enroll, on a full-time or part-time basis.
 * § 3215. Unlawful employment. 1. It shall be unlawful, except as
otherwise provided by law, to employ in any trade, business or service a
minor who does not present an employment certificate or permit issued in
accordance with this article.
 2. No minor shall be employed during the hours when attendance upon
instruction is required by this chapter.
 3. No minor shall be employed in violation of any provision of the
labor law or other law.
 4. Exceptions. a. When attendance upon instruction is not required by
this chapter, a minor fourteen years of age or over may be employed
without an employment certificate or permit in the following
occupations:
 (1) Caddy service on a golf course;
 (2) Service as a baby sitter staying with and at the home of another
child or children with or without the presence at such home of such
child or children's parents or guardians;
 (3) Casual employment of a minor fourteen or fifteen years of age
consisting of yard work and household chores in and about a residence or
the premises of a non-profit, non-commercial organization, not involving
the use of power-driven machinery; and
 (4) Casual employment of a minor sixteen years of age or over
consisting of yard work and household chores in and about a residence or
the premises of a non-profit, non-commercial organization, not involving
the use of power-driven machinery other than power-driven machinery
ordinarily used in such yard work or household chores.
 b. When attendance upon instruction is not required, a minor sixteen
years of age or over may be employed in work on a farm without an
employment certificate or permit.
 c. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the employment of a minor
during the school lunch period in a school cafeteria at the school which
the minor attends if the minor presents an employment certificate issued
in accordance with this article.
 d. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the
employment of a minor in accordance with sections thirty-two hundred
twenty-six through and including section thirty-two hundred thirty of
this chapter.
 e. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the
employment of a minor twelve years of age or over in work for his
parents or guardians on the home farm or at other outdoor work not
connected with or for any trade, business or service when attendance
upon instruction is not required by this chapter.
 f. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, an employment
certificate or permit shall not be required for a student sixteen years
of age or over who is in attendance at a recognized institution of
higher learning and who is employed by a non-profit college or
university or by a non-profit college or university fraternity,
sorority, student association or faculty association.
 * NB Effective until May 9, 2027
 * § 3215. Unlawful employment. 1. It shall be unlawful, except as
otherwise provided by law, to employ in any trade, business or service a
minor who does not present an employment certificate or permit issued in
accordance with this article and section one hundred thirty-five of the
labor law.
 2. No minor shall be employed during the hours when attendance upon
instruction is required by this chapter.
 3. No minor shall be employed in violation of any provision of the
labor law or other law.
 4. Exceptions. a. When attendance upon instruction is not required by
this chapter, a minor fourteen years of age or over may be employed
without an employment certificate or permit in the following
occupations:
 (1) Caddy service on a golf course;
 (2) Service as a baby sitter staying with and at the home of another
child or children with or without the presence at such home of such
child or children's persons in parental relation;
 (3) Casual employment of a minor fourteen or fifteen years of age
consisting of yard work and household chores in and about a residence or
the premises of a non-profit, non-commercial organization, not involving
the use of power-driven machinery; and
 (4) Casual employment of a minor sixteen years of age or over
consisting of yard work and household chores in and about a residence or
the premises of a non-profit, non-commercial organization, not involving
the use of power-driven machinery other than power-driven machinery
ordinarily used in such yard work or household chores.
 b. When attendance upon instruction is not required, a minor sixteen
years of age or over may be employed in work on a farm without an
employment certificate or permit.
 c. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the employment of a minor
during the school lunch period in a school cafeteria at the school which
the minor attends if the minor presents an employment certificate issued
in accordance with this article.
 d. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the
employment of a minor in accordance with section thirty-two hundred
twenty-six of this chapter.
 e. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the
employment of a minor twelve years of age or over in work for their
person in parental relation on the home farm or at other outdoor work
not connected with or for any trade, business or service when attendance
upon instruction is not required by this chapter.
 f. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, an employment
certificate or permit shall not be required for a student sixteen years
of age or over who is in attendance at a recognized institution of
higher learning and who is employed by a non-profit college or
university or by a non-profit college or university fraternity,
sorority, student association or faculty association.
 * NB Effective May 9, 2027
 * § 3215-a. General certification provisions. 1. Certificating
officials. Employment certificates or permits shall be issued by the
chancellor in the city school district of the city of New York, and by
the superintendent of schools in other school districts, provided that
the district superintendent of schools may issue such certificates or
permits for students attending classes operated by a board of
cooperative educational services, and the principal of a nonpublic
secondary school may issue such certificates or permits for students
attending such school. The chancellor in New York city, or elsewhere the
superintendent of schools or district superintendent of schools may
designate in writing the principal of the public school the minor
attends or last attended or other public school official to act as
certificating official in his stead. During the months of July and
August, and at other times in extraordinary circumstances and
emergencies, one or more public school officials shall be designated in
writing by the chancellor in New York city and elsewhere by the
superintendent or district superintendent to act as certificating
officials. The designation or authorization of certificating officials
in public schools shall be subject to such limitations or standards as
may be prescribed by the chancellor in New York city and elsewhere by
the superintendent or district superintendent.
 2. Revocation. Employment certificates or permits may be revoked for
cause by the chancellor in New York city and elsewhere by the
superintendent of schools or the district superintendent of schools
within their respective jurisdictions, or, by a principal of a nonpublic
secondary school for a student attending such school. Where a student
who is required to attend school pursuant to section thirty-two hundred
five of this article has failed no less than four academic courses in
one semester, the chancellor in New York city, and elsewhere the
superintendent of schools or the district superintendent of schools
within their respective jurisdictions, or a principal of a nonpublic
secondary school may revoke such student's employment certificate or
permit. In determining whether to revoke an employment certificate or
permit, the chancellor in New York city, and elsewhere the
superintendent of schools or the district superintendent of schools
within their respective jurisdictions, or a principal of a nonpublic
secondary school, shall consider, (1) an evaluation of the student's
overall academic performance and past academic record; (2) an
examination of the student's attendance record; (3) the economic need of
the student's family for the income provided by the student; (4) the
willingness of the student to participate in a cooperative education
program, work study program, school to work program or any other
structured program which provides a student with an opportunity to earn
income while earning academic credit; (5) such other factors as the
aforementioned officials identify; and (6) any material submitted by the
student.
 Notwithstanding any other provisions of law, nothing in this section
shall be construed to prevent any student from obtaining an employment
certificate or permit for the purpose of working during the months of
July and August.
 3. Approval of form and contents. The commissioner of education shall
prescribe or approve the form and contents of all certificates, permits,
physical examination records, and schooling records required by part one
of this article. The form of such certificates and permits shall also be
subject to the approval of the industrial commissioner.
 * NB Effective until May 9, 2027
 * § 3215-a. General certification provisions. 1. Certificating
officials. Employment certificates or permits shall be issued by the
commissioner of labor. The commissioner of labor may share the status of
a student's certificate or permit with the chancellor in the city school
district of the city of New York and elsewhere with the superintendent
of schools or the district superintendent of schools within their
respective jurisdictions or with a principal of a nonpublic secondary
school for a student attending such school.
 2. Revocation. Employment certificates or permits may be revoked by
the commissioner of labor pursuant to section one hundred thirty-five of
the labor law.
 Notwithstanding any other provisions of law, nothing in this section
shall be construed to prevent any student from obtaining an employment
certificate or permit for the purpose of working during the months of
July and August.
 3. Approval of form and contents. The commissioner of labor, in
consultation with the commissioner of education, shall prescribe the
form and contents of all certificates, permits, and schooling records
required by part one of this article for employment purposes and
consistent with section one hundred thirty-five of the labor law. Any
employment certificate or permit issued pursuant to this part shall be
issued electronically within the database created and maintained by the
department of labor, in consultation with and with support from the
department, pursuant to section one hundred thirty-five of the labor
law.
 * NB Effective May 9, 2027
 * § 3216. Employment certificates. 1. A student non-factory
employment certificate may be issued to a minor fourteen or fifteen
years of age who is attending day school. The certificate shall be valid
for work in a trade, business or service, but shall not be valid for
work in or in connection with a factory except as provided in
subdivision four of section one hundred thirty-one of the labor law.
 2. A student general employment certificate may be issued to a minor
sixteen or seventeen years of age who is attending day school. It shall
be valid for work in or in connection with a factory or any other trade,
business or service.
 3. A full-time employment certificate may be issued to a minor sixteen
or seventeen years of age who is not attending day school or who
declares his intention to leave day school for full-time employment. It
shall be valid for work in or in connection with a factory or any other
trade, business or service. A full-time employment certificate also may
be issued to a minor who is a graduate of a four-year high school, but
if such minor is under sixteen years of age the certificate shall not be
valid for work in or in connection with a factory except as provided in
subdivision four of section one hundred and thirty-one of the labor law.
 4. A limited employment certificate may be issued as provided in
subdivision two of section thirty-two hundred twenty of this article.
 5. A special employment certificate may be issued as provided in
section thirty-two hundred twenty-five of this article.
 6. An employment certificate shall be valid not only for the initial
employment but also for subsequent employments in work permitted by the
particular type of certificate.
 7. An employment certificate shall expire two years from the date of
its issuance, except as otherwise provided in this article. No
employment certificate shall be valid for employment in violation of any
provision of the labor law or rules issued thereunder.
 8. An employment certificate shall be kept on file at the place of the
minor's employment and shall be returned to the minor when the
employment terminates.
 * NB Effective until May 9, 2027
 * § 3216. Employment certificates. 1. A student non-factory employment
certificate may be issued to a minor fourteen or fifteen years of age
who is attending day school. The certificate shall be valid for work in
a trade, business or service, but shall not be valid for work in or in
connection with a factory except as provided in subdivision four of
section one hundred thirty-one of the labor law.
 2. A student general employment certificate may be issued to a minor
sixteen or seventeen years of age who is attending day school. It shall
be valid for work in or in connection with a factory or any other trade,
business or service.
 3. A full-time employment certificate may be issued to a minor sixteen
or seventeen years of age who is not attending day school or who
declares their intention to leave day school for full-time employment.
It shall be valid for work in or in connection with a factory or any
other trade, business or service. A full-time employment certificate
also may be issued to a minor who is a graduate of a four-year high
school, but if such minor is under sixteen years of age the certificate
shall not be valid for work in or in connection with a factory except as
provided in subdivision four of section one hundred and thirty-one of
the labor law.
 4. An employment certificate shall be valid not only for the initial
employment but also for subsequent employments in work permitted by the
particular type of certificate, provided that the minor has updated
their electronic registration to reflect the subsequent employer as
required by section one hundred thirty-five of the labor law.
 5. An employment certificate shall expire two years from the date of
its issuance, except as otherwise provided in this article. No
employment certificate shall be valid for employment in violation of any
provision of the labor law or rules issued thereunder.
 6. An employment certificate shall be kept on file at the place of the
minor's employment or be readily accessible to any person authorized by
law to examine such document in accordance with the recordkeeping
requirements set forth in section one hundred thirty-five of the labor
law.
 * NB Effective May 9, 2027
 * § 3217. Procedure for issuance of employment certificates. 1. An
application for an employment certificate shall be made by a minor on a
form prescribed by the commissioner of education.
 2. Before issuing an employment certificate the issuing official shall
require the minor to submit the following:
 a. Evidence of age;
 b. Written consent of the parent or guardian;
 c. A certificate of physical fitness; and
 d. If the application is for a full-time employment certificate, a
schooling record.
 In addition, in a city or school district which, pursuant to section
thirty-two hundred five, subdivision three, of this article, requires
minors from sixteen to seventeen years of age who are not employed to
attend school, the certificating official shall require a minor applying
for a full-time employment certificate to submit the following:
 a. A pledge of employment; and
 b. A schooling record.
 * NB Effective until May 9, 2027
 * § 3217. Procedure for issuance of employment certificates. 1. An
application for an employment certificate shall be made by a minor in
the manner prescribed by the commissioner of labor and consistent with
the requirements of section one hundred thirty-five of the labor law.
 2. Before issuing an employment certificate the issuing official shall
require the minor to submit the following:
 a. Evidence of age;
 b. Written consent of the person in parental relation as defined in
section thirty-two hundred twelve of this part; and
 c. If the application is for a full-time employment certificate, a
schooling record.
 In addition, in a city or school district which, pursuant to section
thirty-two hundred five, subdivision three, of this article, requires
minors from sixteen to seventeen years of age who are not employed to
attend school, the certificating official shall require a minor applying
for a full-time employment certificate to submit the following:
 a. A pledge of employment; and
 b. A schooling record.
 * NB Effective May 9, 2027
 § 3218. Evidence of age. 1. Evidence showing that the minor is of the
required age shall be presented as follows:
 a. A duly certified transcript of a birth certificate filed according
to law, or duly certified transcript of a record of baptism, giving the
date of birth; or, if not available,
 b. A passport showing the date of birth of the minor; or, if not
available,
 c. Other documentary evidence or other recorded evidence in existence
two years or more, and satisfactory to the certificating officer, except
an affidavit of age.
 2. Certificate of age. A person over eighteen years of age may apply
for a certificate of age to the superintendent of schools, the district
superintendent, or to the certificating officer. Upon such application a
certificate of age, containing the name, date of birth, address and
signature of the applicant, shall be issued to him if he furnishes such
evidence that he is over eighteen years of age as is required for the
issuance of an employment certificate. Such a certificate of age or an
employment certificate previously issued for such person shall be
conclusive evidence for an employer that the person has reached the age
certified to therein.
 * § 3219. Consent of parent or guardian. If the application is for a
full-time employment certificate a parent or guardian shall personally
appear before the issuing officer or school authorities to indicate
consent to the issuance of the application, provided, however, that such
personal appearance shall not be required if the applicant is a high
school graduate.
 * NB Repealed May 9, 2027
 * § 3220. Certificate of physical fitness. 1. A certificate of
physical fitness shall be issued to a minor if a thorough physical
examination made within twelve months of his or her application for an
employment certificate shows that such minor is of sound health, and if
there are no known health problems at the time of issuance of the
certificate, and if the applicant is physically qualified for lawful
employment. If a known health problem exists at the time of the
application for such certificate, another examination may be required by
the issuing authority. Such certificate shall be issued and such
physical examination shall be made, in a city of over three hundred
thousand population, by a physician designated by the board of health,
and elsewhere by the director of school health services charged with the
duty of making physical examinations of all school children or by any
physician duly licensed to practice medicine in this state. A new
certificate of physical fitness shall not be required if one had been
issued to the minor within twelve months.
 2. If the physician authorized to issue certificates of physical
fitness shall find that a minor from fourteen to eighteen years of age
is not physically sound but that in the physician's opinion the minor
may safely engage in certain occupations as specified by the regulations
of the commissioner of education, the physician shall require a pledge
of employment and may issue to the minor a certificate of limited
physical fitness, and shall describe therein the physical disability of
the minor and shall indicate the particular employer and the occupation
in which the minor may engage. A limited employment certificate issued
to a minor from fourteen to eighteen years of age who has presented a
certificate of limited physical fitness shall be valid for not more than
six months from the date of its issuance and shall bear on the face of
the certificate the date of its expiration and the particular employer
and occupation to which the employment of the minor is limited;
provided, however, that the examining physician may indicate upon the
certificate of limited physical fitness that the physical disability of
the minor is of a permanent nature, in which case such certificate shall
not expire at the end of six months but shall remain valid for so long
as the nature and type of work set forth in the pledge of employment
remain substantially the same.
 3. A record made of the physical examination shall show whether a
certificate of physical fitness has been issued or withheld. Such record
shall be sent to the certificating official.
 4. A certificate of physical fitness issued in another state to a
minor seeking employment in this state may be accepted in lieu of the
certificate of physical fitness required by subdivision one of this
section, provided the standards for issuing such certificates in the
other state are deemed substantially equivalent to those of this state
in accordance with regulations adopted by the commissioner of education.
 * NB Repealed May 9, 2027
 * § 3221. Pledge of employment. The pledge of employment shall be
signed by the initial prospective employer or his authorized
representative and shall show his name and place of business, the
minor's name, the number of days per week and the number of hours per
day and per week during which he will be employed, the hours of the
beginning and the ending of work, and the nature and type of the
employment.
 * NB Effective until May 9, 2027
 * § 3221. Pledge of employment. The pledge of employment shall be
completed in the method prescribed pursuant to section one hundred
thirty-five of the labor law by the initial prospective employer or
their authorized representative and shall show their name and place of
business, the minor's name, the number of days per week and the number
of hours per day and per week during which they will be employed, the
hours of the beginning and the ending of work, and the nature and type
of the employment.
 * NB Effective May 9, 2027
 § 3222. Schooling record. 1. By whom issued. The schooling record
shall be issued by the principal of the school the minor attends or last
attended, or by a teacher deputized by the principal or by a supervising
official, and during the months of July and August, and at other times
in extraordinary circumstances and emergencies, by one or more public
school officials deputized in writing by the chancellor in New York city
and elsewhere by the superintendent of schools or by the district
superintendent of schools.
 2. Procedure. On application of the person in parental relation, a
schooling record shall be issued promptly to a minor who complies with
the following conditions:
 a. Presents a certificate of physical fitness. Upon receipt of an
application for a schooling record the person authorized to issue such
record shall request that an examination be made of the minor for a
certificate of physical fitness in accordance with the requirements
herein prescribed.
 b. Meets the specified age requirement.
 3. Such schooling record shall show, when practicable, the name of the
school and grade or class which the minor is then attending or last
attended.
 4. Upon notification by the division of criminal justice services that
a child has been listed as a missing child, a school in which the child
is currently or was previously enrolled shall flag the schooling record
of the child in such a manner that whenever a copy of or information
concerning the schooling record is requested, the person authorized to
issue such record shall be alerted to the fact that the child has been
reported as a missing child. The school shall immediately report to the
local law enforcement authority and the division of criminal justice
services any request concerning flagged schooling records or knowledge
as to the whereabouts of any missing child. Upon notification by the
division of criminal justice services that a reported missing child has
been recovered, the school shall remove the flag from the person's
schooling record.
 5. Upon notification by the division of criminal justice services that
a child who may be listed as a missing child is currently enrolled in
and believed to be attending a New York school, such school shall
immediately notify the division of criminal justice services.
 * § 3223. Duties of employers. The employer of any minor required to
have an employment certificate:
 1. Shall satisfy himself that the minor presenting an employment
certificate is in fact the minor named therein.
 2. Shall before employment begins, file at the place of the minor's
employment such certificate so that it may be readily accessible to any
authorized person to examine such document.
 3. Shall, upon termination of the minor's employment, return the
employment certificate to the minor.
 * NB Effective until May 9, 2027
 * § 3223. Duties of employers. The employer of any minor required to
have an employment certificate:
 1. Shall personally confirm that the minor presenting an employment
certificate is in fact the minor named therein.
 2. Shall before employment begins, physically or electronically file
at the place of the minor's employment such certificate so that it may
be readily accessible to any authorized person to examine such document.
 3. Shall, upon termination of the minor's employment, destroy any
physical or electronic copies of such certificate.
 * NB Effective May 9, 2027
 * § 3224. Temporary services. a. If an employer is engaged in a
business of assigning employees for temporary services at another
establishment, and the employer compensates the employee for such
services rendered the employer shall keep on file in his office the
employment certificate and shall cause to be delivered to each
establishment where the child will perform his services a true copy of
such employment certificate. Such delivery shall be deemed compliance
with sections thirty-two hundred sixteen and thirty-two hundred
twenty-three of this chapter. The owner of each establishment to which
the child is assigned shall keep on file in his office such copy of the
employment certificate, which shall be deemed compliance with sections
thirty-two hundred sixteen and thirty-two hundred twenty-three of this
chapter, and shall return such copy to the employer at the conclusion of
the child's assignment. Such employer shall note on the original
employment certificate the existence of each copy.
 b. As used in this section, the term "establishment" includes a
factory, mercantile establishment, business office, restaurant, hotel
and any other trade, business or service.
 c. The commissioner of education may promulgate rules and regulations
as he deems necessary to insure that employment under the provisions of
this section shall not be harmful or undesirable from the point of view
of the welfare, development, or proper education of the child.
 * NB Effective until May 9, 2027
 * § 3224. Temporary services. a. If an employer is engaged in a
business of assigning employees for temporary services at another
establishment, and the employer compensates the employee for such
services rendered the employer shall keep on file physically in office
or electronically and readily accessible the employment certificate and
shall cause to be delivered to each establishment where the child will
perform the services a true copy of such employment certificate. Such
delivery shall be deemed compliance with sections thirty-two hundred
sixteen and thirty-two hundred twenty-three of this part and section one
hundred thirty-five of the labor law. The owner of each establishment to
which the child is assigned shall also retain a copy of the employment
certificate and shall return such copy to the employer at the conclusion
of the child's assignment. Such employer shall note on the original
employment certificate the existence of each copy.
 b. As used in this section, the term "establishment" includes a
factory, mercantile establishment, business office, restaurant, hotel
and any other trade, business or service.
 c. The commissioner of education may promulgate rules and regulations
as they deem necessary to ensure that employment under the provisions of
this section shall not be harmful or undesirable from the point of view
of the welfare, development, or proper education of the child.
 * NB Effective May 9, 2027
 * § 3225. Special employment certificate. 1. A special employment
certificate may be issued to a minor fifteen years of age, found to be
incapable of profiting by further instruction available upon compliance
with the same requirements as in the case of a full-time employment
certificate.
 2. The fact that a minor is incapable of profiting from further
instruction available shall be determined in accordance with the
provisions of section thirty-two hundred eight of this article and the
regulations of the commissioner of education.
 3. A special employment certificate shall not authorize the employment
of a minor in or in connection with or for a factory.
 * NB Repealed May 9, 2027
 * § 3226. Farm work permits. 1. A farm work permit may be issued to a
minor fourteen or fifteen years of age authorizing employment in farm
service.
 2. A farm work permit also may be issued to a minor over twelve years
of age for employment in assisting in the hand work harvest of berries,
fruits and vegetables pursuant to paragraph e of subdivision two of
section one hundred thirty of the labor law.
 3. To obtain a farm work permit a minor shall present to the issuing
officer the following:
 a. Evidence of age;
 b. Written consent of the parent or guardian; and
 c. A certificate of physical fitness.
 4. Such permit shall be valid only when signed by the employer and
subject only to the condition that it shall not be valid for work in or
in connection with a factory.
 5. A farm work permit shall not be required for the employment of a
minor sixteen years of age or over in farm service.
 * NB Effective until May 9, 2027
 * § 3226. Farm work permits. 1. A farm work permit may be issued to a
minor fourteen or fifteen years of age authorizing employment in farm
service.
 2. A farm work permit also may be issued to a minor over twelve years
of age for employment in assisting in the hand work harvest of berries,
fruits and vegetables pursuant to paragraph e of subdivision two of
section one hundred thirty of the labor law.
 3. To obtain a farm work permit a minor shall present to the issuing
officer the following:
 a. Evidence of age; and
 b. Written consent of the person in parental relation as defined in
section thirty-two hundred twelve of this article.
 4. Such permit shall be valid only when signed by the employer and
subject only to the condition that it shall not be valid for work in or
in connection with a factory.
 5. A farm work permit shall not be required for the employment of a
minor sixteen years of age or over in farm service.
 * NB Effective May 9, 2027
 * § 3227. Street trades. 1. Definition. A street trade for the
purposes of part one of this article shall include the carrying,
selling, exposing or offering for sale of newspapers or periodicals, and
work as a bootblack, but shall not include the occupation engaged in by
a newspaper carrier as defined in subdivision one of section thirty-two
hundred twenty-eight of this chapter.
 2. Application. The provisions of this section shall apply to all
school districts.
 3. No minor under fourteen years of age shall be engaged in a street
trade; and no minor from fourteen to eighteen years of age shall be so
engaged unless a street trades permit has been lawfully issued to the
minor.
 4. A street trades permit shall be issued in the same manner and with
the same requirements as in the case of an employment certificate. Such
a permit shall expire two years from the date of its issuance.
 5. A minor to whom a street trades permit has been issued shall carry
it on his or her person while engaged in a street trade. Such a permit
shall not be transferred to another minor or used by another if
transferred.
 6. No minor shall be engaged in a street trade before six o'clock in
the morning nor after seven o'clock in the evening, nor during the time
the minor is required to attend upon instruction, nor more than four
hours in any one day when school is in session, nor more than five hours
in any one day when school is not in session.
 7. The police shall enforce the provisions of this section except with
respect to the issuance and revocation of street trades permits. The
industrial commissioner shall have concurrent power to enforce this
section except with respect to the issuance and revocation of street
trades permits.
 8. The school authorities may revoke the permit for cause after due
notice.
 * NB Repealed May 9, 2027
 * § 3228. Newspaper carrier. 1. Definition: A "newspaper carrier" is a
minor between the ages of eleven and eighteen years of age who engages
in the occupation of delivering, or selling and delivering, newspapers,
shopping papers or periodicals to customers at their homes or places of
business. For purposes of this section shopping papers shall mean those
community publications distributed, for the purposes of advertising and
public information, to the consumer without consideration being paid
therefor by the consumer.
 Such papers shall:
 (i) be distributed to the public on a community-wide basis;
 (ii) be published at stated intervals at least fifty times a year;
 (iii) have continuity as to title and general nature of content from
issue to issue;
 (iv) contain in each issue community notices or editorial comment or
articles by different authors; and
 (v) contain in each issue advertisements from numerous unrelated
advertisers including non-commercial advertisements.
 The term "shopping papers" shall not include mail order and other
catalogs, advertising fliers, travel brochures, house organs, theatre
programs, telephone directories, shopping and restaurant guides, racing
tip and form sheets, shopping center advertising sheets and similar
publications.
 2. A "newspaper carrier" shall possess a newspaper carrier permit and
shall carry it upon his or her person when engaged in the occupation of
delivering, or selling and delivering, newspapers, shopping papers or
periodicals to homes or places of business.
 3. A newspaper carrier permit shall be issued on a form prescribed by
the commissioner of education to a minor qualified to participate in
physical training as provided for in section thirty-two hundred four of
this chapter. Minors that are not participating in physical training may
be issued a permit with the approval of the school physician.
 4. No newspaper carrier shall be engaged in delivering, or selling and
delivering, newspapers, shopping papers or periodicals before five
o'clock in the morning nor after seven o'clock in the evening or thirty
minutes prior to sunset, whichever is later, nor during the time the
minor is required to attend upon instruction, nor for more than four
hours in any one day when school is in session, nor more than five hours
in any one day when school is not in session.
 5. No minor under eleven years of age may engage in the occupation of
delivering, or selling and delivering, newspapers, shopping papers or
periodicals to customers at their homes or places of business.
 6. The school authorities may revoke the permit for cause after due
notice.
 7. Enforcement. The police shall enforce the provisions of this
section except with respect to the issuance and revocation of permits.
The industrial commissioner shall have concurrent power to enforce this
section except with respect to the issuance and revocation of permits.
 8. It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation to wilfully and
knowingly deliver or cause to be delivered newspapers, shopping papers
or periodicals to a newspaper carrier who is not in compliance with the
provisions of this section.
 * NB Repealed May 9, 2027
 § 3230. School district meetings and activities. 1. The board of
education or trustees of each school district shall ensure that at any
meeting or activity which is conducted by the board of education,
trustees, school district or a district school which is specific to a
child's educational program and which parents or persons in parental
relationship who are deaf or hard of hearing, as defined by the
commissioner, attend, the board of education or trustees shall provide
interpreter services at no charge to such persons, provided a written
request therefor is made to the school district within a reasonable time
prior to the scheduled meeting or activity. In the event interpreter
services are requested, the school district shall appoint an interpreter
of the deaf to interpret the proceedings of the meeting or activity. In
the event that an interpreter is unavailable, other reasonable
accommodations shall be made which are satisfactory to the parents or
guardians.
 2. Each board of education or trustees shall adopt a policy which
shall establish the time limitation for requesting interpreter services,
examples of what constitutes reasonable accommodations and how the
regulations of the commissioner promulgated pursuant to this chapter
shall be implemented.
 3. For the purposes of this section "meeting" or "activity" shall
include those school-initiated meetings or activities which parents or
persons in parental relationship who are deaf or hard of hearing attend
which are specific to the academic and/or disciplinary aspects of their
child's educational program including parent-teacher conferences and
other such meetings and activities as defined by the commissioner.
 § 3232. Courts having jurisdiction. 1. Courts sitting as courts of
special sessions or as magistrates' courts shall have concurrent
jurisdiction with family courts to hear, try and determine charges of
violation of the provisions of part one of this article, within their
respective jurisdiction. In the counties of Cortland and Westchester
and in the city of New York family courts shall have exclusive original
jurisdiction in such proceedings. Notwithstanding other provisions of
law, family courts shall have jurisdiction, for the purposes of part one
of this article, of minors.
 2. A prosecution instituted under the provisions of part one of this
article shall be deemed a bar to a prosecution under the labor law based
on the same state of facts.
 § 3233. Penalties. Except as otherwise provided, a violation of part
one of this article shall be punishable for the first offense by a fine
not exceeding ten dollars or ten days' imprisonment; for each subsequent
offense by a fine not exceeding fifty dollars, or by imprisonment not
exceeding thirty days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
 A violation of sections thirty-two hundred fifteen, thirty-two hundred
twenty-three and thirty-two hundred twenty-four of this article shall be
punishable for a first offense by a fine of not less than twenty nor
more than fifty dollars; for a second offense by a fine of not less than
fifty nor more than two hundred fifty dollars, or by imprisonment for
not more than thirty days or by both such fine and imprisonment; for a
third offense by a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars, or
by imprisonment for not more than sixty days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
 Any person who knowingly makes a false statement in or in relation to
any application made for an employment certificate or permit as to any
matter required by this chapter to appear in any affidavit, record,
transcript, certificate or permit therein provided for, is guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished, except as in this
chapter or in the penal law otherwise provided, for a first offense by a
fine of not more than one hundred dollars; for a second offense by a
fine of not less than one hundred nor more than five hundred dollars, or
by imprisonment for not more than thirty days or by both such fine and
imprisonment; for a subsequent offense by a fine of not less than three
hundred dollars, or by imprisonment for not more than sixty days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment.
 § 3234. Enforcement; withholding state moneys by commissioner of
education. 1. The commissioner of education shall supervise the
enforcement of part one of this article and he may withhold one-half of
all public school moneys from any city or district, which, in his
judgment, wilfully omits and refuses to enforce the provisions of part
one of this article, after due notice, so often and so long as such
wilful omission and refusal shall, in his judgment, occur, or continue.
 2. If the provisions of part one of this article are complied with at
any time within one year from the date on which said moneys were
withheld, the money so withheld shall be paid over by said commissioner
of education to such district or city, otherwise forfeited to the state.
 PART II
 SCHOOL CENSUS
Section 3240. School census in the cities of New York, Buffalo and
 Rochester.
 3241. School census in cities, except in cities having a
 population of one hundred twenty-five thousand or more.
 3242. School census in school districts.
 3243. Penalty for withholding information.
 3244. Education of children in foster care.
 § 3240. School census in the cities of New York, Buffalo and
Rochester. In the cities of New York, Buffalo and Rochester provision
shall be made by the board of education for taking a school census in
connection with the work of enforcing part one of this article.
 § 3241. School census in cities, except in cities having a population
of one hundred twenty-five thousand or more. 1. The board of education
of each city, except in cities having a population of one hundred
twenty-five thousand or more, shall constitute a permanent census board
in such city. Such board shall, under its regulations, cause a census of
the children in its city to be taken and to be amended from day to day,
as changes of residence shall occur among persons in such cities within
the ages prescribed in subdivision two of this section and as other
persons shall come within the ages prescribed therein and as other
persons within such ages shall become residents of such cities, so that
there shall always be on file with such board a complete census giving
the facts and information required in subdivision two of this section;
provided, however, that for pre-school students from birth to five years
of age, such census may be prepared and filed biennially on or before
the fifteenth day of October.
 2. Such census shall include all persons between birth and eighteen
years of age and in the case of physically or mentally handicapped
children between birth and twenty-one years of age, their names, their
respective residences by street and number, the day of the month and the
year of their birth, the names of the persons in parental relation to
them, such information relating to physical or mental defects, to
illiteracy, to employment and to the enforcement of the law relating to
child labor and compulsory education as the education department and the
board of education of each such city shall require and also such further
information as such board of education shall require.
 3. Such board shall provide to the commissioner of education upon
written request therefor and in such form as shall be prescribed by him,
a report containing the names, ages and addresses of those children who
are blind or deaf and those having serious physical or mental defects.
In addition such report shall indicate whether such children are being
educated within the public schools of the district or, if they are not,
where such education is being furnished them.
 4. It shall be the duty of persons in parental relation to any person
between such ages residing within the limits of any such city to make
such reports as the board of education of such city shall require. Such
reports shall contain the following information:
 a. Two weeks before any child shall become of the compulsory school
age, the name of such child, its residence, the name of the person or
persons in parental relation thereto, and the name and location of the
school to which such child shall have been or shall be sent as a pupil.
 b. In case a child of compulsory school age shall, for any cause, be
removed from one school and sent to another school, or sent to work in
accordance with the labor law, all the facts in relation thereto.
 c. In case the residence of a child shall be removed from one police
precinct to another police precinct, the new residence and the other
facts required in paragraphs a and b of this subdivision.
 d. In case a child between birth and eighteen years of age shall
become a resident of such city for the first time, the name, residence
and such other facts as the board of education shall require.
 § 3242. School census in school districts. The trustees or board of
education of every school district may cause a census to be taken of all
children between birth and eighteen years of age, including all such
facts and information as are required in the census provided for in
section thirty-two hundred forty-one of this part. Such census shall be
prepared biennially for children between ages five and eighteen who are
entitled to attend the public schools without payment of tuition in
duplicate in their respective school districts, and one copy thereof
filed with the teacher or principal and the other copy filed with the
district superintendent or superintendent on or before the fifteenth day
of October. For pre-school students from birth to five years of age,
such census may be prepared and filed biennially on or before the
fifteenth day of October. Such census shall include the reports and
information required from cities as provided in section thirty-two
hundred forty-one of this part. All information regarding a student with
a disability under the age of twenty-one years shall be filed annually
with the superintendent of the board of cooperative educational services
of which said district may be a part.
 § 3243. Penalty for withholding information. A parent, guardian or
other person having under his control or charge a child between birth
and eighteen years of age who withholds or refuses to give information
in his possession relating to such child and required under part two of
this article, or any such parent, guardian or other person who gives
false information in relation thereto, shall be liable to and punished
by a fine not exceeding twenty dollars or by imprisonment not exceeding
thirty days.
 § 3244. Education of children in foster care. 1. Definitions. For
purposes of this section only, the following definitions shall apply:
 a. Child or youth in foster care. For the purposes of this article,
the term "child or youth in foster care" shall mean a child who is in
the care and custody or custody and guardianship of a local commissioner
of social services or the commissioner of the office of children and
family services.
 b. School district of origin. The term "school district of origin"
shall mean the school district within the state of New York in which the
child or youth in foster care was attending a public school or preschool
on a tuition-free basis or was entitled to attend at the time of
placement into foster care when the social services district or the
office of children and family services assumed care and custody or
custody and guardianship of such child or youth, which is different from
the school district of residence.
 c. School district of residence. The term "school district of
residence" shall mean the public school district within the state of New
York in which the foster care placement is located, which is different
from the school district of origin.
 d. Feeder school. The term "feeder school" shall mean:
 (1) a preschool whose students are entitled to attend a specified
elementary school or group of elementary schools upon completion of that
preschool;
 (2) a school whose students are entitled to attend a specified
elementary, middle, intermediate, or high school or group of specified
elementary, middle, intermediate, or high schools upon completion of the
terminal grade of such school; or
 (3) a school that sends its students to a receiving school in a
neighboring school district pursuant to section two thousand forty of
this chapter.
 e. Preschool. The term "preschool" shall mean a publicly funded
pre-kindergarten program administered by the department or a local
educational agency or a Head Start program administered by a local
educational agency and/or services under the Individuals with
Disabilities Education Act administered by a local educational agency.
 f. Receiving school. The term "receiving school" shall mean:
 (1) a school that enrolls students from a specified or group of
preschools, elementary schools, middle schools, intermediate schools, or
high schools; or
 (2) a school that enrolls students from a feeder school in a
neighboring local educational agency pursuant to section two thousand
forty of this chapter.
 g. School of origin. The term "school of origin" shall mean a public
school that a child or youth attended at the time of placement into
foster care, or the school in which the child or youth was last
enrolled, including a preschool or a charter school. Provided that, for
a child or youth in foster care who completes the final grade level
served by the school of origin, the term "school of origin" shall
include the designated receiving school at the next grade level for all
feeder schools. Where the child is eligible to attend school in the
school district of origin because the child was placed in foster care
after such child is eligible to apply, register, or enroll in the public
preschool or kindergarten or the child is living with a school-age
sibling who attends school in the school district of origin, the school
of origin shall include any public school or preschool in which such
child would have been entitled or eligible to attend based on such
child's last residence before the circumstances arose which caused such
child to be placed in foster care.
 2. Choice of district and school. a. Notwithstanding any other
provision of law to the contrary, the social services district, in
consultation with the appropriate local educational agency or agencies,
shall designate either the school district of origin or the school
district of residence within which the child in foster care shall be
entitled to attend in accordance with a best interest determination made
by the applicable social services district or voluntary authorized
agency, as defined in paragraph (a) of subdivision ten of section three
hundred seventy-one of the social services law, in accordance with the
regulations of the office of children and family services. The child
shall be entitled to attend the school of origin or any school that
children and youth who live in the attendance area in which the foster
care placement is located are eligible to attend, including a preschool,
subject to a best interest determination made by the applicable social
services district or voluntary authorized agency, as defined in
paragraph (a) of subdivision ten of section three hundred seventy-one of
the social services law, for the duration of the child's placement in
foster care and until the end of the school year in which such child is
no longer in foster care and for one additional year if that year
constitutes the child's terminal year in such building.
 b. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, where
the school district of origin or school of origin that a child was
attending on a tuition-free basis or was entitled to attend when such
child entered foster care is located in New York state and the child's
foster care placement is located in a contiguous state, the child shall
be entitled to attend the school of origin or any school that children
and youth who live in the attendance area in which the foster care
placement is located are eligible to attend, including a preschool,
subject to a best interest determination made by the applicable social
services district or voluntary authorized agency, as defined in
paragraph (a) of subdivision ten of section three hundred seventy-one of
the social services law, for the duration of the child's placement in
foster care and until the end of the school year in which such child is
no longer in foster care and for one additional year if that year
constitutes the child's terminal year in such building.
 c. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph a or b of this
subdivision, a child in foster care who is moved from one foster care
placement to another shall be entitled to continue to attend the school
of origin or the social services district may designate that the child
in foster care attend any school that children and youth who live in the
attendance area in which the foster care placement is located are
eligible to attend, including a preschool, subject to a best interest
determination made by the applicable social services district or
voluntary authorized agency, as defined in paragraph (a) of subdivision
ten of section three hundred seventy-one of the social services law, for
the duration of the child's placement in foster care and until the end
of the school year in which the child is no longer in such foster care
placement and for one additional year if that year constitutes the
child's terminal year in such building.
 d. Upon notification of the designation made by the social services
district for a foster care youth, the designated school district of
attendance shall immediately:
 (1) enroll the child or youth in foster care even if the child or
youth is unable to produce records normally a requirement for
enrollment, such as previous academic records, records of immunization
and/or other required health records, proof of residency or other
documentation and/or even if the child has missed application or
enrollment deadlines during any period of placement in foster care, if
applicable. Provided that nothing herein shall be construed to require
the immediate attendance of an enrolled student lawfully excluded from
school temporarily pursuant to section nine hundred six of this chapter
because of a communicable or infectious disease that imposes a
significant risk of infection of others;
 (2) treat the child or youth in foster care as a resident for all
purposes; and
 (3) make a written request to the school district where the child's
records are located for a copy of such records.
 e. Within five days of receipt of a request for records in accordance
with subparagraph three of paragraph d of this subdivision, the school
district shall forward, in a manner consistent with state and federal
law, a complete copy of the records of the child or youth in foster care
including, but not limited to, proof of age, academic records,
evaluations, immunization records, and guardianship papers, if
applicable.
 f. Where the school of origin is a charter school, the school district
designated pursuant to this subdivision shall be deemed to be the school
district of residence of such child for purposes of fiscal and
programmatic responsibility under article fifty-six of this chapter and
shall be responsible for transportation of the child in foster care. If
the designated school district of attendance is not the school district
of origin, the designated school district of attendance may seek
reimbursement from the school district of origin in accordance with the
provisions of subdivision four of section thirty-two hundred two of this
article.
 g. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, each
local educational agency, as such term is defined in subsection
twenty-six of section ninety-one hundred one of the Elementary and
Secondary Education Act of 1965, as amended by the Every Student
Succeeds Act of 2015, shall designate a local educational agency point
of contact for children and youth in foster care. Provided that such
point of contact shall not be the same as the liaison designated
pursuant to the subtitle B of title VII of the McKinney-Vento Assistance
Act, unless the McKinney-Vento liaison has sufficient ability to carry
out the responsibilities of the McKinney-Vento liaison in addition to
the responsibilities of the point of contact for children and youth in
foster care.
 3. Reimbursement. The tuition costs of the education of such child or
youth in foster care shall be borne in accordance with the provisions of
paragraph d of subdivision four of section thirty-two hundred two of
this article.
 4. Transportation. a. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any
child or youth in foster care who requires transportation in order to
attend a school of origin designated pursuant to subdivision two of this
section, shall be entitled to receive such transportation pursuant to
this paragraph. The designated school district of attendance shall
provide transportation to and from the child's foster care placement
location and the school of origin. Any cost incurred for such
transportation that is allowable up to fifty miles each way pursuant to
the applicable provision of parts two and three of article seventy-three
of this chapter or herein, shall be aidable pursuant to subdivision
seven of section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter, provided that
the approved transportation expense shall not exceed an amount
determined by the commissioner to be the total cost for providing the
most cost-effective mode of such transportation in a manner consistent
with the commissioner's regulations.
 b. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, where any child or
youth in foster care attends the school district of residence and such
child does not attend the school of origin, such school district shall
provide transportation to such child on the same basis as a resident
student. Any cost incurred for such transportation that is allowable
pursuant to the applicable provisions of parts two and three of article
seventy-three of this chapter or herein, shall be aidable pursuant to
subdivision seven of section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter,
provided that the approved transportation expense shall not exceed an
amount determined by the commissioner to be the total cost for providing
the most cost-effective mode of such transportation in a manner
consistent with the commissioner's regulations.
 c. Excess allowable transportation costs beyond those reimbursed in
paragraphs a and b of this subdivision resulting from the attendance of
a child or youth in foster care shall be shared between the social
services district responsible for the foster care costs of the child or
youth and the designated school district of attendance equally. Excess
transportation costs shall mean the difference between what a school
district otherwise would spend to transport a student to his or her
assigned school and the cost of transporting a child in foster care to
his or her school of origin; except as otherwise reimbursed under
paragraph a or b of this subdivision and as further defined in
regulations of the commissioner. The school district and local social
services district are expected to consider and utilize all allowable
funding sources, including any available federal funds, to cover
additional transportation costs. Provided however that school districts
and social services districts that have written agreements relating to
how excess transportation costs should be funded, that both entities
have agreed to and are consistent with the requirements in subparagraph
five of paragraph c of section one thousand one hundred twelve of title
twenty of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965, as amended
by the Every Student Succeeds Act of 2015, filed with the department and
the office of children and family services shall not be subject to this
paragraph. In the absence of such a shared agreement, such school
districts and local departments of social services are subject to the
provisions of this paragraph.
 d. Where the child has been placed in foster care in a contiguous
state and has designated a school of origin located in the state of New
York, the designated school district of attendance in New York state
shall collaborate with the social services district to arrange for
transportation.
 5. Each child or youth in foster care to be assisted under this
section shall be provided services comparable to services offered to
other students in the school selected under this section, including the
following: transportation services; educational services for which the
child or youth meets the eligibility criteria, such as services provided
under Title I of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 or
similar state or local programs; educational programs for children with
disabilities; educational programs for English learners; programs in
career and technical education; programs for gifted and talented
students; and school nutrition programs.
 6. The commissioner, in consultation with the office of children and
family services, may promulgate regulations to carry out the purposes of
this section.