 TITLE VII
 STATE AND CITY COLLEGES AND INSTITUTIONS-CORNELL UNIVERSITY
 ARTICLE 125
 CITY UNIVERSITY OF NEW YORK
Section 6201. Legislative findings and intent.
 6202. Definitions.
 6203. City university of New York.
 6204. Board of trustees.
 6204-a. College opportunity to prepare for employment.
 6205. Liability of board of trustees and liability of city
 university of New York.
 6206. Powers and duties.
 6207. Administration of civil service.
 6208. Collective negotiation.
 6209. Investments in designated obligations; indemnification.
 6210. Non-Instructional positions.
 6211. College presidents emeriti; appointments, duties,
 qualifications, salary.
 6212. Tenure.
 6213. Establishment of collegiate centers.
 6214. Retirement systems.
 6215. Fees.
 6216. State aid.
 6218. Contracts and purchases.
 6219. Conveyance of property.
 6220. Salary schedules in certain public institutions of
 higher learning.
 6221. Financing of the city university of New York.
 6222. Admission of non-residents of the city of New York to
 each community college of the city university.
 6223. Deferred education payments.
 6224. Claims against city university.
 6225. Pending actions and proceedings.
 6226. Community college severance provisions.
 6227. Reference in provisions relating to retirement.
 6228. Transitory provisions.
 6229. City university of New York community college budget
 process.
 6230. City university of New York senior college budget
 process.
 6231. Certain payment by the state of New York to the city of
 New York.
 6232. College of Staten Island, New York city technical
 college and Medgar Evers college programs.
 6233. Reports of the city university trustees.
 6233-a. Master capital plan.
 6234. Perfection of security interests.
 § 6201. Legislative findings and intent. 1. The legislature finds
that in order to meet the state's responsibility to provide
post-secondary education in New York city beyond the associate degree
level, as it does elsewhere in the state, there should be full state
funding of senior college operating and debt service. The governance of
the university must reflect increased state responsibility but should
preserve the city's participation in the governance of the university it
created and developed at city expense.
 2. The legislature intends that the city university of New York should
be maintained as an independent system of higher education governed by
its own board of trustees responsible for the governance, maintenance
and development of both senior and community college units of the city
university. The university must remain responsive to the needs of its
urban setting and maintain its close articulation between senior and
community college units. Where possible, governance and operation of
senior and community colleges should be jointly conducted or conducted
by similar procedures to maintain the university as an integrated system
and to facilitate articulation between units.
 3. The legislature's intent is that the city university be supported
as an independent and integrated system of higher education on the
assumption that the university will continue to maintain and expand its
commitment to academic excellence and to the provision of equal access
and opportunity for students, faculty and staff from all ethnic and
racial groups and from both sexes.
 4. The city university is of vital importance as a vehicle for the
upward mobility of the disadvantaged in the city of New York. The
pioneering efforts of the SEEK and College Discovery programs must not
be diminished as a result of greater state financial responsibility for
the operation of the city and state of New York.
 5. Only the strongest commitment to the special needs of an urban
constituency justifies the legislature's support of an independent and
unique structure for the university. Activities at the city university
campuses must be undertaken in a spirit which recognizes and responds to
the imperative need for affirmative action and the positive desire to
have city university personnel reflect the diverse communities which
comprise the people of the city and state of New York. In its urban
environment this commitment should be evident in all the guidelines
established by the board of trustees for the university's operation,
from admissions and hiring to contracting for the provision of goods,
services, new construction and facilities rehabilitation.
 § 6202. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms
shall have the following meanings unless the context shall otherwise
require.
 1. The term "board of trustees" means the board of trustees of the
city university of New York.
 2. The term "city university" shall mean the city university of New
York, including each senior college and each community college.
 3. The terms "center", "center of instruction", "college", "college
unit", "educational unit" and "unit" shall each mean either a senior
college or a community college or both.
 4. The term "community college" shall mean an institution of higher
education in the city of New York, which is governed and administered as
such, by the board of trustees on July first, nineteen hundred
seventy-nine, whose primary purpose is providing certificate and
associate degree post secondary programs in general and technical
educational subjects, and is receiving financial assistance from the
state as a community college. Article one hundred twenty-six of this
chapter shall continue to apply to such institutions but they shall
hereafter be governed by the board of trustees in accordance with the
provisions of this article.
 5. The term "senior college" shall mean an institution of higher
education in the city of New York, which is governed and administered by
the board of trustees, including, but not limited to, a professional or
graduate institution, an institution for research, an administrative
institution, and, except as otherwise provided, Medgar Evers college,
New York city college of technology (formerly known as "New York city
technical college" and "New York city community college"), and the
college of Staten Island, but not including a community college.
 6. The term "the mayor" shall mean the mayor of the city of New York.
 7. The term "revised unfunded accrued liability payment" and the term
"revised unfunded accrued liability contribution," when used in relation
to the New York city employees' retirement system, shall mean a payment
of contribution which is required by the provisions of item (iii) of
subparagraph (a) of paragraph one of subdivision b of section 13-127 of
the administrative code of the city of New York to be made to such
retirement system with respect to any fiscal year of the city preceding
July first, nineteen hundred ninety. Either such term, when used in
relation to the New York city teachers' retirement system, shall mean a
payment or contribution which is required by the provisions of
subparagraph (c) of paragraph one of subdivision a of section 13-527 of
such code to be made to such retirement system with respect to any
fiscal year of the city preceding July first, nineteen hundred ninety.
 8. The term "nineteen hundred eighty unfunded accrued liability
adjustment," when used in relation to the New York city employees'
retirement system, shall mean the total amount which is determined
pursuant to the provisions of items (i), (ii), (iii), (iv) and (v) of
subparagraph (c) of paragraph (3) of subdivision b of section 13-127 of
the administrative code of the city of New York to be the amount to be
paid as a charge or applied as a credit, as the case may be, pursuant to
the provisions of subparagraph (b) of paragraph (1) of such subdivision
b, with respect to employer contributions to such retirement system for
any fiscal year of the city preceding July first, nineteen hundred
ninety. Such term, when used in relation to the New York city teachers'
retirement system, shall mean the total amount which is determined
pursuant to the provisions of paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6),
(7) and (8) of subdivision e of section 13-527 of such code to be the
amount to be paid as a charge or applied as a credit, as the case may
be, pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (2) of subdivision a of such
section, with respect to employer contributions to such retirement
system for any fiscal year of the city preceding July first, nineteen
hundred ninety.
 8-a. The term "nineteen hundred eighty-two unfunded accrued liability
adjustment," when used in relation to the New York city employees'
retirement system, shall mean the total amount which is determined
pursuant to the provisions of item (vi) of subparagraph (c) of paragraph
three of subdivision b of section 13-127 of the administrative code of
the city of New York to be the amount to be applied as a credit pursuant
to the provisions of subparagraph (b) of paragraph (1) of such
subdivision b, with respect to employer contributions to such retirement
system for any fiscal year of the city preceding July first, nineteen
hundred ninety. Such term, when used in relation to the New York city
teachers' retirement system, shall mean the total amount which is
determined pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (9) of subdivision e
of section 13-527 of such code to be the amount to be applied as a
credit pursuant to the provisions of paragraph two of subdivision a of
such section, with respect to employer contributions to such retirement
system for any fiscal year of the city preceding July first, nineteen
hundred ninety.
 8-b. The term "NYCERS nineteen hundred eighty-five unfunded accrued
liability adjustment attributable to the senior colleges" shall mean the
total amount which is determined pursuant to the provisions of sub-items
(H), (I), (J) and (J-1) of item (vii) of subparagraph (c) of paragraph
three of subdivision b of section 13-127 of the administrative code of
the city of New York to be the amount to be applied as a credit in favor
of the city of New York and the state of New York with respect to their
required contributions to the contingent reserve fund of the New York
city employees' retirement system for any fiscal year of the city
preceding July first, nineteen hundred ninety.
 8-c. The term "NYCTRS nineteen hundred eighty-five unfunded accrued
liability adjustment" shall mean the total amount which is determined
pursuant to the provisions of paragraph ten of subdivision e of section
13-527 of the administrative code of the city of New York to be the
amount to be applied as a credit, pursuant to the provisions of
subparagraph c-1 of paragraph two of subdivision a of such section
13-527, with respect to employer contributions to the New York city
teachers' retirement system for fiscal years of the city preceding July
first, nineteen hundred ninety.
 8-d. The term "NYCTRS nineteen hundred eighty-six unfunded accrued
liability adjustment" shall mean the total amount which is determined
pursuant to the provisions of paragraph eleven of subdivision e of
section 13-527 of the administrative code of the city of New York to be
the amount to be applied as a credit, pursuant to the provisions of
subparagraph c-2 of paragraph two of subdivision a of such section
13-527, with respect to employer contributions to the New York city
teachers' retirement system for fiscal years of the city preceding July
first, nineteen hundred ninety.
 8-e. The term "New York city employees' retirement system nineteen
hundred eighty-eight unfunded accrued liability adjustment attributable
to the senior colleges" shall mean the amount which is determined
pursuant to the provision of subdivisions j, k, l and m of section
13-638.1 of the administrative code of the city of New York to be the
amount to be paid as a charge by, or applied as credit in favor of (as
the case may be), the city of New York and the state of New York,
pursuant to the provisions of subdivisions r and s of such section, with
respect to their required contributions to the contingent reserve fund
of the New York city employees' retirement system for any fiscal year of
the city preceding July first, nineteen hundred ninety.
 8-f. The term "New York city teachers' retirement system nineteen
hundred eighty-eight unfunded accrued liability adjustment attributable
to the senior colleges" shall mean the amount which is determined
pursuant to the provisions of subdivisions n, o, p and q of section
13-638.1 of the administrative code of the city of New York to be the
amount to be paid as a charge by, or applied as a credit in favor of (as
the case may be), the city of New York and the state of New York,
pursuant to the provisions of subdivisions r and s of such section, with
respect to their required contributions to the contingent reserve fund
of the New York city teachers' retirement system for fiscal years of the
city preceding July first, nineteen hundred ninety.
 8-g. The term "NYCERS post-June thirtieth, nineteen hundred ninety
unfunded accrued liability adjustment attributable to the senior
colleges" shall mean any amount which, pursuant to subdivision k of
section 13-638.2 of the administrative code of the city of New York, is
required to be paid as a charge by, or applied as a credit in favor of
(as the case may be) the city of New York and the state of New York with
respect to their required contributions, for fiscal years of the city
succeeding June thirtieth, nineteen hundred ninety, to the contingent
reserve fund of the New York city employees' retirement system in
relation to the senior colleges.
 8-h. The term "NYCTRS post-June thirtieth, nineteen hundred ninety
unfunded accrued liability adjustment attributable to the senior
colleges" shall mean any amount which, pursuant to subdivision k of
section 13-638.2 of the administrative code of the city of New York, is
required to be paid as a charge by, or applied as a credit in favor of
(as the case may be) the city of New York and the state of New York with
respect to their required contributions, for fiscal years of the city
succeeding June thirtieth, nineteen hundred ninety, to the contingent
reserve fund of the New York city teachers' retirement system in
relation to the senior colleges.
 8-i. The term "NYCERS phase-in installment of nineteen hundred ninety
consolidated UAL contribution attributable to the senior colleges" shall
mean any phase-in installment defined in paragraph thirty of subdivision
a of section 13-638.2 of the administrative code of the city of New
York.
 8-j. The term "NYCERS regular installment of nineteen hundred ninety
consolidated UAL contribution attributable to the senior colleges" shall
mean any regular installment defined in paragraph forty of subdivision a
of section 13-638.2 of the administrative code of the city of New York.
 8-k. The term "NYCTRS phase-in installment of nineteen hundred ninety
consolidated UAL contribution attributable to the senior colleges" shall
mean any phase-in installment defined in paragraph thirty-two of
subdivision a of section 13-638.2 of the administrative code of the city
of New York.
 8-l. The term "NYCTRS regular installment of nineteen hundred ninety
consolidated UAL contribution attributable to the senior colleges" shall
mean any regular installment defined in paragraph forty-one of
subdivision a of section 13-638.2 of the administrative code of the city
of New York.
 8-m. The term "NYCERS installment of nineteen hundred ninety BSL
contribution attributable to the senior colleges" shall mean any
installment defined in paragraph forty-six of subdivision a of section
13-638.2 of the administrative code of the city of New York.
 8-n. The term "NYCTRS installment of nineteen hundred ninety BSL
contribution attributable to the senior colleges" shall mean any
installment defined in paragraph forty-eight of subdivision a of section
13-638.2 of the administrative code of the city of New York.
 8-o. The term "contributions for twenty-year amortization of nineteen
hundred ninety senior college consolidated UAL and senior college
remainder of BSL" shall mean all of the installments of contribution and
contributions referred to in subdivisions 8-i to 8-n, inclusive, of this
section which are required to be paid by the city and the state during
the applicable twenty-year amortization period pursuant to section
sixty-two hundred thirty-one of this article and the applicable
provisions of subdivision bb of section 13-638.2 of the administrative
code of the city of New York.
 9. The term "balance sheet liability contribution", when used in
relation to the New York city employees' retirement system, shall mean a
payment of contribution which is required by the provisions of item (iv)
of subparagraph (a) of paragraph one of subdivision b of section 13-127
of the administrative code of the city of New York to be made to such
retirement system with respect to any fiscal year of the city preceding
July first, nineteen hundred ninety. Such term, when used in relation to
the New York city teachers' retirement system, shall mean a payment of
contribution which is required by the provisions of subparagraph (d) of
paragraph one of subdivision a of section 13-527 of such code to be made
to such retirement system with respect to any fiscal year of such city
preceding July first, nineteen hundred ninety.
 § 6203. City university of New York. The separate and distinct body
corporate designated as the board of higher education in the city of New
York shall be continued and shall hereinafter be known as the city
university of New York. The city university shall have the powers and
privileges of colleges and shall be subject to the visitation of the
regents of the university of the state of New York. The city university
shall have the care, custody, control, and management of the lands,
grounds, buildings, facilities and equipment used for the purposes of
the educational units of the city university and it shall have the power
to protect, preserve and improve the same. Each existing unit of the
city university shall be given an appropriate and distinctive
designation.
 § 6204. Board of trustees. 1. The board of trustees shall govern and
administer the city university. The control of the educational work of
the city university shall rest solely in the board of trustees which
shall govern and administer all educational units of the city
university.
 2. Structure of the board of trustees:
 (a) The board of trustees shall consist of seventeen trustees. Ten of
the trustees shall be appointed by the governor with the advice and
consent of the senate. Five of the trustees shall be appointed by the
mayor of the city of New York with the advice and consent of the senate.
One ex-officio trustee shall be the chairperson of the university
student senate. One ex-officio non-voting trustee shall be the
chairperson of the university faculty senate.
 (b) The ex-officio trustees shall be afforded the same parliamentary
privileges as are conferred upon the appointed trustees. The ex-officio
trustees shall be subject to every provision of any general, special or
local law, ordinance, charter, code, rule or regulation applying to the
appointed trustees of the board with respect to the discharge of their
duties including, but not limited to, those provisions setting forth
codes of ethics, disclosure requirements and prohibiting business and
professional activities. The chair of the university faculty senate
shall not participate as a voting trustee in any matter.
 (c) Except as provided in subparagraphs (i), (ii) and (iii) of this
paragraph, the term of office of each appointed trustee shall be seven
years renewable solely for one additional term of seven years.
 (i) The members of the board of higher education in the city of New
York shall be and constitute the members of the board of trustees for
the period beginning July first, nineteen hundred seventy-nine and
ending December thirty-first, nineteen hundred seventy-nine.
 (ii) Effective January first, nineteen hundred eighty, the governor
shall appoint one trustee to a term which expires on June thirtieth,
nineteen hundred eighty, two trustees to terms which expire on June
thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty-one, one trustee to a term which
expires on June thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty-two, two trustees to
terms which expire on June thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty-three, one
trustee to a term which expires on June thirtieth, nineteen hundred
eighty-four, two trustees to terms which expire on June thirtieth,
nineteen hundred eighty-five, and one trustee to a term which expires on
June thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty-six. Upon expirations of these
terms, the governor shall appoint trustees to full seven year terms.
 (iii) Effective January first, nineteen hundred eighty, the mayor
shall appoint one trustee to a term which expires on June thirtieth,
nineteen hundred eighty, one trustee to a term which expires on June
thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty-two, one trustee to a term which
expires on June thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty-three, one trustee to
a term which expires on June thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty-five,
and one trustee to a term which expires on June thirtieth, nineteen
hundred eighty-six. Upon expiration of the terms the mayor shall
appoint trustees to full seven year terms.
 (d) A chairperson and a vice chairperson of the board of trustees
shall be appointed by and shall serve at the pleasure of the governor.
 (e) At least four of the trustees initially appointed by the governor
and two of the trustees initially appointed by the mayor pursuant to
this subdivision shall be selected from among the persons serving on the
board of higher education in the city of New York, on and after January
first, nineteen hundred seventy-nine.
 (f) The five trustees appointed by the mayor shall include at least
one resident of each of the five boroughs of the city of New York.
 (g) The trustees appointed by the governor shall include at least one
resident of each of the five boroughs of the city of New York.
 (h) The trustees appointed by the mayor shall include at least one
alumnus of an educational unit in the city university. The trustees
appointed by the governor shall include at least two alumnae of an
educational unit in the city university including at least one other
alumnus of a community college.
 (i) In the event of a vacancy occurring in the office of trustee by
death, resignation or otherwise, a successor shall be chosen in the same
manner as was the trustee whose office became vacant, to serve for the
balance of the term.
 (j) Any trustee appointed by the governor may be removed by the
governor and any trustee appointed by the mayor may be removed by the
mayor. Removal of a trustee by the governor or the mayor shall be upon
proof of (i) official misconduct or neglect of official duties; or (ii)
mental or physical inability to perform his duties. Before the removal
of a trustee, the trustee shall receive due and timely written notice of
the charges and a copy of the charges. The trustee shall be entitled to
a hearing on the charges pursuant to due and timely notice before the
governor or the mayor, as the case may be, and to the assistance of
counsel on such hearing.
 (k) Trustees shall receive no compensation for their services but
shall be reimbursed for their actual and necessary expenses incurred by
them in the performance of their duties under this article.
 3. Meetings of the board of trustees. (a) The by-laws of the board of
trustees shall provide for regular meetings. At least seven days notice
of every regular meeting and a copy of the agenda for that meeting shall
be mailed to the usual address of each trustee. Resolutions for the
consideration of the board of trustees must be mailed to the usual
address of each trustee no less than seven days prior to a meeting,
unless the chair shall make available in writing on the day of the
meeting the facts which necessitate an immediate vote. The agendas for
such meetings shall be available electronically on the city university
of New York website three days prior to the meetings unless an executive
committee meeting has been called in which an agenda must be available
twenty-four hours in advance, and shall be considered public records. A
summary of resolutions and board actions for any such meeting of the
board of trustees shall be electronically available on the city
university of New York website no later than seven days after the
meeting and shall be considered public records. The approved minutes,
attendance, voting record, and either transcripts or video record for
any such meeting must be posted no later than seven days following their
approval by the board. Information posted on the city university of New
York website regarding board of trustee meetings shall remain on the
site as archived data for a minimum of ten years. All meetings shall be
held in accordance with article seven of the public officers law.
 (b) The chairperson, the vice chairperson or any five trustees acting
by petition, may at any time call a special meeting of the board of
trustees and fix the time and place therefor. Each trustee shall receive
telephonic or written notice of a special meeting at least twenty-four
hours prior to the special meeting. An agenda for such meeting,
including meetings of any committees and subcommittees under the purview
of the board of trustees, shall be available electronically on the city
university of New York website twenty-four hours prior to the special
meeting of the board and shall be considered a public record. A summary
of resolutions and board actions for any such meeting of the board of
trustees shall be electronically available on the city university of New
York website no later than seven days after the meeting and shall be
considered a public record. The approved minutes, attendance, voting
record, and either transcripts or video record for any such meeting must
be posted no later than seven days following their approval by the
board. Information posted on the city university of New York website
regarding board of trustee meetings shall remain on the site as archived
data for a minimum of ten years. Any such meeting of the board of
trustees shall be conducted in accordance with article seven of the
public officers law.
 (c) Nine trustees attending a meeting shall constitute a quorum for
the transaction of business by the board of trustees.
 (d) (i) The board of trustees shall hold at least one public hearing
each year in each of the five boroughs of the city of New York. The
purpose of such hearing shall be to receive testimony and statements
from concerned individuals about university issues.
 (ii) The board of trustees shall fix the time, place, duration and
format of each hearing.
 (iii) At least thirty days notice of the hearing shall be given by the
chairperson of the board of trustees to all of the trustees, to all
presidents of educational units, to the chair of faculty-senate bodies
of educational units, to all student government presidents of
educational units, to the borough president, the members of the city
council, the members of the board of estimate, the local community
boards of the borough where the hearing is to be held and to the media.
The notice shall contain the time, place and date of the public hearing.
Such information shall be made electronically available on the city
university of New York website. Any such meeting of the board of
trustees shall be conducted in accordance with article seven of the
public officers law.
 (iv) At least three trustees shall attend each hearing.
 § 6204-a. College opportunity to prepare for employment. 1. The city
university is authorized to enter into an agreement with the department
of social services for the establishment of the college opportunity to
prepare for employment (COPE) program for the development of a program
of allowable activities and services for eligible participants in the
federal job opportunity and basic skills (JOBS) program.
 2. The city university shall identify such funds as necessary,
including any private funds provided for the purpose of supporting
employment and training services, to be used on a matching basis
consistent with federal requirements.
 3. Services may include, but are not limited to, high school
equivalency, basic education, job skills training, English-as-a-second
language, job readiness training, job placement services, case
management, career counseling and assessment, employability planning,
supportive services such as child care, and a youth demonstration
activity providing an integrated program of high school equivalency,
occupational training, work experience, and job placement.
 4. The city university shall submit an annual evaluation and report on
the college opportunity to prepare for employment program to the
governor, the speaker of the assembly, the temporary president of the
senate, the chairman of the assembly ways and means committee, the
chairman of the senate finance committee, and the chair of the
legislative commission on skills development and career education no
later than October thirty-first following the program year ending June
thirtieth. The evaluation and report shall include, at a minimum, a
description of services provided, participant characteristics, data on
measures of educational and job skills gains, job development and
placement, and retention.
 § 6205. Liability of board of trustees and liability of city
university of New York. 1. The state shall save harmless and indemnify
members of the board of trustees and any duly appointed member of the
teaching or supervising staff, officer or employee, and a student
serving on a university or college body or committee which is composed
of a majority of faculty, administration and trustees, of the senior
colleges under the jurisdiction of such board pursuant to section
seventeen of the public officers law against any claim, demand, suit or
judgment arising by reason of any act or omission to act by such person
occurring in the discharge of his duties and within the scope of his
service on behalf of such university.
 2. (a) As used in this subdivision, the term (i) "employee" shall mean
any person holding a position by appointment or employment at a
community college under the jurisdiction of the board of trustees,
whether or not compensated, or a volunteer expressly authorized to
participate in a sponsored volunteer program of such community colleges,
and a student serving on a community college body or committee composed
of a majority of faculty, administration and trustees, but shall not
include an independent contractor. The term employee shall include a
former employee, his estate or judicially appointed personal
representative; (ii) "comptroller" shall mean the comptroller of the
city of New York; and (iii) "corporation counsel" shall mean the
corporation counsel of the city of New York.
 (b) Upon compliance by the employee with the provisions of paragraph
(i) of this subdivision, the city of New York shall provide for the
defense of the employee in any civil action or proceeding in any state
or federal court arising out of any alleged act or omission which
occurred or is alleged in the complaint to have occurred while the
employee was acting within the scope of his public employment or duties,
or which is brought to enforce a provision of section nineteen hundred
eighty-one or nineteen hundred eighty-three of title forty-two of the
United States code. This duty to provide for a defense shall not arise
where such civil action or proceeding is brought by or on behalf of the
city of New York.
 (c) Subject to the conditions set forth in paragraph (b) of this
subdivision, the employee shall be entitled to be represented by the
city of New York provided, however, that the employee shall be entitled
to representation by private counsel of his choice in any civil judicial
proceeding whenever the corporation counsel of the city of New York
determines based upon his investigation and review of the facts and
circumstances of the case that representation by the corporation counsel
would be inappropriate, or whenever a court of competent jurisdiction,
upon appropriate motion or by a special proceeding, determines that a
conflict of interest exists and that the employee is entitled to be
represented by private counsel of his choice. The corporation counsel
shall notify the employee in writing of such determination that the
employee is entitled to be represented by private counsel. The
corporation counsel may require, as a condition to payment of the fees
and expenses of such representation, that appropriate groups of such
employees be represented by the same counsel. If the employee or group
of employees is entitled to representation by private counsel under the
provisions of this subdivision, the corporation counsel shall so certify
to the comptroller of the city of New York. Reasonable attorneys' fees
and litigation expenses shall be paid by the city of New York to such
private counsel from time to time during the pendency of the civil
action or proceeding subject to certification that the employee is
entitled to representation under the terms and conditions of this
subdivision by the board of trustees of the city university and upon the
audit and warrant of the comptroller. Any dispute with respect to
representation of multiple employees by a single counsel or the amount
of litigation expenses or the reasonableness of attorneys' fees shall be
resolved by the court upon motion or by way of a special proceeding.
 (d) Where the employee delivers process and a request for a defense to
the corporation counsel as required by paragraph (i) of this
subdivision, the corporation counsel shall take the necessary steps
including the retention of private counsel under the terms and
conditions provided in paragraph (c) of this subdivision, on behalf of
the employee to avoid entry of a default judgment pending resolution of
any question pertaining to the obligation to provide for a defense.
 (e) The city of New York shall indemnify and save harmless employees
of the community colleges of the city university in the amount of any
judgment obtained against such employees in any state or federal court,
or in the amount of any settlement of a claim, provided that the act or
omission from which such judgment or settlement arose, occurred while
the employee was acting within the scope of his public employment or
duties; the duty to indemnify and save harmless prescribed by this
subdivision shall not arise where the injury or damage resulted from
intentional wrongdoing or recklessness on the part of the employee.
 (f) An employee represented by private counsel shall cause to be
submitted to the board of trustees any proposed settlement which may be
subject to indemnification by the city of New York and if not
inconsistent with the provisions of this subdivision the board of
trustees shall certify such settlement and submit such settlement and
certification to the corporation counsel. The corporation counsel shall
review such proposed settlement as to form and amount, and shall give
his approval if in his judgment the settlement is in the best interest
of the city of New York. Nothing in this subdivision shall be construed
to authorize the city of New York to indemnify or save harmless an
employee with respect to a settlement not so reviewed and approved by
the board of trustees.
 (g) Nothing in this subdivision shall authorize the city of New York
to indemnify and save harmless an employee with respect to punitive or
exemplary damages, fines or penalties, or money recovered from an
employee pursuant to article seven-A of the state finance law.
 (h) Upon entry of a final judgment against the employee, or upon the
settlement of the claim, the employee shall cause to be served a copy of
such judgment or settlement, personally or by certified or registered
mail within thirty days of the date of entry or settlement, upon the
board of trustees; and if not inconsistent with the provisions of this
subdivision, such judgment or settlement shall be certified for payment
by the board of trustees of the city university. If the corporation
counsel concurs in such certification, the judgment or settlement shall
be paid upon audit and warrant of the comptroller.
 (i) The duty to defend or indemnify and save harmless prescribed by
this subdivision shall be conditioned upon (1) delivery to the
corporation counsel at his main business office in the city of New York
by the employee of the original or a copy of any summons, complaint,
process, notice, demand or pleading within five days after he is served
with such document, and (2) the full cooperation of the employee in the
defense of such action or proceeding and in defense of any action or
proceeding against the city university or city of New York based upon
the same act or omission, and in the prosecution of any appeal. Such
delivery shall be deemed a request by the employee that the board of
trustees provide for his defense pursuant to this subdivision.
 (j) The benefits of this subdivision shall inure only to employees as
defined herein and shall not enlarge or diminish the rights of any other
party nor shall any provision of this subdivision be construed to
affect, alter or repeal any provision of the workers' compensation law.
 (k) This subdivision shall not in any way affect the obligation of any
claimant to serve notice of the claim upon the city of New York pursuant
to any other provision of law.
 (l) The provisions of this subdivision shall not be construed to
impair, alter, limit or modify the rights and obligations of any insurer
under any policy of insurance.
 (m) The provisions of this subdivision shall apply to all actions and
proceedings pending upon the effective date thereof or thereafter
instituted.
 (n) Except as otherwise specifically provided in this subdivision, the
provisions of this subdivision shall not be construed in any way to
impair, alter, limit, modify, abrogate or restrict any immunity
available to or conferred upon any unit, entity, officer or employee of
the city of New York or any other level of government, or any right to
defense or indemnification provided for any governmental officer and/or
employee by, in accordance with, or by reason of, any other provision of
state or federal statutory or common law.
 (o) If any provision of this subdivision or the application thereof to
any person or circumstance be held unconstitutional or invalid in whole
or in part by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding of
unconstitutionality or invalidity shall in no way affect or impair any
other provision of this subdivision or the application of any such
provision to any other person or circumstance.
 § 6206. Powers and duties. 1. The board of trustees shall have the
duties and powers of trustees of colleges as set forth in this chapter,
unless otherwise specifically provided in this chapter.
 2. On or before February first, nineteen hundred eighty or six months
after their assuming their functions, whichever occurs later, the board
of trustees shall transmit to the governor, to the mayor, to the
temporary president of the senate and to the speaker of the assembly a
status report concerning the functioning, the goals and the needs of the
city university. Included in the status report shall be such
recommendations as the board of trustees sees fit to make in regard to
the following topics.
 a. Description of curricula and plans for maintenance of and
adjustments to curricula;
 b. Description of the conditions, appropriateness and adequacy of
facilities and plans to remedy deficiencies;
 c. Description of policies with respect to student admissions; and
 d. Desired and potential student enrollments, including the
justification of the projections.
 3. a. The board of trustees shall, once every four years, formulate a
long-range city university plan or general revision thereof and make
recommendations to the board of regents, for the organization,
development and coordination of the city university. The plan and
recommendations shall include but not be limited to the following:
 (1) Plans for new curricula,
 (2) Plans for new facilities,
 (3) Plans for change in policies with respect to student admissions,
 (4) Potential student enrollments,
 (5) Comments upon its relationship to other colleges and universities,
public and private, within the state, and
 (6) For informational purposes only, projection standards and overall
expenditure projections of capital and operating costs.
 The plan shall be in such form as to provide a basis for the
development of the regents statewide plan for higher education as
defined in section two hundred thirty-seven of this chapter. Prior to
transmitting their long-range plan or general revisions thereof to the
board of regents, to the temporary president of the senate, and to the
speaker of the assembly, the board of trustees shall, after giving due
notice, conduct one or more hearings on such plan.
 b. During the calendar year nineteen hundred eighty and each fourth
year thereafter the board of trustees shall transmit their proposed plan
or general revisions thereof to the board of regents, on or before the
first day of June in each such year. Such plan shall be reviewed by the
board of regents and shall be subject to approval by such board. As
approved by the board of regents and incorporated into the regents plan
or general revision thereof for the development of higher education in
the state and, upon approval thereafter by the governor, such plan shall
guide and determine the development, organization and coordination of
the city university.
 c. By the first day of June in nineteen hundred eighty-two and each
fourth year thereafter, the board of trustees shall report in writing to
the board of regents, a copy of which report shall be furnished to the
temporary president of the senate, and the speaker of the assembly, the
mayor and the president of the city council for information and comment,
on the progress made in carrying out its responsibilities under such
plan and its general recommendations with respect to the city university
or its component colleges or other institutions in the city of New York
including recommendations as to modifications of such plan which the
board of trustees deems essential to meet the then current demands upon
public higher education in the city of New York. The board of trustees
may also at any other time propose modifications which it deems
essential or desirable with respect to such plan. The board of trustees
may, after giving due notice, conduct one or more hearings on such
modifications and shall transmit its recommendations therefor to the
board of regents, to the temporary president of the senate, the speaker
of the assembly, the mayor and the president of the city council for
information and comment. Such modifications shall be subject to approval
by the regents and thereafter by the governor in the same manner as such
plan or general revisions thereof.
 4. When a proposed plan or general revision thereof contains a
proposal providing for the termination or merger of a senior college or
community college so that such college ceases to exist as a separate
educational institution that provision of a proposed plan or general
revision shall also be subject to the approval of the legislature.
 5. The board of trustees shall select and acquire or cause to be
acquired all new sites hereafter to be designated for the purposes of
the city university and procure and pass upon all plans for buildings on
newly acquired sites, shall supervise their erection, shall organize
their faculties, shall approve and administer their courses leading to
academic, professional and technical certificates, diplomas and degrees,
shall appoint their officers of administration and instruction, shall
prepare all their budgets and shall generally control and administer all
public education in the colleges and institutions of which the city
university is composed in such city, except the teacher training courses
which are now conducted by the board of education of such city. The
board of trustees shall appoint the chancellor of the city university
who shall be the chief educational and administrative officer of the
city university and who shall serve at the pleasure of the board of
trustees.
 6. The board of trustees shall control and keep up the buildings and
grounds occupied and used by institutions and units controlled by it;
allow and regulate the use, gratuitously or otherwise, of such property
for other than college or university purposes and prescribe the fees, if
any, that persons, associations or corporations allowed to use it may
charge; purchase materials, services, equipment and supplies. But the
board of trustees shall not sell, transfer or otherwise dispose of land
and buildings purchased by city funds used for the community colleges of
the city university. It may, however, accept and administer for college
or university purposes, gifts of land, bequests, trusts, devises, money
and buildings from private sources and erect buildings on college or
university land out of money not furnished by the city or the state; and
gifts of money, endowments, fees, interest and other income not derived
from public taxation or the public credit shall be administered by it
for collegiate or university purposes in connection with the units under
its control.
 7. * (a) The board of trustees shall establish positions, departments,
divisions and faculties; appoint and in accordance with the provisions
of law fix salaries of instructional and non-instructional employees
therein; establish and conduct courses and curricula; prescribe
conditions of student admission, attendance and discharge; and shall
have the power to determine in its discretion whether tuition shall be
charged and to regulate tuition charges, and other instructional and
non-instructional fees and other fees and charges at the educational
units of the city university. The trustees shall review any proposed
community college tuition increase and the justification for such
increase. The justification provided by the community college for such
increase shall include a detailed analysis of ongoing operating costs,
capital, debt service expenditures, and all revenues. The trustees shall
not impose a differential tuition charge based upon need or income. All
students enrolled in programs leading to like degrees at the senior
colleges shall be charged a uniform rate of tuition, except for
differential tuition rates based on state residency. Notwithstanding any
other provision of this paragraph, the trustees may authorize the
setting of a separate category of tuition rate, that shall be greater
than the tuition rate for resident students and less than the tuition
rate for non-resident students, only for students enrolled in distance
learning courses who are not residents of the state; provided, however,
that:
 (i) Commencing with the two thousand eleven--two thousand twelve
academic year and ending in the two thousand fifteen--two thousand
sixteen academic year, the city university of New York board of trustees
shall be empowered to increase the resident undergraduate rate of
tuition by not more than three hundred dollars over the resident
undergraduate rate of tuition adopted by the board of trustees in the
prior academic year, provided however that commencing with the two
thousand eleven--two thousand twelve academic year and ending with the
two thousand sixteen--two thousand seventeen academic year if the annual
resident undergraduate rate of tuition would exceed five thousand
dollars, then a tuition credit for each eligible student, as determined
and calculated by the New York state higher education services
corporation pursuant to section six hundred eighty-nine-a of this
chapter, shall be applied toward the tuition charged for each semester,
quarter or term of study. Tuition for each semester, quarter or term of
study shall not be due for any student eligible to receive such tuition
credit until the tuition credit is calculated and applied against the
tuition charged for the corresponding semester, quarter or term.
 (ii) Commencing with the two thousand seventeen--two thousand eighteen
academic year and ending in the two thousand twenty--two thousand
twenty-one academic year the city university of New York board of
trustees shall be empowered to increase the resident undergraduate rate
of tuition by not more than two hundred dollars over the resident
undergraduate rate of tuition adopted by the board of trustees in the
prior academic year, provided however that if the annual resident
undergraduate rate of tuition would exceed five thousand dollars, then a
tuition credit for each eligible student, as determined and calculated
by the New York state higher education services corporation pursuant to
section six hundred eighty-nine-a of this title, shall be applied toward
the tuition charged for each semester, quarter or term of study. Tuition
for each semester, quarter or term of study shall not be due for any
student eligible to receive such tuition credit until the tuition credit
is calculated and applied against the tuition charged for the
corresponding semester, quarter or term. Provided, further that the
revenue resulting from an increase in the rate of tuition shall be
allocated to each campus pursuant to a plan approved by the board of
trustees to support investments in new classroom faculty, instruction,
initiatives to improve student success and on-time completion and a
tuition credit for each eligible student.
 (iii) On or before November thirtieth, two thousand seventeen, the
trustees shall approve and submit to the chairs of the assembly ways and
means committee and the senate finance committee and to the director of
the budget a master tuition plan setting forth the tuition rates that
the trustees propose for resident undergraduate students for the four
year period commencing with the two thousand seventeen--two thousand
eighteen academic year and ending in the two thousand twenty--two
thousand twenty-one academic year, and shall submit any proposed
amendments to such plan by November thirtieth of each subsequent year
thereafter through November thirtieth, two thousand twenty.
 (iv) Beginning in state fiscal year two thousand twelve--two thousand
thirteen and ending in state fiscal year two thousand fifteen--two
thousand sixteen, the state shall appropriate and make available state
support for operating expenses, including fringe benefits, for the city
university in an amount not less than the amount appropriated and made
available in the prior state fiscal year; provided, however, that if the
governor declares a fiscal emergency, and communicates such emergency to
the temporary president of the senate and speaker of the assembly, state
support for operating expenses of the state university and city
university may be reduced in a manner proportionate to one another, and
the aforementioned provisions shall not apply.
 (v) Beginning in state fiscal year two thousand seventeen--two
thousand eighteen and ending in state fiscal year two thousand
twenty--two thousand twenty-one, the state shall appropriate and make
available general fund operating support, including fringe benefits, for
the city university in an amount not less than the amount appropriated
and made available in the prior state fiscal year; provided, however,
that if the governor declares a fiscal emergency, and communicates such
emergency to the temporary president of the senate and speaker of the
assembly, state support for operating expenses at the state university
and city university may be reduced in a manner proportionate to one
another, and the aforementioned provisions shall not apply; provided
further, the state shall appropriate and make available general fund
support to fully fund the tuition credit pursuant to subdivision two of
section six hundred sixty-nine-h of this chapter.
 (vi) Notwithstanding any law, rule, regulation or practice to the
contrary, commencing with the two thousand twenty-three--two thousand
twenty-four academic year and ending in the two thousand
twenty-five--two thousand twenty-six academic year, following the review
and approval of the chancellor of the city university or his or her
designee, the city university of New York board of trustees shall be
empowered to annually impose differential tuition rates on non-resident
undergraduate and graduate rates of tuition for senior colleges,
provided that such rates are competitive with the rates of tuition
charged by peer institutions and that the board of trustees annually
provide the reason and methodology behind any rate increase to the
governor, the temporary president of the senate, and the speaker of the
assembly prior to the approval of such increases.
 * NB Effective until July 1, 2027
 * (a) (i) The board of trustees shall establish positions,
departments, divisions and faculties; appoint and in accordance with the
provisions of law fix salaries of instructional and non-instructional
employees therein; establish and conduct courses and curricula;
prescribe conditions of student admission, attendance and discharge; and
shall have the power to determine in its discretion whether tuition
shall be charged and to regulate tuition charges, and other
instructional and non-instructional fees and other fees and charges at
the educational units of the city university. The trustees shall review
any proposed community college tuition increase and the justification
for such increase. The justification provided by the community college
for such increase shall include a detailed analysis of ongoing operating
costs, capital, debt service expenditures, and all revenues. The
trustees shall not impose a differential tuition charge based upon need
or income. All students enrolled in programs leading to like degrees at
the senior colleges shall be charged a uniform rate of tuition, except
for differential tuition rates based on state residency. Notwithstanding
any other provision of this paragraph, the trustees may authorize the
setting of a separate category of tuition rate, that shall be greater
than the tuition rate for resident students and less than the tuition
rate for non-resident students, only for students enrolled in distance
learning courses who are not residents of the state. The trustees shall
further provide that the payment of tuition and fees by any student who
is not a resident of New York state, other than a non-immigrant
noncitizen within the meaning of paragraph (15) of subsection (a) of
section 1101 of title 8 of the United States Code, shall be paid at a
rate or charge no greater than that imposed for students who are
residents of the state if such student:
 (1) attended an approved New York high school for two or more years,
graduated from an approved New York high school and applied for
attendance at an institution or educational unit of the city university
within five years of receiving a New York state high school diploma; or
 (2) attended an approved New York state program for general
equivalency diploma exam preparation, received a general equivalency
diploma issued within New York state and applied for attendance at an
institution or educational unit of the city university within five years
of receiving a general equivalency diploma issued within New York state;
or
 (3) was enrolled in an institution or educational unit of the city
university in the fall semester or quarter of the two thousand one--two
thousand two academic year and was authorized by such institution or
educational unit to pay tuition at the rate or charge imposed for
students who are residents of the state.
 A student without lawful immigration status shall also be required to
file an affidavit with such institution or educational unit stating that
the student has filed an application to legalize his or her immigration
status, or will file such an application as soon as he or she is
eligible to do so. The trustees shall not adopt changes in tuition
charges prior to the enactment of the annual budget. The board of
trustees may accept as partial reimbursement for the education of
veterans of the armed forces of the United States who are otherwise
qualified such sums as may be authorized by federal legislation to be
paid for such education. The board of trustees may conduct on a fee
basis extension courses and courses for adult education appropriate to
the field of higher education. In all courses and courses of study it
may, in its discretion, require students to pay library, laboratory,
locker, breakage and other instructional and non-instructional fees and
meet the cost of books and consumable supplies. In addition to the
foregoing fees and charges, the board of trustees may impose and collect
fees and charges for student government and other student activities and
receive and expend them as agent or trustee.
 (ii) Notwithstanding any law, rule, regulation or practice to the
contrary, commencing with the two thousand twenty-three--two thousand
twenty-four academic year and ending in the two thousand
twenty-five--two thousand twenty-six academic year, following the review
and approval of the chancellor of the city university or his or her
designee, the city university of New York board of trustees shall be
empowered to annually impose differential tuition rates on non-resident
undergraduate and graduate rates of tuition for senior colleges,
provided that such rates are competitive with the rates of tuition
charged by peer institutions and that the board of trustees annually
provide the reason and methodology behind any rate increase to the
governor, the temporary president of the senate, and the speaker of the
assembly prior to the approval of such increases.
 * NB Effective July 1, 2027
 * (a-1) The trustees shall further provide that the payment of tuition
and fees by any student who is not a resident of New York state, other
than a non-immigrant noncitizen within the meaning of paragraph (15) of
subsection (a) of section 1101 of title 8 of the United States Code,
shall be paid at a rate or charge no greater than that imposed for
students who are residents of the state if such student:
 (i) attended an approved New York high school for two or more years,
graduated from an approved New York high school and applied for
attendance at an institution or educational unit of the city university
within five years of receiving a New York state high school diploma; or
 (ii) attended an approved New York state program for general
equivalency diploma exam preparation, received a general equivalency
diploma issued within New York state and applied for attendance at an
institution or educational unit of the city university within five years
of receiving a general equivalency diploma issued within New York state;
or
 (iii) was enrolled in an institution or educational unit of the city
university in the fall semester or quarter of the two thousand one--two
thousand two academic year and was authorized by such institution or
educational unit to pay tuition at the rate or charge imposed for
students who are residents of the state.
 A student without lawful immigration status shall also be required to
file an affidavit with such institution or educational unit stating that
the student has filed an application to legalize his or her immigration
status, or will file such an application as soon as he or she is
eligible to do so. Except as otherwise authorized in paragraph (a) of
this subdivision, the trustees shall not adopt changes in tuition
charges prior to the enactment of the annual budget. The board of
trustees may accept as partial reimbursement for the education of
veterans of the armed forces of the United States who are otherwise
qualified such sums as may be authorized by federal legislation to be
paid for such education. The board of trustees may conduct on a fee
basis extension courses and courses for adult education appropriate to
the field of higher education. In all courses and courses of study it
may, in its discretion, require students to pay library, laboratory,
locker, breakage and other instructional and non-instructional fees and
meet the cost of books and consumable supplies. In addition to the
foregoing fees and charges, the board of trustees may impose and collect
fees and charges for student government and other student activities and
receive and expend them as agent or trustee.
 * NB Repealed July 1, 2027
 (a-2) The trustees shall further provide that the payment of tuition
and fees by any student who is not a resident of New York state shall be
paid at a rate or charge no greater than that imposed for students who
are residents of the state if such student is enrolled in any college or
educational unit of the city university of New York and is attending
such college or educational unit in accordance with the federal GI bills
and in compliance with all applicable eligibility requirements thereof.
 (a-3) The trustees shall further provide that the payment of tuition
and fees by any student who is not a resident of New York state shall be
paid at a rate or charge no greater than that imposed for students who
are residents of the state if such student is enrolled in any college or
educational unit of the city university of New York and is the spouse or
the dependent of a member of the armed forces of the United States on
full-time active duty and not stationed in this state immediately
following being stationed therein.
 (b) Notwithstanding the provisions of any other general, special or
local law, rule or regulation, the board of trustees may permit persons
sixty years of age or over to audit courses given therein without
tuition, examination, grading or credit therefor upon a space available
basis, as determined by the president of each such institution, provided
that such audit attendance does not deny course attendance at the city
university of New York by an individual who is otherwise qualified under
this section.
 * (c) Notwithstanding the provisions of any other general, special or
local law, rule or regulation, the board of trustees shall promulgate
regulations to permit members of the New York city police department
employed in the rank of police officer, who are enrolled in programs
leading to baccalaureate or higher degrees at a senior college of the
city university to attend one course without tuition, provided that such
course is related to their employment as police officers and that such
tuition-waived attendance does not deny course attendance at a senior
college of the city university by an individual who is otherwise
qualified under this section.
 * NB Repealed July 1, 2026
 * (d) Notwithstanding the provisions of any other general, special or
local law, rule or regulation, the board of trustees shall promulgate
regulations to permit firefighters and fire officers employed by the New
York city fire department, who are enrolled in programs leading to
baccalaureate or higher degrees at a senior college of the city
university to attend one course without tuition, provided that such
course is related to their employment as firefighters and fire officers
and that such tuition-waived attendance does not deny course attendance
at a senior college of the city university by an individual who is
otherwise qualified under this section.
 * NB Repealed July 1, 2026
 * (e) The trustees shall further provide that any student who is not a
legal resident of New York state but is a United States citizen, a
permanent lawful resident, an individual who is granted U or T
non-immigrant status pursuant to the Victims of Trafficking and Violence
Protection Act of 2000, a person granted temporary protected status
pursuant to the Federal Immigration Act of 1990, an individual of a
class of refugees paroled by the attorney general of the United States
under his or her parole authority pertaining to the admission of
noncitizens to the United States, or an applicant without lawful
immigration status may have the payment of tuition and other fees and
charges reduced by state-aided programs, scholarships or other financial
assistance awarded under the provisions of articles thirteen,
thirteen-A, fourteen and fourteen-A of this chapter, provided that the
student meets the requirements set forth in subparagraph (ii) of
paragraph a or subparagraph (ii) of paragraph b of subdivision five of
section six hundred sixty-one of this chapter, as applicable.
 * NB There are 2 par (e)'s
 * (e) Notwithstanding the provisions of any other general, special or
local law, rule or regulation, the board of trustees shall be authorized
to set a reduced rate of tuition and/or fees, or to waive tuition and/or
fees entirely, for students participating in any dual or concurrent
enrollment program with no reduction in other state, local, or other
support for such students earning college credit that such higher
education partner would otherwise be eligible to receive; provided that,
for purposes of this provision, a dual or concurrent enrollment program
shall mean one or more college courses taken by a high school student
through a community college or a senior college of the city university
while such student is still enrolled in high school and for which the
student may receive both high school and college credit.
 * NB There are 2 par (e)'s
 (f) In state fiscal year two thousand twenty-two--two thousand
twenty-three and thereafter, the state shall appropriate and make
available general fund operating support in the amount of the tuition
credit calculated pursuant to section six hundred eighty-nine-a of this
chapter annually.
 * (g) (i) For purposes of this paragraph, "Team USA athlete" means any
student athlete who meets the eligibility standards defined and approved
by the United States Olympic and Paralympic Committee and by the
national governing body for the sport in which the athlete competes.
 (ii) Notwithstanding the provisions of any other general, special or
local law, rule or regulation and pursuant to an appropriation and
funding being made for such purpose, the trustees shall further provide
that the payment of tuition and fees by any student who is not a
resident of New York state shall be paid at a rate or charge no greater
than that imposed for students who are residents of this state if such
student is enrolled in an institution or educational unit of the city
university of New York, is a Team USA athlete, and is training in New
York State in an elite level program approved by the United States
Olympic and Paralympic Committee.
 * NB Effective July 1, 2026
 8. The board of trustees shall, on the recommendation of its faculty
or faculties, grant the certificates, diplomas and degrees which were
announced in the bulletins of the existing public institutions of higher
learning published for the term beginning immediately prior to April
sixteenth, nineteen hundred twenty-six, and also such other degrees and
honors as the regents thereafter specifically authorized or may
hereafter authorize it to grant.
 9. When a center is first opened, the board of trustees shall submit
an initial estimate of the sum needed for its support, maintenance and
operation, based on an estimated original enrollment of students, for
the fiscal year or portion thereof immediately following. Such estimate
shall be acted upon as hereinbefore prescribed for current annual
budgets; and in the event that an initial appropriation be for a part of
the fiscal year only, then in making calculation for the succeeding
annual appropriation, the initial appropriation shall be taken as the
appropriate fractional base.
 10. Money appropriated by the city to the board of trustees for
college or university purposes, shall be placed in the custody of the
comptroller of the city to the credit of such board of trustees and all
disbursements from such funds shall be made by the comptroller acting
for and in behalf of such board of trustees upon requisitions duly
audited and signed by the board of trustees or by a person or persons
appointed by such board of trustees, by resolution filed with the
comptroller, to act for it. The comptroller shall audit such account of
the board of trustees in the same manner as he audits the account of the
board of education of the city of New York. Any balance of any annual
appropriation made by the city to the board of trustees, which may be
unallocated for college or university purposes by the board of trustees
ninety days after the expiration of the calendar year for which the
appropriation was made, shall revert to the city treasury and be
credited to such uses as the city may direct.
 11. The board of trustees may, in its discretion, compensate members
of the instructional staff and non-instructional staff for loss of
personal property. With respect to members of the instructional staff
and other employees who are not covered by the workers' compensation
law, the board of trustees may provide in its discretion for payment of
reasonable medical and hospital expenses arising from injuries incurred
in actual performance of duty on or after July first, nineteen hundred
sixty-five.
 12. The board of trustees, under such by-laws as it deems appropriate,
shall provide for the eligibility for sabbatical leaves of absence to
members of its permanent instructional staff provided, however, that
when such leaves are for one half year, they shall be at full pay, and
when such leaves are for one year, they shall be at half pay.
 13. The board of trustees shall provide standards for the granting of
advanced standing to veterans applying for college admissions at schools
in the city university who have successfully completed United States
Armed Forces Institute or other comparable course work.
 13-a. The board of trustees shall provide standards for admission of
students who have completed an online high school program located within
the United States consistent with the provisions of subparagraph eleven
of paragraph h of subdivision two of section three hundred fifty-five of
this chapter.
 14. Notwithstanding the provisions of section forty-four, fifty or
fifty-one of the state finance law or any other provision of law to the
contrary, the city university trustees are authorized and empowered to
increase or decrease appropriations by transfer or interchange as
follows:
 a. Amounts appropriated for the programs or purposes or for any item
or items within such programs or purposes of any individual senior
college of the city university and city university central
administration within the schedules of such senior colleges or central
administration from a particular fund or funds in a fiscal year may be
interchanged between such programs or purposes of such senior college or
central administration of city university, or between items within the
same program or purpose, or with other items appropriated from such fund
not in the same program or purpose, but which are contained in the state
comptroller's classification of items as last promulgated pursuant to a
certificate of allocation. Such certificate shall be submitted by such
senior college or central administration to the board of trustees of the
city university. Such certificate shall be submitted by the board of
trustees to the state comptroller with copies to be sent to the chairs
of the senate finance committee and the assembly ways and means
committee and the director of the budget for informational purposes
only. The total amount appropriated for any program or purpose may be
decreased by not more than the aggregate of five percent of such
appropriation for a program or purpose with the approval of the senior
college or central administration or such amounts may be decreased by
more than the aggregate of five percent of such appropriation with the
approval of the city university trustees.
 b. Amounts appropriated to senior colleges of the city university from
a particular fund or funds in a fiscal year for the programs or purposes
of such senior colleges of the city university may be transferred
between and among such senior colleges pursuant to a certificate of
allocation, submitted directly by the city university to the state
comptroller, with copies of such certificates to be sent to the chairmen
of the senate finance committee and the assembly ways and means
committee and the director of the budget for informational purposes
only. The total amount appropriated for any senior college may not be
decreased by more than the aggregate of three percent of an
appropriation for a senior college.
 c. Amounts appropriated for programs or purposes, or for any item
within such programs or purposes, within the university-wide program
schedule of city university from a particular fund or funds in a fiscal
year shall not be decreased by means of transfer or interchange by more
than the aggregate of four percent of an appropriation for a program or
purpose within such schedule.
 d. Amounts appropriated for the central administration of the city
university within the central administration schedule from a particular
fund or funds in a fiscal year for programs or purposes including, but
not limited to, administration of senior colleges and university-wide
programs of the city university shall not be increased by means of
transfer or interchange by more than five percent of the aggregate
appropriation within such schedule.
 e. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subdivision,
whenever the director of the budget, pursuant to section forty-nine of
the state finance law, shall establish an aggregate amount less than
that contained in the local assistance appropriations act, the trustees
may transfer or interchange any or all of such lesser amount among any
of the programs or purposes or items without regard to the restrictions
provided in this subdivision.
 f. The allocation of lump sum appropriations from a fund or funds made
to the city university for later distribution to senior colleges and/or
the central administration of the city university or the allocation of
lump sum appropriations made to all state departments and agencies for
later allocation for specific programs or purposes or senior colleges
and/or central administration of the city university shall not be deemed
to be part of any total increase or decrease authorized by this section.
 15. a. The board of trustees shall adopt rules requiring that each
institution of the city university, on or before January first, two
thousand, adopt and implement a plan providing for the investigation of
any violent felony offense occurring at or on the grounds of each such
institution, and providing for the investigation of a report of any
missing student. Such plans shall provide for the coordination of the
investigation of such crimes and reports with local law enforcement
agencies. Such plans shall include, but not be limited to, written
agreements with appropriate local law enforcement agencies providing for
the prompt investigation of such crimes and reports and requirement that
the institution shall notify the appropriate law enforcement agency as
soon as practicable but in no case more than twenty-four hours after a
report of a violent felony or that a student who resides in housing
owned or operated by such institution is missing; provided that each
institution shall: (1) inform each victim of a sexual offense of their
options to notify proper law enforcement authorities, including
on-campus and local police; (2) inform the victim of a sexual offense of
the right to report or not to report such offense to local law
enforcement agencies; and (3) offer the option to be assisted by campus
authorities in notifying such authorities, if the victim of sexual
assault so chooses, all in compliance with applicable federal law,
including, but not limited to, the federal Campus Sexual Assault
Victims' Bill of Rights under Title 20 U.S. Code Section 1092(f).
 b. As used in this subdivision, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
 (i) "Local law enforcement agencies" means any agency or agencies
employing peace officers or police officers for the enforcement of the
laws of the state, and which has or have jurisdiction under provisions
of the criminal procedure law over offenses occurring at or on the
grounds of any institution subject to the provisions of this
subdivision.
 (ii) "Missing student" means any student of an institution subject to
the provisions of this subdivision, who resides in a facility owned or
operated by such institution and who is reported to such institution as
missing from his or her residence.
 (iii) "Violent felony offense" means a violent felony offense as
defined in subdivision one of section 70.02 of the penal law.
 16. The board of trustees shall appoint for the city university campus
officers who shall have the powers of peace officers as set forth in the
criminal procedure law within the geographical area of the city of New
York. A campus officer designated as a peace officer must have
satisfactorily completed or complete, within one year of the date of
such designation, a course of law enforcement training prescribed by the
municipal police training council in consultation with the city
university board of trustees.
 18. Notwithstanding any law, rule or regulation to the contrary, the
city university of New York board of trustees shall pass a resolution by
June first, two thousand fifteen, to develop a plan to make available to
students enrolled in an academic program of the city university of New
York beginning in the two thousand sixteen--two thousand seventeen
academic year, approved experiential or applied learning activities.
Such experiential or applied learning activities may include completion
of activities related to students' program of study, including, but not
limited to, service-learning activities completed as part of a course,
paid or unpaid internships, faculty-supervised undergraduate projects
and activities leading to publication of research in journals or similar
publications, production or performance of creative works, and iterative
"co-op" partnerships that explicitly link the curricula to a temporary,
paid position in industry or the public sector. Such plan, to be
completed by June first, two thousand sixteen, shall be developed in
consultation with university faculty senate, the university student
senate and other stakeholders. Such plan shall define approved
experiential or applied learning activities, methods of faculty
oversight and assessment, responsibilities of business, corporate,
non-profit or other entities hosting students, and include a requirement
for collecting and reporting data associated with such experiential or
applied learning activities. Such plan shall have each college examine
the feasibility of including such experiential or applied learning
activities as a degree requirement. Such college shall examine its
ability to administer and provide such opportunities to students; the
local community's capacity to support such experiential or applied
learning activities; the impact such requirement would have on the local
workforce, if any; potential for such a requirement to enhance learning
outcomes for students; and whether adding such a requirement would cause
potential delays in graduation for students.
 19. The city university trustees shall annually report on how the
revenue generated has been invested in faculty, instruction, initiatives
to improve student success and on-time completion and student financial
assistance for the duration of the four year tuition plan. The trustees
shall submit the report by September first of each subsequent year.
 20. The board of trustees shall adopt rules requiring that each
institution of the city university of New York adopt written policies
requiring that all public single-occupancy bathroom facilities be
designated as gender neutral for use by no more than one occupant at a
time or for family or assisted use. Such gender neutral bathroom
facilities shall be clearly designated by the posting of such on or near
the entry door of each facility. For purposes of this section,
"single-occupancy bathroom" shall have the same meaning as paragraph (d)
of subdivision one of section one hundred forty-five of the public
buildings law.
 21. The board of trustees shall adopt a policy requiring that each
institution of the city university of New York collaborate with
students, faculty and staff to encourage campuses to eliminate the use
of certain plastic items generally recognized by the public as being
designed for single use. Such plastic items may include, but shall not
be limited to, tableware, straws, stirrers, cups and food service
containers. In establishing such a policy, the trustees shall consider
the following:
 a. the availability of affordable alternatives;
 b. the accessibility of alternatives to all students, faculty, and
staff;
 c. an evaluation of the effectiveness of reusable alternatives; and
 d. benchmarks for assessing progress.
 22. Notwithstanding any law, rule or regulation to the contrary, the
board of trustees shall establish a policy authorizing senior colleges
and community colleges within the city university of New York to grant
posthumous degrees to enrolled matriculated students whose death occurs
prior to graduation. Such policy shall provide that, upon terms set in
the policy, any remaining credit requirements shall be waived for any
student who dies and who otherwise would have been eligible for
graduation had they been able to complete their academic career.
 23. Notwithstanding any law, rule or regulation to the contrary, the
city university of New York board of trustees shall, by June first, two
thousand twenty-five, develop a plan to make available to students
enrolled in an academic program of the city university of New York
beginning in the two thousand twenty-five--two thousand twenty-six
academic year, approved experiential or applied learning activities, as
defined in subdivision eighteen of this section. Such plan shall be
developed in consultation with university faculty senate, the university
student senate and other stakeholders. Such plan shall define approved
experiential or applied learning activities, methods of faculty
oversight and assessment, responsibilities of business, corporate,
non-profit or other entities hosting students, and include a requirement
for collecting and reporting data associated with such experiential or
applied learning activities. Such plan shall have each college examine
the feasibility of including such experiential or applied learning
activities as a degree requirement. Such college shall examine its
ability to administer and provide such opportunities to students; the
local community's capacity to support such experiential or applied
learning activities; the impact such requirement would have on the local
workforce, if any; potential for such a requirement to enhance learning
outcomes for students; and whether adding such a requirement would cause
potential delays in graduation for students.
 * 24. (a) The use of artificial intelligence systems, as defined by
section one hundred three-e of the state technology law, shall not
affect (i) the existing rights of employees pursuant to a collective
bargaining agreement; or (ii) the existing representational
relationships among employee organizations or the bargaining
relationships between the employer and an employee organization.
 (b) The use of such artificial intelligence systems shall not result
in the: (i) discharge, displacement or loss of position, including
partial displacement such as a reduction in the hours of non-overtime
work, wages, or employment benefits, or result in the impairment of
existing collective bargaining agreements; or
 (ii) transfer of duties and functions currently performed by employees
of the city university of New York to an artificial intelligence system.
 (c) The use of an artificial intelligence system shall not alter the
rights or benefits, and privileges, including but not limited to terms
and conditions of employment, civil service status, and collective
bargaining unit membership status of all existing employees of the city
university of New York shall be preserved and protected.
 * NB Repealed July 1, 2028
 § 6207. Administration of civil service. The city university, for the
purpose of administering the state civil service law, shall be deemed to
be a municipal employer, provided, however, that the city university may
elect to delegate the administration of any or all of the provisions of
the civil service law, except article fourteen, to the department of
personnel of the city of New York. In that event, the city department
of personnel shall enter into a contract with such university for the
rendition of such services. The city university of New York shall
compensate the city of New York for such services only with respect to
such services rendered for or on behalf of the senior colleges of such
university. If the city of New York and city university cannot agree on
the amount of such compensation, the state comptroller shall determine
the fair and reasonable value of such services and the city university
shall pay such sum to the city of New York. Any person on an eligible
list for a position with the city university of New York in effect on
the effective date of this article shall continue to hold such position
on such list and shall be entitled to the same civil service rights.
With respect to all persons employed by the city university on the
effective date of this article, the city university and the city of New
York shall be deemed to be the same public employer only for purposes of
transfer of employment under the civil service law. No civil service
right of an employee of the city university of New York employed on the
effective date of this article shall be lost, impaired or affected by
reason of the enactment of this article into law.
 § 6208. Collective negotiation. For the purposes of article fourteen
of the civil service law, the city university of New York shall be
deemed to be the public employer and as such shall negotiate with and
enter into written agreements with employee organizations representing
the instructional staff and non-instructional staff of the senior
colleges and community colleges of such university that have been
certified or recognized under such article. For purposes of such
article, the chancellor of the city university shall be deemed to be the
chief executive officer, the chief legal officer of the city university
shall be chief legal officer, and the legislature of the state of New
York shall be deemed to be the legislative body of the government. In
carrying on such negotiations, the city university of New York shall
consult with and seek assistance from the state office of employee
relations and the New York city office of municipal labor relations.
The state public employment relations board shall have exclusive
jurisdiction for the purpose of administering the provisions of such
article and the provisions of section two hundred twelve of such article
shall not be applicable to any such negotiations.
 § 6209. Investments in designated obligations; indemnification. 1.
It is hereby found and declared that obligations of the dormitory
authority of the state of New York are reasonable, prudent, proper and
legal investments in which all gifts, grants, bequests, devises, trusts,
money, endowments, fees, and other income not derived from public
taxation or the public credit, received and administered or to be
received and administered by the board of trustees or any of its
educational units for college or university purposes in connection with
the units under the control of the board of trustees pursuant to
subdivision six of section sixty-two hundred six of this article may be
invested or may be pledged, hypothecated or delivered as collateral to
secure in whole or in part the payment of principal or interest of any
obligation of the dormitory authority of the state of New York by the
board of trustees or any officer, employee or fiduciary thereof upon
such terms and conditions as may be acceptable to the board of trustees.
It is hereby found and declared that obligations of the dormitory
authority of the state of New York are reasonable, prudent, proper and
legal investments in which funds presently in existence or hereafter
created or established or other moneys administered by any alumni
corporation or college fund organized pursuant to the not-for-profit
corporation law or this chapter to encourage the educational mission or
assist any educational unit of the city university may be invested or
may be pledged, hypothecated or delivered as collateral to secure in
whole or in part the payment of principal or interest of any obligation
of the dormitory authority of the state of New York by such corporation
or fund or any officer, trustee, director, employee or fiduciary thereof
upon such terms and conditions as may be acceptable to such corporation,
person or persons. For the purpose of this section, such gifts, grants,
bequests, devises, trusts, money, endowments, fees, funds, and other
income shall be referred to as endowment funds.
 2. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of law, the board of
trustees or the directors or trustees of any such alumni corporation or
college fund may in its or their discretion purchase and retain
obligations or may pledge, hypothecate, or deliver as collateral
endowment funds to secure in whole or in part the payment of principal
or interest on obligations of the dormitory authority of the state of
New York without regard to the percentage of the assets of such
endowment funds invested in such obligations or pledged, hypothecated,
or delivered as collateral to secure in whole or in part the payment of
principal or interest on such obligations, and without regard to the
percentage of outstanding obligations of the issuer held or to be held
by such funds or secured by pledge, hypothecation, or delivery as
collateral of such funds. The board of trustees or such alumni
corporation or college fund may consider, in addition to the appropriate
factors recognized by law, the extent to which such investments,
pledges, hypothecations, or deliveries as collateral, will maintain the
credit worthiness of the state of New York and the dormitory authority
of the state of New York so as to enable the state and such corporation
to finance the construction of capital facilities heretofore or
hereafter duly authorized for the city university.
 3. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the state shall, with
respect to the board of trustees, save and hold harmless and indemnify
each and every member, trustee, director, officer, employee or fiduciary
with responsibility for the custody of funds or the assets thereof or
for the approval of the sale, investment, pledge, hypothecation, or
delivery as collateral of the assets of such funds, and any investment
advisor, attorney or accountant who shall have been employed by or who
has advised such member, trustee, director, officer, employee, or
fiduciary, from any or all financial loss arising out of or in
connection with any claim, demand, suit, action, proceeding or judgment
for alleged negligence, waste, or breach of fiduciary duty by reason of
any investment of any funds in, or the pledge, hypothecation, or
delivery as collateral of any endowment funds to secure in whole or in
part the payment of principal or interest of any obligation of the
dormitory authority of the state of New York, or resulting from the sale
of any assets of any funds to obtain sufficient revenues to make such
investments, pledges, hypothecations, or deliveries as collateral,
provided that such member, trustee, director, officer, employee,
fiduciary, investment advisor, attorney, or accountant within five days
after the date on which he or she is personally served with, or receives
actual notice of, any summons, complaint, process, notice, demand, claim
or pleading, shall give notice thereof to the attorney general. Upon
such notice, the attorney general shall assume control of the
representation of such member, trustee, director, officer, employee,
fiduciary, investment advisor, attorney or accountant in connection with
such claim, demand, suit, action or proceeding. Each person so
represented shall cooperate fully with the attorney general or any other
person designated to assume such defense in respect to such
representation or defense.
 § 6210. Non-Instructional positions. 1. All persons hereafter
appointed to serve in non-instructional positions in the city university
shall be appointed for the probationary period of one year during which
the service of a person appointed to any such position may be
discontinued by the board of trustees at any time. All persons employed
in the non-instructional service of the board of trustees who have
served the full probationary period shall hold their respective
positions during good behavior and efficient and competent service, and
shall not be removed except for cause after a hearing by the affirmative
vote of a majority of the board of trustees.
 The board of trustees shall provide, by appropriate by-laws, for the
presentation of charges, the reference thereof to a committee of the
board of trustees or to others for hearings, the conduct of such
hearings, and the report thereof on the basis of which the board of
trustees shall take such action as it deems necessary or advisable.
 A person who had acquired tenure in a position with the board of
trustees and who is promoted therefrom to a higher position shall be
fully restored to his lower position and tenure therein in the event his
service is discontinued by the board of trustees during his probationary
period in such higher position; upon restoration to such original
position the time such person served in the higher position shall be
credited for all purposes as if such service had been rendered in the
original position.
 2. Vacancies in positions included in group II (college office
assistant B and college secretarial assistant B) and group III
(administrative assistant) of item number sixteen of section sixty-two
hundred twenty, shall be filled, as far as practicable, by promotion
from among persons holding positions in the lower grades listed in group
I (college office assistant A and college secretarial assistant A) and
group II of such item number sixteen of section sixty-two hundred
twenty, respectively. Promotions shall be made by the board of trustees
from group I and from group II of the aforesaid item number sixteen so
that of the total regularly employed in such three groups, not more than
forty per centum of the total in the three groups shall be employed in
group I and not less than fifteen per centum of the said total shall be
employed in group III.
 3. The board of trustees shall, by appropriate by-laws, determine from
time to time the qualification requirements for all positions.
 § 6211. College presidents emeriti; appointments, duties,
qualifications, salary. The board of trustees shall be authorized to
appoint, notwithstanding the provisions of any local law or charter to
the contrary, as president emeritus any retired president of an existing
college unit or a college unit hereafter to be created other than
teachers' training schools, whose duty it shall be to consult and advise
with educational officers as and when requested by the president, or
head of such college unit. No person shall be eligible for such
appointment unless he shall have been duly retired from such college
unit. He shall receive for the duration of his life such annual salary
as the board of trustees or like financial authority, shall determine.
The salary is to be in lieu of the annual pension to which such retired
president would be entitled during his lifetime but is not to be
construed as depriving him at the time of his retirement of the right to
choose an option or as depriving his estate or beneficiary of any death
benefit accruing to such estate or beneficiary under the law.
 § 6212. Tenure. 1. The following words and phrases, for the purposes
of this section, shall have the following meanings:
 a. "Educational unit" shall mean a college, school, preparatory
school, high school, or model school.
 b. "Instructional staff" shall mean the persons employed by the board
of trustees in the educational units governed and administered by it in
the grades or positions of president, dean, director, professor,
associate professor, assistant professor, instructor, fellow, lecturer,
senior registrar, registrar, assistant registrar, associate registrar,
college laboratory technicians; in the high school and model school:
principal, first assistant, supervisor, instructor, assistant teacher,
critic teacher, teacher; or in any grade or position which the board of
trustees in its discretion may add thereto.
 c. "Tenure" shall mean the right of a person to hold his position
during good behavior and efficient and competent service, and not to be
removed therefrom except for cause in the manner hereinafter provided.
 2. All members of the permanent instructional staff of the educational
units governed and administered by the board of trustees shall have
tenure.
 3. The permanent instructional staff shall consist of all persons
employed by the city university on an annual salary basis at the
educational units governed and administered by the board of trustees as
follows: (a) in the grades of professor, associate professor, assistant
professor, or in any grade or position which the board in its discretion
may add thereto, who, after serving on an annual salary in any of the
grades or positions enumerated or provided for in this paragraph for
seven full years continuously, have been appointed or shall be appointed
for an eighth full year, except as provided in subdivisions four and
five of this section; and (b) in the grades of college laboratory
technician, senior registrar, registrar, assistant registrar, associate
registrar, assistant librarian and in the elementary and high schools:
instructor, assistant teacher, critic teacher, or teacher, or in any
grade or position which the board in its discretion may add thereto,
who, after serving on an annual salary in any of the grades or positions
enumerated or provided for in this paragraph for five full years
continuously, have been appointed or shall be appointed for a sixth full
year, except as provided in subdivision four of this section; the
membership of such persons on the permanent instructional staff as
provided for in paragraph (a) of this subdivision shall become effective
on the first day of September following their reappointment for the
eighth full year, and the membership of such persons on the permanent
instructional staff as provided for in this paragraph shall become
effective on the first day of September following their reappointment
for the sixth full year. Where the service of a member of the
instructional staff, in one of the titles listed or provided for herein,
is interrupted by reason of absence on a maternity or child care leave
duly granted by the board of trustees, the period of creditable service
immediately preceding such absence shall be counted in computing the
full years of service required by this subdivision.
 4. Nothing herein contained shall be construed as conferring or
permitting tenure, or service credit toward the achievement of tenure,
in the grades or positions of president, director, assistant director,
dean, assistant dean, head of instructional department, chairman of
instructional department, fellow, laboratory teaching assistant,
principal, supervisor, or first assistant. Appointment to such grade or
position, or removal therefrom, however, shall not deprive the person so
appointed or removed of tenure in the highest position on the
instructional staff held with tenure prior to his appointment to such
office or conjointly with such office, nor shall the appointment to,
holding of, or removal from such grade or position deprive any person of
service credit toward the achievement of tenure under the provisions of
this section.
 5. Persons appointed to the rank of professor, associate professor or
assistant professor may under the provisions of the board of trustee's
by-laws be placed on the permanent instructional staff by the board of
trustees in its discretion after not less than one nor more than seven
years of continuous full time service on an annual salary except that
persons of proven record who have achieved tenure at another recognized
institution of higher learning and whose appointment is to the rank of
professor may be granted tenure immediately on appointment. Persons
promoted to the rank of professor shall be granted tenure after not more
than four years of continuous full time service on an annual salary in
positions on the instructional staff.
 6. For the purpose of appointments and promotions in the instructional
staff which may be made after April twentieth, nineteen hundred forty,
the board of trustees shall determine to what extent examinations are
practicable to ascertain merit and fitness for each of the positions
within the educational units covered and administered by it and, in so
far as examinations are deemed practicable, shall determine to what
extent it is practicable that such examinations be competitive. Any
examination held in accordance with the provisions of this subdivision
shall be set and administered through any agency which the board of
trustees may from time to time create or designate.
 7. Neither tenure as conferred through the operation of this section
nor the period requisite for the achievement of tenure shall be affected
by transfer within the educational units governed and administered by
the board of trustees, or by promotion, or by change of title, except
that a person upon whom tenure is conferred through the operation of
this section and who may be transferred to any position within the
educational units governed and administered by the board of trustees, or
who may be promoted, or whose title may be changed, shall have tenure in
his new position, provided such position is not one of those enumerated
in subdivision four of this section. Nothing herein contained shall be
construed to prevent the board of trustees from assigning any person
having tenure to any appropriate position on the staff, but no such
assignment shall carry with it a reduction in rank or a reduction in
salary other than the elimination of any additional emolument provided
for administrative positions. Any person in a position on the
instructional staff just prior to the effective date of this article
shall not be affected with respect to his tenure or the time credit
earned towards such tenure, or the period requisite for the achievement
of tenure under the law as it existed just prior to the effective date
of this article.
 8. A position held by a person upon whom tenure is conferred through
the operation of this section may be abolished or discontinued by the
board of trustees for reasons which are not discriminatory against a
particular person or persons. In the event that a position in a
department is to be abolished or discontinued, such position shall be
that of the person last appointed to such department, save that, for
special educational reasons which are not discriminatory against a
particular person or persons, the board of trustees may continue the
services of a person or persons whose position or positions would
otherwise be abolished or discontinued, and abolish or discontinue the
position or positions of the person or persons next most recently
appointed to such department; provided, however, that all persons of any
grade in such department upon whom tenure is not conferred by the
operation of this section shall be dismissed before the position of any
other person in such department is abolished or discontinued. If the
board of trustees abolishes or discontinues the position of a person
upon whom tenure is conferred through the operation of this section and
can find no position in the educational unit in which such person has
been serving which can be efficiently and capably filled by such person,
then his name shall be placed and shall remain for three years upon a
preferred eligible list of candidates for reappointment to fill a
vacancy that may thereafter occur in a position which can be efficiently
and capably filled by such person or to fill a newly created position
which can be efficiently and capably filled by such person. The board of
trustees shall, through the adoption of appropriate by-laws, determine
the number of such preferred eligible lists, the extent of applicability
of each such list, and the order of reappointment therefrom to vacancies
in positions under its jurisdiction or to newly created positions under
its jurisdiction. No names shall be placed on such preferred eligible
lists except as hereinbefore provided for persons upon whom tenure is
conferred through the operation of this section. Any person reappointed
from a preferred eligible list shall be reappointed at a salary not less
than that which he was receiving when his position was abolished or
discontinued. Any person whose name is placed on a preferred eligible
list as hereinbefore provided shall, for the purpose of maintaining his
status in any retirement system of which he is a member, be deemed to be
on leave of absence without pay.
 9. Persons having tenure under the provisions of this section may be
removed or suspended from the permanent instructional staff for one or
more of the following reasons, provided, however, that, except as to a
charge of misconduct constituting a crime when committed, no proceedings
shall be commenced more than five years after the occurrence of the
alleged incompetency or misconduct:
 a. incompetent or inefficient service;
 b. neglect of duty;
 c. physical or mental incapacity;
 d. conduct unbecoming a member of the staff. This provision shall not
be so interpreted as to constitute interference with academic freedom.
 Proceedings for the removal of such a person shall be conducted in
accordance with the by-laws of the board of trustees, and shall be
initiated by service by the board of trustees upon the person involved
of a notice setting forth all the charges pending against him. Such a
person so charged shall be entitled to a hearing with right of
representation by any person or persons of his choice before any
committee which the board of trustees may appoint to investigate such
charges, or, in the event that such a committee is not appointed, before
the board of trustees. In cases in which such a committee is appointed,
such a person shall further be entitled to an appeal on the record with
right of representation by any person or persons of his choice before
the board of trustees prior to its final determination of the question
of his removal. No such person shall be removed except at a regular or
special meeting of the board of trustees, by an affirmative vote of the
majority of all the members of the board of trustees. For the purposes
of any such proceeding, the board by its chairman or the chairman of any
such committee shall have power to subpoena witnesses, papers and
records, and to administer oaths.
 10. If any clause, sentence, paragraph or part of this section, or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance, shall, for any
reason, be adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid,
such judgment or order shall not invalidate the remainder of this
section and the application thereof to other persons or circumstances,
but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence,
paragraph or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which
such judgment or order shall have been rendered and to the person or
circumstance involved.
 § 6213. Establishment of collegiate centers. 1. The board of trustees
shall have the same powers to acquire sites, buildings, apparatus, and
equipment for its community colleges' as the board of education has for
school purposes, and it shall follow the procedure prescribed by law for
the board of education in the acquisition of such sites, buildings,
apparatus and equipment. When, in its discretion, the city university of
New York resolves to establish new centers of instruction for community
colleges, it shall follow the procedure of the board of education in
establishing new schools.
 2. The city university of New York shall have the power to acquire
real property, as defined by the eminent domain procedure law, in the
name of the people of the state of New York by purchase, lease or
appropriation for senior college purposes in accordance with the
provisions of section three hundred seven of this chapter, except that
the powers and duties in said section mentioned to be performed by the
commissioner of education, shall be performed by the board of trustees.
 3. On the request of the city university construction fund, either the
commissioner of general services of the state of New York, with respect
to any property held by the city university in the name of the people of
the state of New York, or the city university, with respect to any
property held by it in its own name, may sell, convey, lease or exchange
or otherwise make available to the dormitory authority, for nominal
consideration, any such property for the purposes of dormitory authority
financing.
 § 6214. Retirement systems. 1. All members of teaching and
administrative staffs in any educational unit established by the board
of trustees, and in any other institution administered and controlled by
such board, who are not members of any other retirement system supported
in whole or in part by the city of New York and who hold appointment to
service on annual salaries, shall, upon appointment, become members of
the public school teachers' retirement system of such city if eligible
therefor and if not eligible therefor shall become members of the
employees' retirement system of such city and shall have all the
obligations, rights, privileges and benefits of new entrants.
 2. An employee of the board of trustees who is a member of the New
York city employees' retirement system and who is also eligible for
membership in the teachers' retirement system of the city of New York
shall have the right to transfer his membership to such teachers'
retirement system. In order to effect such a transfer, a member must
give notice to the New York city employees' retirement system within one
year of his last becoming eligible for membership in the said teachers'
retirement system, of his intention to transfer to the said teachers'
retirement system. Upon receipt of such notice, the New York city
employees' retirement system shall transfer to such teachers' retirement
system the reserve on such member's benefits in the manner provided by
section forty-three of the retirement and social security law. The
former system shall also transfer to the latter system the member's
accumulated deductions which shall become such member's accumulated
deductions in the latter system. A person so transferring shall be
deemed to have been a member of the system to which he has transferred
during the entire period of membership service credited to him in the
system from which he has transferred. Such transferee shall be entitled
to all the rights, privileges and benefits of the system to which he has
transferred. Such transferee shall be entitled to the crediting of
regular interest in such teachers' retirement system at the same rate as
he would have received had he continued membership in the New York city
employees' retirement system. Upon his retirement, the mortality table
in effect in the teachers' retirement system of the city of New York on
the date when he last became a member of the New York city employees'
retirement system shall apply.
 3. Any member of the New York city employees' retirement system who is
a member of the instructional staff of the city university shall have
the right to transfer his membership to the teachers' retirement system
of the city of New York. In order to effect such a transfer, a member
must give notice to the New York city employees' retirement system, on
or before June thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty-seven or, within one
year of his eligibility for membership in the said teachers' retirement
system, of his intention to transfer to the said teachers' retirement
system. Upon receipt of such notice, the New York city employees'
retirement system shall transfer to such teachers' retirement system the
reserve on such member's benefits in the manner provided by section
forty-three of the retirement and social security law. The former system
shall also transfer to the latter system the member's accumulated
deductions which shall become such member's accumulated deductions in
the latter system. A person so transferring shall be deemed to have been
a member of the system to which he has transferred during the entire
period of membership service credited to him in the system from which he
has transferred. Such transferee shall be entitled to all the rights,
privileges and benefits of the system to which he has transferred. Such
transferee shall be entitled to the crediting of regular interest in
such teachers' retirement system at the same rate as he or she would
have received had he continued membership in the New York city
employees' retirement system. Upon his retirement, the mortality table
in effect in the teachers' retirement system of the city of New York on
the date when he last became a member of the New York city employees'
retirement system shall apply.
 4. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, on or after July first,
nineteen hundred eighty-six, any new member of the instructional staff
at a senior or community college of the city university of New York
shall be a member of the teachers' retirement system of the city of New
York or, if he so elects under applicable provisions of law, a member of
the optional retirement program established under article one hundred
twenty-five-A of this chapter.
 § 6215. Fees. 1. All instructional and non-instructional fees
hereafter received from matriculated students by the city university
shall be accounted for and paid to the city university construction
fund; subject, however, in the case of any such fees received by
graduate institutions, to any prior pledge thereof made by an agreement
and lease both between the city university of New York and the dormitory
authority dated as of January tenth, nineteen hundred sixty-six. The
fund shall receive, accept, invest, administer, expend and disburse the
instructional and non-instructional fees in accordance with the city
university construction fund act.
 2. All instructional and non-instructional fees hereafter received
from non-matriculated students by the city university shall be accounted
for and paid, as determined by the board of trustees, to the city
university construction fund; subject, however, in the case of any such
fees received by graduate institutions, to any prior pledge thereof made
by an agreement and lease both between the city university and the
dormitory authority dated as of January tenth, nineteen hundred
sixty-six. The fund shall receive, accept, invest, administer, expend
and disburse the instructional and non-instructional fees in accordance
with the city university construction fund act.
 3. For purposes of this article and article one hundred twenty-five-B
of this chapter, and notwithstanding any other provision thereof, the
instructional and non-instructional fees received from matriculated and
non-matriculated students at New York city college of technology shall
be treated as if they were fees from a community college, and the
instructional and non-instructional fees received from matriculated and
non-matriculated students at the college of Staten Island shall be
treated as if they were senior college fees; provided, however, that
instructional and non-instructional fees from students attending that
portion of the program of the college of Staten Island whose primary
purpose is providing certificate and associate degree post secondary
programs in general and technical educational subjects shall be treated
as if they were fees from a community college; provided, however, that
instructional and non-instructional fees received from all students
attending the college of Staten Island, New York city college of
technology and Medgar Evers college shall be used to offset the state
share of operating expenses.
 § 6216. State aid. The board of trustees shall continue to pay
salaries to the supervisors, teachers and all other employees of any
preparatory high school or model school under its jurisdiction which
shall be the same as those paid by the board of education of the same
city to persons discharging like functions in similar schools under the
jurisdiction of the said board of education. The city school district
of such city shall be entitled to receive apportionments of public
school moneys for the elementary and secondary schools maintained in and
by such city and under the control of the board of trustees on the same
basis as such city school district receives apportionments of public
school moneys for the elementary and high school conducted by the board
of education of such city. The board of trustees shall make all reports
required by the commissioner of education as the basis for calculating
such apportionment.
 § 6218. Contracts and purchases. a. Notwithstanding the provisions of
subdivision two of section one hundred twelve and sections one hundred
fifteen, one hundred sixty-one and one hundred sixty-three of the state
finance law and section three of the New York state printing and public
documents law or any other law to the contrary, the city university
trustees are authorized and empowered to:
 (i) purchase materials; proprietary electronic information resources,
including, but not limited to, academic, professional and industry
journals, reference handbooks and manuals, research tracking tools,
indexes and abstracts; and equipment and supplies, including computer
equipment and motor vehicles, where the amount for a single purchase
does not exceed seventy-five thousand dollars, (ii) execute contracts
for services and construction contracts to an amount not exceeding
seventy-five thousand dollars, and (iii) contract for printing to an
amount not exceeding seventy-five thousand dollars, without prior
approval by any other state officer or agency, but subject to rules and
regulations of the state comptroller not otherwise inconsistent with the
provisions of this section and in accordance with the guidelines
promulgated by the city university board of trustees after consultation
with the state comptroller. In addition, the trustees are authorized to
annually negotiate with the state comptroller increases in the
aforementioned dollar limits and the exemption of any articles,
categories of articles, services, or commodities from these limits.
Guidelines promulgated by the city university board of trustees shall,
to the extent practicable, require that competitive proposals be
solicited for purchases, and shall include requirements that purchases
and contracts authorized under this section be at the lowest available
price.
 b. Except as hereinafter provided, no contract for work or labor or
the purchase of supplies, material, or equipment or for the construction
or the alteration of any building or facility involving an expenditure
or liability of more than twenty thousand dollars shall be entered into
by the board of trustees, unless said board of trustees shall have duly
advertised for bids for the same for a period of not less than five days
under regulations to be approved by the board of trustees and the
contract in each case shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder
furnishing the security as required by the board of trustees. If two or
more bids are tied, and are the lowest bids submitted by responsible
bidders furnishing the security as required by the board, the board of
trustees may award the contract to any of said tied bidders.
 c. If the several parts of the work or labor to be done and/or the
supplies, materials or equipment to be furnished shall together involve
an expenditure of not more than twenty thousand dollars, the same may be
procured on an order awarded to the lowest responsible bidder upon bids
submitted without public advertisement under such regulations as shall
be made by the board of trustees. Purchases of five thousand dollars or
less may be made without competition.
 d. The board of trustees, if it shall deem it in the public interest,
may reject all bids.
 e. Upon the adoption of a resolution by a vote of at least two-thirds
of the members of the board of trustees by vote at a meeting, stating
that, for reasons of efficiency or economy, there is need for
standardization, purchase contracts for a particular type or kind of
equipment, materials, or supplies of more than twenty thousand dollars
may be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder furnishing the required
security after advertisement for bids in the manner provided in this
section. Such resolution shall contain a full explanation of the reasons
for its adoption. Purchase contracts for a particular type or kind of
equipment, materials or supplies of not more than twenty thousand
dollars may be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder upon bids
submitted without public advertisement under such regulations as shall
be made by the board of trustees.
 f. Surplus or second-hand supplies, materials or equipment may be
purchased without competitive bidding from the federal government, the
state of New York or from any political subdivision of the state.
 g. The board of trustees is authorized to establish cash advance
accounts for the purpose of purchasing materials, supplies, or services,
for cash advances for travel expenses and per diem allowances, or for
advance payment of wages and salary. The account may be used to purchase
such materials, supplies, or services where the amount of a single
purchase does not exceed two hundred fifty dollars in accordance with
such guidelines as shall be prescribed by the city university trustees
after consultation with the state comptroller.
 h. Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this section, the board of
trustees may make purchases, when available, through the state of New
York, the city of New York, the federal government or the board of
education of the city of New York, provided that the board of trustees
shall accept sole responsibility for any payment due the vendor.
 § 6219. Conveyance of property. 1. a. The city of New York shall on
or before January first, nineteen hundred eighty, by resolution or
resolutions of the board of estimate of such city or by instruments
authorized by such resolutions, convey to the state of New York all
right, title and interest to all real property owned by the city and
used by such university for senior college purposes notwithstanding the
provisions of any general, special or local law, or code or charter.
 b. All such conveyances shall contain a provision that if such real
property ceases to be used for such purpose, title to such property
shall revert to the city of New York, provided, however, that until such
time as the city university delivers the notice referred to in paragraph
c of this subdivision with respect to any parcel of such real property,
such parcel shall be deemed to be used for senior college purposes
notwithstanding any change in character, use or occupancy consistent
with such purposes subsequent to the conveyance thereof pursuant to
paragraph a of this subdivision. Notwithstanding the reverter contained
in the foregoing sentence, on the request of the city university
construction fund, the commissioner of general services of the state of
New York may, for the purposes of dormitory authority financing of any
facility conveyed by the city of New York pursuant to paragraph a of
this subdivision, sell, convey, lease or exchange or otherwise make
available to the dormitory authority, for a nominal consideration any
such property, subject to the provision that if title shall be
reconveyed to the state of New York by the dormitory authority
subsequent to satisfaction of indebtedness incurred by the dormitory
authority to finance improvements on such property, such property shall,
subject to paragraph c of this subdivision, again become subject to the
provisions of the first sentence of this paragraph. The conveyance to
the dormitory authority shall be free of the reverter provided for in
the first sentence of this paragraph.
 c. If any property which is subject to the reverter contained in the
first sentence of paragraph b of this subdivision ceases to be used for
senior college purposes, the city university shall notify the
commissioner of general services of the state of New York and the
director of management and budget of the city of New York in writing of
such event within sixty days. Upon the giving of such notice the
reverter contained in the first sentence of paragraph b of this
subdivision shall become effective and the state shall provide the city
with a duly executed deed in recordable form.
 d. If the city shall (i) use property so deeded to it with
improvements wholly paid for by the state or (ii) sell or otherwise
dispose of property so deeded to it with improvements wholly paid for by
the state, then, within thirty days after the beginning of the city
fiscal year immediately following such conveyance, the city shall pay to
the state an amount equal to the current appraised value of such
improvements in such property.
 e. The commissioner of general services of the state of New York may,
on the request of the city university construction fund for the purposes
of dormitory authority financing of the portion of the Staten Island
Developmental Center which is to be used by city university for senior
college purposes exclusively, sell, convey, lease or exchange or
otherwise make available to the dormitory authority such state lands,
situate within the county of Richmond, the city of New York, upon such
terms and conditions including consideration as the commissioner may fix
and determine with the approval of the director of the budget. However,
in the event that all or any part of such property should not be
utilized for senior college purposes exclusively, such property will
revert back to the state of New York.
 2. Real property being used on the effective date of this article or
to be used by the city university for senior college purposes which is
encumbered by bonds, mortgages or similar debt instruments and title to
which is held by an agency of the state subject to the provision that
such title shall be conveyed to the city of New York by such state
agency when such outstanding indebtedness has been satisfied, shall upon
being so conveyed to such city by such agency thereupon be re-conveyed
by such city to the state of New York.
 3. Notwithstanding any other provisions of law, the provisions of this
section shall apply to Medgar Evers college.
 § 6220. Salary schedules in certain public institutions of higher
learning. For the purposes of this section, "college" shall mean a
senior college as defined in subdivision five of section sixty-two
hundred two of this article. Any reference in this section to a
"community college of the board of trustees" or to a "community college
sponsored or administered by the board of higher education of the city
of New York" shall be deemed a reference to a community college as
defined in subdivision four of section sixty-two hundred two of this
article and to a locally sponsored community college administered by the
board pursuant to subdivision three of section sixty-three hundred six
of this chapter.
 In any public institution of higher learning under the jurisdiction of
the board of trustees, including community colleges sponsored or
administered by the board of trustees, the salaries, increments and
annual salary schedules of the following positions shall continue to be
no lower than those established by the board of higher education and
approved by the mayor and in full force and effect the first day of
January, nineteen hundred sixty-five:
 1. President;
 2. Dean;
 3. Professor;
 4. Registrar;
 5. Lecturers;
 6. Associate professors and librarians;
 7. Assistant professors and associate librarians;
 8. Instructors, assistant registrars and assistant librarians;
 9. Library assistants;
 10. Tutors;
 11. Research assistants and clinical assistants;
 12. Fellows and laboratory teaching assistants;
 13. Services on an hourly basis of compensation: persons appointed to
teaching positions in the evening and summer session with compensation
on an hourly basis;
 14. Temporary employees in teaching and supervising positions; and
 15. College physician--doctor and/or dentist: on session service.
 The annual increments provided through the operation of this
subdivision shall be added on January first of each year.
 16. Administrative employees of the non-instructional staff.
 A. Group I. College office assistant A, college secretarial assistant
A;
 Group II. College office assistant B, college secretarial assistant B;
 Group III. College administrative assistant;
 Group IV. Such other administrative positions of the non-instructional
staff now existing and such other administrative positions of the
non-instructional staff as the board of trustees may establish from time
to time and at such salary and salary schedules as the said board of
trustees may establish with the approval of the mayor of the city of New
York.
 B. The annual increments provided through the operation of this
section in the foregoing salary schedules for groups I, II, and III
hereof shall become effective on the first day of July or the first day
of January in each year following the completion of a year of service.
 C. Effective July first, nineteen hundred sixty-six, titles of
administrative employees of the non-instructional staff of community
colleges sponsored or administered by the board of trustees shall be
changed as follows:
 1. Group I. College office assistant A, college secretarial assistant
A.
 2. Group II. College office assistant B, college secretarial assistant
B.
 3. Group III. College administrative assistant.
 4. Group IV. Such other administrative positions of the
non-instructional staff now existing and such other administrative
positions of the non-instructional staff as the board of trustees may
establish from time to time and at such salary and salary schedules as
said board of trustees may establish with the approval of the mayor of
the city of New York.
 5. The qualification requirements for these positions and the
conditions of employment shall be as established by the board of
trustees, and shall be the same as those established for comparable
titles for four-year colleges of the board of trustees of the city
university of New York.
 6. Salaries and salary conditions for these positions shall be as
established by the board of trustees, and shall be the same as those
established for comparable titles for four-year colleges of the board of
trustees.
 7. All permanent administrative employees of the non-instructional
staff of the community colleges sponsored or administered by the board
of trustees, who are high school graduates and who on June thirtieth,
nineteen hundred sixty-six had permanent or probationary status in the
titles listed in column one below shall without examination (except as
otherwise specified) have their titles changed to the equated titles in
column two:
 Column 1 Column 2
Title as of June 30, 1966 Equated Title as of
 July 1, 1966
Account Clerk College office
 assistant A
Administrative assistant College administrative
 assistant
Clerk College office
 assistant A
Department library aide College office
 assistant A
Senior Clerk College
 office assistant B
Senior stenographer College secretarial
 assistant B
Stenographer College secretarial
 assistant A
Supervising clerk College administrative
 assistant
 (if incumbent passes a noncompetitive qualifying examination conducted
by the New York city department of personnel; a probationary period of
one year shall begin on appointment as a college administrative
assistant)
 or
 College office assistant B (if incumbent fails to pass the above
qualifying examination; in which case incumbent's salary shall continue
to increase by increments until the maximum of supervising clerk
schedule has been reached). Supervising stenographer College
administrative assistant
 (if incumbent passes a non-competitive qualifying examination
conducted by the New York city department of personnel; a probationary
period of one year shall begin on appointment as college administrative
assistant)
 or
 College secretarial assistant B (if incumbent fails to pass the above
qualifying examination; in which case incumbent's salary shall continue
to increase by increments until the maximum of supervising stenographer
schedule has been reached).
Typist College office assistant A
 An employee who on July first, nineteen hundred sixty-six has not yet
completed his probationary period shall, if he subsequently completes
his probationary period, be reclassified to the appropriate equivalent
title at the time of his permanent appointment. An employee who is not a
high school graduate shall be reclassified within a year after July
first, nineteen hundred sixty-six to the appropriate equivalent title on
presentation of a high school diploma or its equivalent, failing to do
which such employee shall remain in his career and salary plan title.
 8. No person employed in the community colleges sponsored or
administered by the board of trustees at the time this article goes into
effect shall suffer any diminution of salary, status, tenure, and
retirement rights, nor shall he receive in his new title a salary less
than he would have received had he continued in his former title. Any
such person shall retain his right to promotion on a city-wide basis
from any civil service list in existence on July first, nineteen hundred
sixty-six or established as the result of any examination for which the
filing period began prior to that date.
 9. All persons appointed on or after the date this article takes
effect to serve in administrative positions of the non-instructional
staff in the community colleges of the board of trustees shall be
appointed for the probationary period of one year, during which the
service of a person appointed to any such position may be discontinued
by the board of trustees at any time. All persons employed in the
administrative service of the non-instructional staff of the community
colleges sponsored or administered by the board of trustees who have
served the full probationary period shall hold their respective
positions during good behavior and efficient and competent service, and
shall not be removed except for cause after a hearing by the affirmative
vote of a majority of the board of trustees.
 The board of trustees shall provide by appropriate by-laws, for the
presentation of charges, the reference thereof to a committee of the
board of trustees or to others for hearings, the conduct of such
hearings and the report thereof on the basis of which the board of
trustees shall take such action as it deems necessary or advisable.
 10. Laboratory staff.
 Group I. College science assistant A; college science technician A;
college engineering technician A;
 Group II. College science assistant B; college science technician B;
college engineering technician B;
 Group III. College science assistant C; college science technician C;
college engineering technician C;
 11. Professor;
 12. Associate professor;
 13. Assistant professor;
 14. Instructor;
 15. Lecturer (nursing science);
 16. Senior registrar;
 17. Associate registrar;
 18. Technical assistant.
 In positions for which annual increments are specified through the
operation of this section, the board of trustees nevertheless shall have
the right to assign fixed salaries, not exceeding the maximum specified
through the operation of this section, to appointees in special cases,
to vote larger increments in special cases, when in its judgment the
nature of the duties or the character of the services renders such
action just, or to withhold an annual increment from any member of the
staff whose services for the preceding year are unsatisfactory.
 In any position for which no annual increment is provided through the
operation of this section, the specified salary of an incumbent shall be
fixed at the minimum rate, or the maximum rate, or between, by
resolution of the board of trustees. Such action shall be taken with due
consideration for the duties to be discharged, prevailing rates of
compensation for one discharging such duties, and the qualifications,
training and experience of the incumbent.
 Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prevent the
establishing of salary schedules by the board of trustees with the
consent of the director of the budget of the state of New York with
respect to senior colleges, and with the consent of the mayor with
respect to community colleges, with maxima higher than those contained
in the minimum schedules provided through the operation of this section,
and the payment by the state or the city, as appropriate, of
compensations and salaries fixed in accordance with such new schedule.
 § 6221. Financing of the city university of New York. A. Senior
college operating expenses. 1. Notwithstanding any other provision of
law, all expenditures for the senior college programs and services of
the city university of New York shall continue to be pre-financed from
city of New York funds. The comptroller of the state of New York may
establish a separate fund for the receipt and deposit of such
pre-financing funds from the city of New York pursuant to this
subdivision, and all other monies deemed appropriate by the state
comptroller and the state director of the budget, except that all monies
presently required by law to be paid directly to the city university
construction fund shall continue to be so paid. All monies appropriated
for such senior college programs and services, or derived from other
sources in the course of the administration thereof, shall be expended
upon vouchers approved by the chancellor of the city university, as
chief administrative officer of the city university, or by such
authority or authorities in the city university as shall be designated
by the chancellor by a rule or written direction filed with the
comptroller, when and in the manner authorized by the board of trustees.
No monies appropriated for such senior college programs and services, or
derived from other sources in the course of the administration thereof,
shall be expended until a certificate of the aggregate funds available
for expenditure pursuant to section forty-nine of the state finance law
has been approved by the director of the budget and copies thereof filed
with the state comptroller, the chairman of the senate finance committee
and the chairman of the assembly ways and means committee. In regard to
the city university, the director of the budget shall exercise the
authority granted under section forty-nine of the state finance law in
accordance with the provisions of paragraph b of subdivision four of
section three hundred fifty-five of this chapter.
 2. a. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the city of New York
shall appropriate in its expense budget and pay to the account of the
senior colleges of the city university of New York as operating aid
amounts in accordance with the following schedule:
 (i) For the twelve-month period commencing July first, nineteen
hundred seventy-nine, an amount equal to the lesser of fifty-eight
million, three hundred ninety-three thousand dollars ($58,393,000) or
twenty-five per centum of the net operating expenses of such senior
college programs and services, as certified by the comptroller of the
state of New York to be properly chargeable to such twelve-month period;
 (ii) For the twelve-month period commencing July first, nineteen
hundred eighty, an amount equal to eighty per centum of the amount
specified in (i) of subparagraph a of this paragraph.
 (iii) For the twelve-month period commencing July first, nineteen
hundred eighty-one, an amount equal to forty per centum of the amount
specified in (i) of subparagraph a of this paragraph.
 b. For the twelve-month period commencing July first, nineteen hundred
eighty-two and thereafter, the city of New York shall not be required to
make any appropriation in support of the net operating expenses of the
programs and services of the senior colleges of the city university.
 c. (i) Subject to the provisions of item (ii) of this subparagraph,
the amounts specified in this subdivision shall be exclusive of monies
payable by such city for campus schools and debt service on bonds
attributable to such university pursuant to article one hundred
twenty-five-B of this chapter.
 (ii) (1) The amounts specified in this subdivision, in so far as such
amounts consist of payments for the twelve-month period commencing on
July first, nineteen hundred seventy-nine, shall not include any
unfunded accrued liability payments required to be made in such period
pursuant to chapters nine hundred seventy-five, nine hundred seventy-six
and nine hundred seventy-seven of the laws of nineteen hundred
seventy-seven with respect to pension contributions.
 (2) The amounts specified in this subdivision, in so far as such
amounts consist of payments for the twelve-month period commencing on
July first, nineteen hundred eighty, shall not include:
 (a) any revised unfunded accrued liability payments (as defined in
subdivision seven of section sixty-two hundred two of this article)
which are required to be made in such period with respect to pension
contributions; or
 (b) any installment of the nineteen hundred eighty unfunded accrued
liability adjustment (as defined in subdivision eight of such section
sixty-two hundred two), whether a charge or a credit, which installment
is required to be paid or credited, as the case may be, in such period
with respect to pension contributions.
 (3) During the period beginning on July first, nineteen hundred
eighty-one and ending on June thirtieth, nineteen hundred ninety, the
net operating expenses of the programs and services of the senior
colleges of the city university shall not include any of the payments or
installments of charge or credit stated below in this sub-item (3), in
so far as such payments or installments are attributable to employees of
such senior colleges:
 (a) any revised unfunded accrued liability payments (as defined in
subdivision seven of section sixty-two hundred two of this article)
required to be made in such period and thereafter with respect to
pension contributions; and
 (b) any installments of nineteen hundred eighty unfunded accrued
liability adjustment (as defined in subdivision eight of such section
sixty-two hundred two), whether a charge or a credit, which installments
are required to be paid or credited, as the case may be, in such
twelve-month period and thereafter; and
 (c) any installments of the nineteen hundred eighty-two unfunded
accrued liability adjustment (as defined in subdivision eight-a of such
section sixty-two hundred two), which installments are required to be
credited in such twelve-month period and thereafter; and
 (d) any balance sheet liability contributions (as defined in
subdivision nine of such section sixty-two hundred two) which
contributions are required to be made in such period; and
 (e) any installments of the NYCERS nineteen hundred eighty-five
unfunded accrued liability adjustment attributable to the senior
colleges (as defined in subdivision eight-b of such section sixty-two
hundred two), regardless of the prescribed time of crediting of such
installments; and
 (f) any installments of the NYCTRS nineteen hundred eighty-five
unfunded accrued liability adjustment (as defined in subdivision eight-c
of such section sixty-two hundred two), regardless of the prescribed
time of crediting of such installments; and
 (g) any installments of the NYCTRS nineteen hundred eighty-six
unfunded accrued liability adjustment (as defined in subdivision eight-d
of such section sixty-two hundred two), regardless of the prescribed
time of crediting of such installments; and
 (h) any installments of the New York city employees' retirement system
nineteen hundred eighty-eight unfunded accrued liability adjustment
attributable to the senior colleges (as defined in subdivision eight-e
of such section sixty-two hundred two), whether a charge or a credit,
regardless of the prescribed time of payment or crediting of such
installments; and
 (i) any installments of the New York city teachers' retirement system
nineteen hundred eighty-eight unfunded accrued liability adjustment
attributable to the senior colleges (as defined in subdivision eight-f
of such section sixty-two hundred two), whether a charge or a credit,
regardless of the prescribed time of payment or crediting of such
installments; and
 (4) Commencing with the twelve-month period beginning on July first,
nineteen hundred ninety and thereafter, the net operating expenses of
the programs and services of the senior colleges of the city university
shall not include any of the payments or installments of charge or credit or contributions stated below in this sub-item (4):
 (a) the contributions for twenty-year amortization of nineteen hundred
ninety senior college consolidated UAL and senior college remainder of
BSL (as defined in subdivision eight-o of section sixty-two hundred two
of this article; and
 (b) any payments or installments of any NYCERS post-June thirtieth,
nineteen hundred ninety unfunded accrued liability adjustment
attributable to the senior colleges (as defined in subdivision eight-g
of section sixty-two hundred two of this article); and
 (c) any payments or installments of NYCTRS post-June thirtieth,
nineteen hundred ninety unfunded accrued liability adjustment
attributable to the senior colleges (as defined in subdivision eight-h
of section sixty-two hundred two of this article).
 d. (i) Nothing contained in this paragraph shall be construed to
remove the obligation of the city of New York, as prescribed by sections
sixty-two hundred thirty and sixty-two hundred thirty-one of this
article, for payment of its share of unfunded accrued pension
liabilities attributable to employees of the senior colleges of the city
university of New York required to be made in the city's nineteen
hundred seventy-nine--nineteen hundred eighty fiscal year pursuant to
chapters nine hundred seventy-five, nine hundred seventy-six and nine
hundred seventy-seven of the laws of nineteen hundred seventy-seven.
 (ii) Nothing contained in this paragraph shall be construed to remove
the obligation of the city of New York, as prescribed by sections
sixty-two hundred thirty and sixty-two hundred thirty-one of this
article, for payment of its share of:
 (1) the revised unfunded accrued liability contributions (as defined
in subdivision seven of section sixty-two hundred two of this article)
which are required to be made in the city's nineteen hundred
eighty--nineteen hundred eighty-one fiscal year; and
 (2) any installment of nineteen hundred eighty unfunded accrued
liability adjustment (as defined in subdivision eight of section
sixty-two hundred two of this article) which, if such adjustment is a
charge, is required to be paid in such fiscal year.
 (iii) Subject to the provisions of subdivision m of section 13-638.2
of the administrative code of the city of New York, nothing contained in
this paragraph shall be construed to remove the obligation of the city
of New York, as prescribed by sections sixty-two hundred thirty and
sixty-two hundred thirty-one of this article, for payment of its share
of:
 (1) the revised unfunded accrued liability contributions (as defined
in subdivision seven of section sixty-two hundred two of this article)
which are required to be made in the city's nineteen hundred
eighty-one--nineteen hundred eighty-two fiscal year and thereafter; and
 (2) any installment of nineteen hundred eighty unfunded accrued
liability adjustment (as defined in subdivision eight of section
sixty-two hundred two of this article) which, if such adjustment is a
charge, is required to be made in such fiscal years; and
 (3) any balance sheet liability contribution (as defined in
subdivision nine of section sixty-two hundred two of this article) which
is required to be made in such fiscal years.
 e. In addition to the amounts specified in subparagraph a of this
paragraph and notwithstanding the provisions of subparagraph b of this
paragraph, the city of New York shall appropriate in its expense budget
and pay to the account of the senior colleges of the city university of
New York as the city's share of operating aid for the college of Staten
Island and New York city college of technology amounts in accordance
with the following schedule:
 (i) For the twelve month period commencing July first, nineteen
hundred eighty, an amount that shall equal four million, one hundred
thousand dollars ($4,100,000).
 (ii) For the twelve month period commencing July first, nineteen
hundred eighty-one, an amount equal to one-half of the amount specified
in clause (i) of this subparagraph.
 (iii) For the twelve month period commencing July first, nineteen
hundred eighty-two, and thereafter the city of New York shall not be
required to make any appropriation for operating aid for the college of
Staten Island and New York city college of technology.
 3. The state shall annually appropriate and pay an amount equal to the
net operating expenses of such senior college programs and services less
that amount payable, if any, by the city of New York pursuant to
paragraph two of this subdivision. Such state payment shall be made in
four installments, on or before April twenty-fifth, June twenty-fifth,
October twenty-fifth and February twenty-fifth.
 4. Commencing with the twelve-month period beginning July first,
nineteen hundred eighty-two and thereafter, the state shall reimburse to
the city of New York one hundred per centum of the net operating
expenses of the approved programs and services of the senior colleges.
 4-a. Notwithstanding the provision of any law, rule or regulation to
the contrary, the city university shall be entitled to annually receive
an apportionment and payment of state assistance equal to all moneys
derived as a result of the tuition increase, calculated as the
difference in the amount generated using the tuition rates authorized by
the trustees of the city university for the two thousand eight-two
thousand nine academic year and the amount generated using the tuition
rates authorized by the trustees of the city university for the two
thousand nine-two thousand ten academic year, pursuant to the following
schedule: for the two thousand nine-two thousand ten academic year, the
city university shall receive an amount equal to twenty percent of such
tuition increase; for the two thousand ten-two thousand eleven academic
year, the city university shall receive an amount equal to thirty
percent of such tuition increase; for the two thousand eleven-two
thousand twelve academic year, the city university shall receive an
amount equal to forty percent of such tuition increase; and for the two
thousand twelve-two thousand thirteen academic year, the city university
shall receive an amount equal to fifty percent of such tuition increase.
Such apportionment shall be for the enhanced investment in the city
university of the state of New York and shall be used to supplement, not
supplant, gross senior college operating budget support, unless the
director of the budget determines that state fiscal conditions preclude
such an outcome and, in which case, the director shall submit a report
regarding the recommended funding levels and whether the tuition
increase apportionment provisions of this subdivision have been complied
with for the city university of the state of New York to the chairs of
the senate finance committee and the assembly ways and means committee
and the chairs of the senate higher education committee and the assembly
higher education committee no later than fifteen days following the
release of the executive budget.
 5. The comptroller of the state of New York shall provide accounting,
payroll, expenditure and revenue reporting and similar services for the
senior colleges for the period commencing July first, nineteen hundred
eighty-two and thereafter. Notwithstanding any other provision of law,
he may, to the extent he deems it necessary and practicable, require
senior colleges of the city university to conform to statutory
requirements, rules, and administrative procedures applicable to state
departments and agencies.
 6. The director of the budget of the state of New York may, to the
extent he deems it necessary and practicable, giving due consideration
to the particular circumstances of the city university, require the
senior colleges of the city university of New York to conform to the
state statutory requirements, rules and administrative procedures such
as are applicable to the state university of New York regarding
budgetary and fiscal matters.
 7. For the purposes of this subdivision, "net operating expenses"
shall be defined as the total operating expenses of approved programs
and services less: (a) all excess tuition and instructional and
non-instructional fees attributable to the senior colleges and received
from the city university construction fund pursuant to subdivision b of
section sixty-two hundred seventy-eight of this chapter; (b) an amount
to be deposited from overhead funds and miscellaneous earnings recovered
in the administration of sponsored programs for which the research
foundation of the city university of New York has been designated as
fiscal administrator; (c) the amount of all monies from any source other
than those paid by the city, if any, and the state on a per centum basis
of the net operating budget, which are expended through the operating
budget; and (d) that portion of the operating costs of central
administration and university-wide programs which the state budget
director determines to be chargeable to the community colleges and which
is to be paid by the city of New York pursuant to paragraph two of
subdivision C of this section.
 B. Senior college capital costs. Commencing with the twelve-month
period beginning July first, nineteen hundred eighty-two and thereafter,
the state shall pay one hundred per centum of capital costs exclusive of
those financed pursuant to the provisions of article one hundred
twenty-five-B of this chapter, of the senior colleges of the city
university of New York, provided however that commencing with the twelve
month period beginning July first, nineteen hundred eighty-two and
thereafter, the state shall pay one hundred per centum of capital costs
exclusive of those financed pursuant to the provisions of article one
hundred twenty-five-B of this chapter, of the college of Staten Island,
New York city college of technology and, commencing with the twelve
month period beginning July first, two thousand nine and thereafter,
Medgar Evers college, provided, however, that appropriations authorizing
such costs have been approved by the legislature. The advancement of
capital projects pursuant to this subdivision shall be undertaken only
in accordance with the provisions of section ninety-three of the state
finance law.
 C. Community colleges. 1. The amount, methods and procedures for the
payment of state aid to community colleges of the city university of New
York shall continue to be governed pursuant to the provisions of section
sixty-three hundred four of this chapter and any rule or regulation
promulgated pursuant thereto. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision
of law, for the purposes of this paragraph, any reference contained in
section sixty-three hundred four of this chapter to the approval of the
state university trustees for such state aid purposes shall, in lieu
thereof, be deemed to mean and refer to the approval of the board of
trustees and any reference to a community college in such section shall
be deemed to mean and refer to a community college as defined in section
sixty-two hundred two of this article; provided however, that any rule
or regulation approved by the board of trustees, for such state aid
purposes, shall be the same as any rule or regulation promulgated by the
state university trustees, as approved by the state director of the
budget.
 2. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the city of New York
shall appropriate in its expense budget and pay to the account of the
community colleges of the city university of New York as operating aid
that portion of the operating costs of central administration and
university-wide programs attributable to community colleges, as defined
pursuant to subparagraph (d) of paragraph seven of subdivision A of this
section.
 D. College of Staten Island. Notwithstanding the designation of the
college of Staten Island as a senior college:
 (i) the city of New York shall annually appropriate in its expense
budget and pay to the city university of New York, as operating aid in
support of the programs and services of the college of Staten Island, an
amount for each full-time equivalent student in the associate degree
program of the college equal to the amount the city of New York is
appropriating and paying for each full-time equivalent student in the
community colleges;
 (ii) and the state of New York shall annually appropriate and pay to
the city university of New York an amount equal to the net operating
expenses of the college of Staten Island less the amount payable by the
city of New York pursuant to this subdivision. Such state of New York
payment shall be made in four installments on or before April
twenty-fifth, June twenty-fifth, October twenty-fifth and January
twenty-fifth. The amount to be paid by the city of New York pursuant to
this subdivision shall be determined by the state director of the
budget, based upon information submitted by the mayor in such form and
content and at such time as may be requred by the state director of the
budget.
 E. Medgar Evers college. Notwithstanding the designation of Medgar
Evers college as a senior college:
 (i) in addition to the amounts specified in subparagraph e of
paragraph two of subdivision A of this section, the city of New York
shall annually appropriate in its expense budget and pay to the city
university of New York as operating aid in support of the programs and
services, an amount for each full-time equivalent student in the
associate degree program of the college equal to the amount the city of
New York is appropriating and paying for each full-time equivalent
student in the community colleges; and
 (ii) the state of New York shall annually appropriate and pay to the
city of New York on behalf of the city university of New York an amount
equal to the net operating expenses of Medgar Evers college less the
amount payable by the city of New York pursuant to this subdivision.
Such state of New York payment shall be made in four installments on or
before April twenty-fifth, June twenty-fifth, October twenty-fifth and
February twenty-fifth. The amount to be paid by the city of New York
pursuant to this subdivision shall be determined by the state director
of the budget, based upon information submitted by the mayor in such
form and content and at such time as may be required by the state
director of the budget.
 § 6222. Admission of non-residents of the city of New York to each
community college of the city university. 1. In addition to admitting
residents of the city of New York, each city university community
college shall, in accordance with the provisions of this section, admit
non-residents of New York city as students.
 2. (a) The methods and procedures for the admission of such
non-resident students to the city university of New York community
colleges shall be in accordance with the provisions of section
sixty-three hundred five of this title. Notwithstanding any inconsistent
provision of law, any reference contained in such section sixty-three
hundred five to the state university trustees or to the chancellor of
the state university of New York shall, for the purposes of this
section, be deemed to mean and refer to the board of trustees and the
chancellor of the city university of New York, respectively.
 (b) Provided, further, in accordance with section six thousand three
hundred five of this title, the chief fiscal officer of each county, as
defined in section 2.00 of the local finance law, shall, upon
application and submission to him of satisfactory evidence, issue to any
person desiring to enroll in a community college as a non-resident
student, a certificate of residence form showing that said person is a
resident of said county. If the chief fiscal officer of a county refuses
to issue such a certificate on the ground that the person applying
therefor is not a resident of such county, the person applying may
appeal to the chancellor of the city university. The chancellor of the
city university shall make a determination after a hearing, upon ten
days' notice to such chief fiscal officer of the county, and such
determination shall be final and binding on the county. Such person
shall, upon his registration for each college year, file with the
college such a certificate of residence form issued not earlier than two
months prior thereto, and such certificate of residence form shall be
valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance.
 3. The city university board of trustees shall work in conjunction
with the state university board of trustees for the purposes of
examining the laws, regulations, and policies regarding community
college charges for non-resident students and submitting a report to the
legislature pursuant to subdivision eleven of section sixty-three
hundred five of this title.
 § 6223. Deferred education payments. The board of trustees, by
regulation, shall provide that upon request by a student attending any
college of the city university who is an eligible veteran, the payment
of tuition and other fees and charges, less the amounts payable for such
purposes from scholarships or other financial assistance awarded said
veteran pursuant to article thirteen of this chapter, article one
hundred thirty of this chapter or any other college, state or federal
aid program, shall be deferred in such amounts and until such times as
the several payments of veterans' benefits under the Veterans'
Readjustment Benefit Act of 1966, as amended, are received by the
veteran, provided that the veteran has filed a claim for such benefits
and presents to the city university proof of eligibility, extent of
entitlement to benefits and the need for deferral until the receipt of
such benefits.
 § 6224. Claims against city university. 1. The provisions of sections
fifty-e and fifty-i of the general municipal law shall, notwithstanding
any inconsistent provision of law, continue to apply to actions and
proceedings based on a cause of action involving a community college of
the city university of New York or an officer, agent, servant or
employee of such community college acting in the course of his
employment. The provisions of subdivisions four, five and six of this
section shall not apply to such actions and proceedings.
 2. No action or proceeding based on a cause of action involving a
community college of the city university of New York or an officer,
agent, servant or employee of such community college acting in the
course of his employment may be prosecuted or maintained unless it shall
appear by and as an allegation in the complaint or necessary moving
papers that at least thirty days have elapsed since a demand setting
forth the underlying basis for such matter was presented to the city
university for adjustment, and that the officers or bodies having the
power to adjust or pay such demand have neglected or refused to make an
adjustment or payment thereof for thirty days, after such presentment.
 3. The city university may require any person presenting to it for
settlement an account or claim for any cause whatever against it to be
sworn before it or a committee thereof, or before any person designated
by such board of trustees touching such account or claim, and when so
sworn, to answer orally as to any facts relative to the justness of such
account or claim. A trustee or any person designated as hereinbefore
stated shall have the power to administer an oath to any person who
shall give testimony to the justness of such account or claim. Willful
false swearing before the board of trustees, a committee thereof or any
person designated as hereinbefore stated shall be perjury and punishable
as such.
 4. Exclusive jurisdiction is hereby conferred upon the court of claims
to hear, audit and determine the claims of any person against the city
university of New York (a) for wrongful death, (b) in connection with
causes of action sounding in tort alleged to have been committed by a
senior college of such university or any officer, agent, servant or
employee of a senior college of such university in the course of his
employment on behalf of such university, and (c) for the breach of a
contract relating to construction, reconstruction, improvement,
maintenance, operation, purchase or personal services entered into by
such university in connection with a senior college of such university
or any officer, agent, servant or employee of a senior college of such
university in the course of his employment on behalf of such university
in the same manner and to the extent provided by and subject to the
provisions of the court of claims act, including time limitations, with
respect to claims against the state, and to make awards and render
judgments therefor. Such jurisdiction shall attach to all claims
against the city university which arise on and after July first,
nineteen hundred seventy-nine. Nothing contained in this section shall
be construed as passing upon the merits of any such claims and no such
award shall be made or judgment rendered unless supported by such
evidence as would sustain a judgment against an individual or
corporation in a court of law or equity.
 5. (a) Notwithstanding any inconsistent provisions of law, the
comptroller of the state of New York is authorized to examine, audit and
certify for payment, in accordance with procedures applicable to and
funding sources available for the payment by the state of any claim,
settlement or judgment against the state, (1) any judgment of the court
of claims, (2) any settlement approved by the court of claims pursuant
to section twenty-a of the court of claims act and (3) any claim which
would be otherwise subject to the provisions of subdivision four of this
section, provided such claim shall have been approved for payment by the
board of trustees of the city university of New York or its designee, by
the director of the budget and by the attorney general.
 (b) Notwithstanding any inconsistent provisions of law, and in
addition to the procedures set forth above, the comptroller of the state
of New York is authorized to examine, audit and certify for payment any
claim not in excess of the amount specified in subdivision twelve-a of
section eight of the state finance law which is otherwise subject to the
provisions of subdivision four of this section in accordance with the
provisions of such subdivision twelve-a.
 6. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provisions of law, with respect to
claims against the city university which arise on and after July first,
nineteen hundred seventy-nine, the comptroller of the state of New York
is authorized to examine, audit, certify for payment and pay from
funding sources available for payment of claims by the state any
settlement, order or judgment in any federal or state court, other than
the court of claims, or any administrative tribunal which pertains to a
senior college of the city university of New York. No such order or
judgment shall be paid except upon a certificate of the attorney general
that it has been entered. No such settlement shall be paid unless it
shall have been approved for payment by the board of trustees of the
city university of New York, or its designee, by the director of the
budget and by the attorney general. Nothing contained in this
subdivision shall be deemed to affect or alter the jurisdiction of any
court or administrative tribunal.
 § 6225. Pending actions and proceedings. No action or proceeding
based upon a cause of action which arose prior to the effective date of
this article or, with respect to Medgar Evers college, prior to July
first, nineteen hundred ninety-four, brought by or against the city of
New York, the city university of New York or its board of trustees, or
the city university construction fund shall be affected by any provision
of this article, but the same may be prosecuted or defended by the
corporation counsel of the city of New York in the name of the body
corporate of the city university of New York created by this article in
the same court in which the action is pending. In all such actions and
proceedings such body corporate, upon application to the court, shall be
substituted as a party. Judgments or awards in any such action or
proceeding shall be paid by the city of New York in the same manner as
prior to the effective date of this article, provided, however, the
state shall reimburse the city to the extent required by law in effect
at the time the cause of action arose.
 § 6226. Community college severence provisions. a. On July first,
nineteen hundred seventy-five:
 1. Any funds and copies of all books, papers and records of the
trustees of the state university, pertaining to or connected with the
community colleges, shall become the property of the board of trustees.
 2. Any business or other matter undertaken or commenced by the
trustees of the state university of New York pertaining to or connected
with the community colleges may be conducted and completed by the board
of trustees under the same terms and conditions and with the same effect
as if conducted and completed by such board of trustees.
 3. Inclusion in the master plan of the state university of New York of
a facility or of a plan or recommendation with respect to a community
college shall constitute inclusion of such facility, plan or
recommendation in the master plan of the city university, and any
approval by the board of regents of any facility, plan or recommendation
included in the master plan of the state university with respect to a
community college and the incorporation thereof in the regents plan for
higher education, and any approval by the governor of the regents plan
insofar as it relates to such facility, plan or recommendation, shall
constitute the requisite approvals of the inclusion of such facility,
plan or recommendation in the master plan of the city university for
purposes of section two hundred thirty-seven of this article and article
one hundred twenty-five-B of this chapter, and any other law.
 4. Any person who, immediately prior to July first, nineteen hundred
seventy-five, was appointed to a position on the instructional staff of
a community college pursuant to former section sixty-two hundred six-b
of this article shall be considered as of the effective date of this
article to have been appointed to a comparable position under section
sixty-two hundred ten of this chapter. Any person who, immediately prior
to July first, nineteen hundred seventy-five, had achieved tenure under
former section sixty-two hundred six-b of this chapter shall be
considered as of July first, nineteen hundred seventy-five as having
achieved tenure and/or attained such other right under section sixty-two
hundred ten of this chapter. The period of creditable service of any
person who, prior to July first, nineteen hundred seventy-five, had at
any time served in a position on the instructional staff of a community
college pursuant to former section sixty-two hundred six-b of this
chapter shall be counted in computing the years of service of such
person required under section sixty-two hundred ten of this chapter in
the achievement of tenure.
 b. The board of trustees is hereby authorized to enter into any
agreement to effectuate the purposes of chapter three hundred thirty-two
of the laws of nineteen hundred seventy-five.
 § 6227. Reference in provisions relating to retirement. Whenever the
term "board of higher education of the city of New York" or "board of
higher education of a city having a population of one million or more"
is referred to or designated in any charter or administrative code or
any other general, special or local law relating to pension or
retirement systems, including but not limited to the New York city
employees' retirement system, the New York city teachers' retirement
system, the board of education retirement system or board of higher
education optional retirement program, such reference or designation
shall be deemed to refer to the corporate body of the city university of
New York continued by this article. Whenever the provisions of such law
require the city of New York to make payments to such pension or
retirement systems or program on behalf of instructional and
non-instructional staff of senior colleges of the city university of New
York, such payments shall be made, with respect to employment on and
after the effective date of this article, by the city university of New
York.
 § 6228. Transitory provisions. 1. Whenever the term "board of higher
education of the city of New York" or "board of higher education of a
city having a population of one million or more" is referred to or
designated in any law, general, special or local, contract, lease,
judgment, decision or document pertaining to the functions, powers and
duties hereby continued in, transferred and assigned to, or devolved
upon, the corporate body of the city university of New York continued by
this article, such reference or designation shall be deemed to refer to
and include the corporate body of the city university of New York
continued by this article, so far as such law, contract, lease,
judgment, decision or document pertains to matters which are within its
jurisdiction by reason of the redesignation, continuation, transfer,
assignment and devolution of functions, powers and duties made by this
article.
 2. All contracts, leases and other agreements entered into by the
board of higher education of the city of New York on behalf of the city
university of New York before the effective date of this article shall
be conducted and completed by the body corporate of the city university
of New York continued by this article in the same manner and under the
same terms and conditions and with the same effect as if the same had
been conducted and completed by the board of higher education of the
city of New York. In addition, any contracts, leases and other
agreements entered into by the city university of New York prior to the
effective date of this article shall remain in full force and effect and
shall be conducted and completed by the body corporate of the city
university of New York continued by this article.
 3. All rights, title and interest in personal property used for
educational or administrative purposes of the senior colleges of the
city university of New York vested in the city of New York on the
effective date of this article are hereby transferred, assigned and
devolved upon the city university of New York.
 4. No existing right or remedy of any character shall be lost,
impaired or affected, nor shall any new right or remedy of any character
accrue to or for the benefit of any person by reason of the continuation
of the corporate body of the city university of New York pursuant to the
provisions of this article.
 5. Any lease entered into by the city of New York for the purposes of
the senior colleges of the city university of New York before the
effective date of this article is hereby transferred, assigned and
devolved upon the city university of New York, notwithstanding any
provision that may be contained therein providing for the
nonassignability of such lease and any such provision shall be deemed to
be void as against the public policy of the state and of no force and
effect; provided however, that the city of New York shall guarantee the
performance by the city university of the obligation of the lessee under
such lease.
 § 6229. City university of New York community college budget process.
1. For the purposes of this section and section sixty-two hundred
twenty-one of this article, the term "approved programs and services"
shall mean and include all programs and services provided by the
community colleges, except for campus schools or other elementary or
secondary schools which receive state aid under other provisions of law,
provided that all such programs have been approved as a part of the
master plan of the city university and as a part of the regents plan for
higher education or general revision thereof pursuant to section two
hundred thirty-seven of this chapter.
 2. For each city fiscal year, the chancellor of the city university
shall prepare a proposed operating and capital budget for all approved
programs and services. The form and content of such proposed operating
and capital budget shall be the same as that approved by the state
director of the budget for the community colleges of the state
university of New York. The proposed operating budget shall be submitted
in accordance with subdivision one-b of section sixty-three hundred four
of this chapter and shall also set forth the separate operating budgets
of each community college.
 3. Such proposed operating and capital budget, after approval by the
board of trustees, shall be submitted to the mayor of the city of New
York for his review and approval. Not later than October first of the
calendar year preceding the city fiscal year, the mayor shall submit to
the state budget director, in the form and content required by
subdivision two hereof, the amount of expenditures that he will
recommend in his executive budget for the following fiscal year for such
approved programs and services.
 § 6230. City university of New York senior college budget process. 1.
For the purposes of this section and section sixty-two hundred
twenty-one of this article, the term "approved programs and services"
shall mean and include all programs and services provided by the senior
colleges excluding campus schools or other elementary or secondary
schools which receive state aid under other provisions of law and also
excluding all unfunded accrued liability payments, revised unfunded
accrued liability payments (as defined in subdivision seven of section
sixty-two hundred two of this article), installments of nineteen hundred
eighty unfunded accrued liability adjustment (as defined in subdivision
eight of such section sixty-two hundred two), installments of nineteen
hundred eighty-two unfunded accrued liability adjustment (as defined in
subdivision eight-a of such section sixty-two hundred two), installments
of NYCERS nineteen hundred eighty-five unfunded accrued liability
adjustment attributable to the senior colleges (as defined in
subdivision eight-b of such section sixty-two hundred two), installments
of NYCTRS nineteen hundred eighty-five unfunded accrued liability
adjustment (as defined in subdivision eight-c of such section sixty-two
hundred two), installments of NYCTRS nineteen hundred eighty-six
unfunded accrued liability adjustment (as defined in subdivision eight-d
of such section sixty-two hundred two), installments of New York city
employees' retirement system nineteen hundred eighty-eight unfunded
accrued liability adjustment attributable to the senior colleges (as
defined in subdivision eight-e of such section sixty-two hundred two),
installments of New York city teachers' retirement system nineteen
hundred eighty-eight unfunded accrued liability adjustment attributable
to the senior colleges (as defined in subdivision eight-f of such
section sixty-two hundred two), installments of any NYCERS post-June
thirtieth, nineteen hundred ninety unfunded accrued liability adjustment
attributable to the senior colleges (as defined in subdivision eight-g
of such section sixty-two hundred two), installments of any NYCTRS
post-June thirtieth, nineteen hundred ninety unfunded accrued liability
adjustment attributable to the senior colleges (as defined in
subdivision eight-h of such section sixty-two hundred two),
contributions for twenty-year amortization of nineteen hundred ninety
senior college consolidated UAL and senior college remainder of BSL (as
defined in subdivision eight-o of section sixty-two hundred two of this
article) and balance sheet liability contributions (as defined in
subdivision nine of such section sixty-two hundred two) required to be
made pursuant to chapters nine hundred seventy-five, nine hundred
seventy-six and nine hundred seventy-seven of the laws of nineteen
hundred seventy-seven or the provisions of law referred to in such
subdivisions with respect to pension contributions, provided that all
such programs have been approved as a part of the master plan of the
city university and as a part of the regents plan for higher education
or general revision thereof pursuant to section two hundred thirty-seven
of this chapter.
 2. For each city fiscal year, the chancellor of the city university
shall prepare a proposed operating and capital budget for all approved
programs and services of the senior colleges in such form and contents
as shall be required by the state director of the budget. Such proposed
operating and capital budget, after approval by the board of trustees,
shall be submitted to the governor by the first day of October of each
year, with copies at such time to the state director of the budget,
senate finance committee and the assembly ways and means committee, for
information purposes, the director of the office of management and
budget of the city of New York.
 3. The governor shall submit his recommendations with respect to such
city university of New York senior college operating and capital budget
to the legislature as part of the local assistance and capital
construction portions of the executive budget, as appropriate.
 § 6231. Certain payment by the state of New York to the city of New
York. 1. a. (i) Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of law, but
subject to the provisions of paragraph d of this subdivision, the state
and the city of New York shall each contribute fifty per centum of:
 (A) all unfunded accrued liability payments required to be made during
the twelve-month period commencing on July first, nineteen hundred
seventy-nine pursuant to chapters nine hundred seventy-five, nine
hundred seventy-six, and nine hundred seventy-seven of the laws of
nineteen hundred seventy-seven with respect to required employer
contributions to the New York city employees' retirement system and to
the New York city teachers' retirement system on account of employees of
the senior colleges of the city university of New York; and
 (B) all revised unfunded accrued liability payments (as defined in
subdivision seven of section sixty-two hundred two of this article)
which are required to be made during the twelve-month period commencing
on July first, nineteen hundred eighty with respect to required employer
contributions to such retirement systems on account of employees of such
senior colleges; and
 (C) all installments of the nineteen hundred eighty unfunded accrued
liability adjustment (as defined in subdivision eight of such section
sixty-two hundred two), which installments (if such adjustment is a
charge) are required to be paid in the twelve-month period beginning on
July first, nineteen hundred eighty with respect to required employer
contributions to such retirement systems on account of employees of such
senior colleges.
 (ii) Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of law to the
contrary, but subject to the provisions of paragraph d of this
subdivision, the city of New York shall contribute twenty per centum of
the amount of one year's interest required to be paid in the
twelve-month period beginning July first, nineteen hundred eighty on the
amount of the balance sheet liability (as such liability is determined
as of June thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty) with respect to required
employer contributions to such retirement systems on account of
employees of such senior colleges plus thirty per centum of that portion
of the amount of one year's interest required to be paid in the
twelve-month period beginning July first, nineteen hundred eighty on the
amount of the balance sheet liability which would represent the amount
of one year's interest which would be required on the amount of a
hypothetical balance sheet liability had such hypothetical balance sheet
liability been determined on June thirtieth, nineteen hundred
seventy-five, with respect to required employer contributions to such
retirement systems on account of employees of such senior colleges.
 (iii) Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of law to the
contrary, but subject to the provisions of paragraph d of this
subdivision, the state of New York shall contribute that portion of the
amount of one year's interest required to be paid in the twelve-month
period beginning July first, nineteen hundred eighty on the amount of
the balance sheet liability (as such liability is determined as of June
thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty) with respect to required employer
contributions to such retirement systems on account of employees of such
senior colleges, which portion shall be the remainder computed by
subtracting from the amount of such one year's interest required to be
paid in such twelve-month period in relation to such employees, the
amount of interest required by subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph to be
contributed by the city of New York.
 b. (i) Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of law, but subject
to the provisions of paragraph d of this subdivision, commencing with
the twelve-month period beginning July first, nineteen hundred
eighty-one and ending with the twelve-month period terminating on June
thirtieth, nineteen hundred ninety, the state and the city of New York
shall each contribute fifty percentum of:
 (A) all revised unfunded accrued liability payments (as defined in
subdivision seven of section sixty-two hundred two of this article)
which are required to be made with respect to required employer
contributions to such retirement systems on account of employees of such
senior colleges; and
 (B) all installments of the nineteen hundred eighty unfunded accrued
liability adjustment (as defined in subdivision eight of such section
sixty-two hundred two) which installments (if such adjustment is a
charge) are required to be paid with respect to employer contributions
to such retirement systems on account of employees of such senior
colleges.
 (ii) Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of law to the
contrary, but subject to the provisions of paragraph d of this
subdivision and subparagraph (iv) of this paragraph, commencing with the
twelve-month period beginning July first, nineteen hundred eighty-one
and thereafter, the city of New York shall contribute twenty per centum
of that portion of the yearly installment of the balance sheet liability
contribution (as defined in subdivision nine of such section sixty-two
hundred two) payable with respect to each such retirement system for
each such twelve-month period with respect to required employer
contributions to such retirement system on account of employees of such
senior colleges, plus thirty per centum of that portion of the balance
sheet liability contribution (as defined in subdivision nine of such
section sixty-two hundred two) which would represent the hypothetical
balance sheet liability contribution which would have been required to
be made with respect to employer contributions on account of employees
of such senior colleges if the balance sheet liability had been
determined on June thirtieth, nineteen hundred seventy-five.
 (iii) Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of law to the
contrary, but subject to the provisions of paragraph d of this
subdivision and subparagraph (iv) of this paragraph, commencing with the
twelve-month period beginning July first, nineteen hundred eighty-one
and thereafter, the state shall contribute that portion of the yearly
installment of the balance sheet liability contribution (as defined in
subdivision nine of such section sixty-two hundred two) payable with
respect to each such retirement system for each such twelve-month period
with respect to required employer contributions to such retirement
system on account of employees of such senior colleges, which portion
shall be the remainder computed by subtracting from such yearly
installment with respect to such retirement system on account of such
employees, the amount which the provisions of subparagraph (ii) of this
paragraph require the city of New York to contribute for the same
twelve-month period with respect to such retirement system.
 (iv) (A) Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, but
subject to the provisions of paragraph d of this subdivision, the city
of New York shall contribute, in each applicable twelve-month period of
the twenty-year amortization schedule set forth in subdivision bb of
section 13-638.2 of the administrative code of the city of New York, a
portion of each of the following installments, which portion shall be
determined pursuant to the method of computation set forth in
subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph with respect to determination of the
portion of the balance sheet liability contribution required to be paid
by the city:
 (1) all NYCERS installments of nineteen hundred ninety BSL
contribution attributable to the senior colleges (as defined in
subdivision eight-m of section sixty-two hundred two of this article);
and
 (2) all NYCTRS installments of nineteen hundred ninety BSL
contribution attributable to the senior colleges (as defined in
subdivision eight-n of section sixty-two hundred two of this article).
 (B) Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, but subject
to the provisions of paragraph d of this subdivision, the state shall
contribute, in each applicable twelve-month period of the twenty-year
amortization schedule set forth in subdivision bb of section 13-638.2 of
the administrative code of the city of New York, a portion of each of
the installments referred to in item (A) of this subparagraph, which
portion shall be determined pursuant to the method of computation set
forth in subparagraph (iii) of this paragraph with respect to
determination of the portion of the balance sheet liability contribution
required to be paid by the state.
 c. (i) If the nineteen hundred eighty unfunded accrued liability
adjustment (as defined in subdivision eight of such section sixty-two
hundred two) is a credit with respect to either of such retirement
systems, there shall be determined the portion of the creditable
installments of such adjustment attributable to the New York city
employees' retirement system and the portion of such creditable
installments attributable to the New York city teachers' retirement
system. With respect to the twelve-month period beginning on July first,
nineteen hundred eighty and each succeeding twelve-month period to and
including the twelve-month period ending on June thirtieth, nineteen
hundred ninety, one-half of the installment, for such period, of the
credit attributable to the New York city employees' retirement system
shall be credited in favor of the city with respect to its obligations
to make contributions to such retirement system for such period and
one-half of such installment shall be credited in favor of the state
with respect to its obligations to make contributions to such retirement
system for such period. With respect to the twelve-month period
beginning on July first, nineteen hundred eighty and each succeeding
twelve-month period to and including the twelve-month period ending on
June thirtieth, nineteen hundred ninety, one-half of the installment,
for such period, of the credit attributable to the New York city
teachers' retirement system shall be credited in favor of the city with
respect to its obligations to make contributions to such retirement
system for such period and one-half of such installment shall be
credited in favor of the state with respect to its obligations to make
contributions to such retirement system for such period.
 (ii) There shall be determined with respect to each such retirement
system the portion of each installment of the nineteen hundred
eighty-two unfunded accrued liability adjustment (as defined in
subdivision eight-a of such section sixty-two hundred two) creditable in
the twelve-month periods beginning on July first, nineteen hundred
eighty-two and ending on June thirtieth, nineteen hundred ninety, which
portion is attributable to the employees of such senior colleges.
One-half of such portion shall be credited in favor of the city with
respect to its obligations to make contributions to the New York city
employees' retirement system in each such twelve-month period and
one-half of such portion shall be credited in favor of the state with
respect to its obligations to make contributions to such retirement
system in such twelve-month period. With respect to the twelve-month
period beginning on July first, nineteen hundred eighty-two and each
succeeding twelve-month period to and including the twelve-month period
ending on June thirtieth, nineteen hundred ninety, one-half of such
portion applicable to the New York city teachers' retirement system
shall be credited in favor of the city with respect to its obligations
to make contributions to such retirement system in each such
twelve-month period and one-half of such portion shall be credited in
favor of the state with respect to its obligations to make contributions
to such retirement system in such twelve-month period.
 c-1. (i) Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary,
commencing with the twelve-month period beginning on July first,
nineteen hundred eighty-five and in each twelve-month period thereafter
to and including the twelve-month period ending on June thirtieth,
nineteen hundred ninety:
 (A) one-half of one annual installment of the NYCERS nineteen hundred
eighty-five unfunded accrued liability adjustment attributable to the
senior colleges (as defined in subdivision eight-b of section sixty-two
hundred two of this article) shall be credited in favor of the city with
respect to its obligations to make contributions of the New York city
employees' retirement system in each such twelve-month period; and
 (B) one-half of one such annual installment above referred to in this
subparagraph shall be credited in favor of the state with respect to its
obligations to make contributions to such retirement system in each such
twelve-month period.
 (ii) Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, there
shall be determined the portion of each installment of the NYCTRS
nineteen hundred eighty-five unfunded accrued liability adjustment (as
defined in subdivision eight-c of such section sixty-two hundred two)
creditable in the twelve-month periods beginning on July first, nineteen
hundred eighty-five and ending on June thirtieth, nineteen hundred
ninety, which portion is attributable to the employees of such senior
colleges. One-half of such portion shall be credited in favor of the
city with respect to its obligations to make contributions to the New
York city teachers' retirement system in each such twelve-month period
and one-half of such portion shall be credited in favor of the state
with respect to its obligations to make contributions to such retirement
system in such twelve-month period.
 (iii) Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary,
there shall be determined the portion of each installment of the NYCTRS
nineteen hundred eighty-six unfunded accrued liability adjustment (as
defined in subdivision eight-d of such section sixty-two hundred two)
creditable in the twelve-month periods beginning on July first, nineteen
hundred eighty-six and ending on June thirtieth, nineteen hundred
ninety, which portion is attributable to the employees of such senior
colleges. One-half of such portion shall be credited in favor of the
city with respect to its obligations to make contributions to the New
York city teachers' retirement system in each such twelve-month period
and one-half of such portion shall be credited in favor of the state
with respect to its obligations to make contributions to such retirement
system in such twelve-month period.
 c-2. Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary:
 (i) commencing with the twelve-month period beginning on July first,
nineteen hundred eighty-eight and in each twelve-month period thereafter
to and including the twelve-month period ending on June thirtieth,
nineteen hundred ninety:
 (A) if the New York city employees' retirement system nineteen hundred
eighty-eight unfunded accrued liability adjustment attributable to the
senior colleges (as defined in subdivision eight-e of section sixty-two
hundred two of this article) is a charge, the state and the city of New
York shall each contribute to the New York city employees' retirement
system one-half of each of the installments of such charge for such
twelve-month periods; and
 (B) if the New York city employees' retirement system nineteen hundred
eighty-eight unfunded accrued liability adjustment attributable to the
senior colleges is a credit, one-half of each installment of such credit
for such twelve-month periods shall be credited in favor of the state
with respect to its obligations to make contributions to such retirement
system for the twelve-month period to which such installment applies;
and one-half of each such installment shall be credited in favor of the
city of New York with respect to its obligations to make contributions
to such retirement system for the twelve-month period to which such
installment applies; and
 (ii) commencing with the twelve-month period beginning on July first,
nineteen hundred eighty-eight and in each twelve-month period thereafter
to and including the twelve-month period ending on June thirtieth,
nineteen hundred ninety:
 (A) if the New York city teachers' retirement system nineteen hundred
eighty-eight unfunded accrued liability adjustment attributable to the
senior colleges (as defined in subdivision eight-f of section sixty-two
hundred two of this article) is a charge, the state and the city of New
York shall each contribute to the New York city teachers' retirement
system one-half of each of the installments of such charge; and
 (B) if the New York city teachers' retirement system nineteen hundred
eighty-eight unfunded accrued liability adjustment attributable to the
senior colleges is a credit, one-half of each installment of such credit
shall be credited in favor of the state with respect to its obligations
to make contributions to such retirement system for the twelve-month
period to which such installment applies and one-half of each such
installment shall be credited in favor of the city of New York with
respect to its obligations to make contributions to such retirement
system for the twelve-month period to which such installment applies.
 c-3. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary,
commencing with the twelve-month period constituting the first fiscal
year of the applicable designated amortization period prescribed
pursuant to subdivision k of section 13-638.2 of the administrative code
of the city of New York with respect to any NYCERS post-June thirtieth,
nineteen hundred ninety unfunded accrued liability adjustment
attributable to the senior colleges (as defined in subdivision eight-g
of such section sixty-two hundred two), and commencing with the
twelve-month period constituting the first fiscal year of the applicable
designated amortization period prescribed pursuant to such subdivision k
with respect to any NYCTRS post-June thirtieth, nineteen hundred ninety
unfunded accrued liability adjustment attributable to the senior
colleges (as defined in subdivision eight-h of such section sixty-two
hundred two), and in each of the next succeeding twelve-month periods of
such applicable designated period of amortization:
 (i) if such adjustment is a charge, the state and the city of New York
shall each contribute to the retirement system in relation to which such
adjustment is established one-half of the installment of such adjustment
due in such twelve-month period; and
 (ii) if such adjustment is a credit, one-half of the installment of
such credit attributable to such twelve-month period shall be credited
in favor of the city with respect to its obligations to make
contributions to such retirement system in such twelve-month period and
one-half of the installment of such credit attributable to such
twelve-month period shall be credited in favor of the state with respect
to its obligations to make contributions to such retirement system in
such twelve-month period.
 c-4. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, but
subject to the provisions of paragraph d of this subdivision, in each
applicable twelve-month period of the twenty-year amortization schedule
set forth in subdivision bb of section 13-638.2 of the administrative
code of the city of New York, the state and the city of New York shall
each contribute one-half of the following installments:
 (i) all NYCERS phase-in installments of nineteen hundred ninety UAL
contribution attributable to the senior colleges (as defined in
subdivision eight-i of section sixty-two hundred two of this article);
 (ii) all NYCERS regular installments of nineteen hundred ninety UAL
contribution attributable to the senior colleges (as defined in
subdivision eight-j of section sixty-two hundred two of this article);
 (iii) all NYCTRS phase-in installments of nineteen hundred ninety UAL
contribution attributable to the senior colleges (as defined in
subdivision eight-k of section sixty-two hundred two of this article);
and
 (iv) all NYCTRS regular installments of nineteen hundred ninety UAL
contribution attributable to the senior colleges (as defined in
subdivision eight-1 of section sixty-two hundred two of this article).
 d. The costs of such unfunded accrued liability contributions, revised
unfunded accrued liability contributions, contributions on account of
installments of nineteen hundred eighty unfunded accrued liability
adjustment (if such adjustment is a charge), contributions on account of
New York city employees' retirement system nineteen hundred eighty-eight
unfunded accrued liability adjustment attributable to the senior
colleges (if such adjustment is a charge) and New York city teachers'
retirement system nineteen hundred eighty-eight unfunded accrued
liability adjustment attributable to the senior colleges (if such
adjustment is a charge), contributions on account of any NYCERS
post-June thirtieth, nineteen hundred ninety unfunded accrued liability
adjustment attributable to the senior colleges (if such adjustment is a
charge), contributions on account of any NYCTRS post-June thirtieth,
nineteen hundred ninety unfunded accrued liability adjustment
attributable to the senior colleges (if such adjustment is a charge),
balance sheet liability contributions and contribution on account of
interest on balance sheet liability and contributions for twenty-year
amortization of nineteen hundred ninety senior college consolidated UAL
and senior college remainder of BSL (as defined in subdivision eight-o
of section sixty-two hundred two of this article) referred to in
paragraphs a, b, c-1, c-2, c-3 and c-4 of this subdivision shall be
pre-financed from city of New York funds. The state shall reimburse the
city of New York for the state's share of such costs in relation to such
employees resulting from such contributions payable to such retirement
systems during the periods beginning on July first, nineteen hundred
seventy-nine and thereafter according to the repayment schedule set
forth for the senior colleges in subparagraph three of subdivision A of
section sixty-two hundred twenty-one of this article.
 2. For each city fiscal year, the board of trustees of the city
university shall submit a proposed budget request for such employer
contribution as defined in subdivision one above in such form and
content as shall be required by the state director of the budget. Such
proposed budget request shall be submitted to the governor by the first
day of October of each year, with copies at such time to the state
director of the budget, the senate finance committee, the assembly ways
and means committee and, for information purposes, the director of the
office of management and budget of the city of New York. The governor
shall submit his recommendations with respect to such budget to the
legislature as part of the local assistance portion of the executive
budget.
 3. The state comptroller shall annually audit the amounts paid
pursuant to this section and shall make a report as soon as practicable
thereon to the governor, the temporary president of the senate, the
speaker of the assembly and the mayor of the city of New York.
 § 6232. College of Staten Island, New York city college of technology
and Medgar Evers college programs. A. Notwithstanding the designation of
the college of Staten Island, New York city college of technology and
Medgar Evers college as senior colleges, the associate degree programs
of these colleges shall be conducted administratively and academically
in a manner consistent with the policies of the city university of New
York applicable to such programs.
 B. New York city college of technology (formerly known as "New York
city technical college" and "New York city community college") shall
offer two year programs in the business, health and engineering related
technologies. For the academic year commencing September first, nineteen
hundred eighty-three and thereafter, no more than ten percent of the
freshmen shall be enrolled in programs leading to associate in arts or
associate in science degrees.
 § 6233. Reports of the city university trustees. 1. The trustees of
the city university shall make, on or before January first of each year,
an annual report of its activities and such recommendations as it may
deem appropriate to the board of regents, the governor, the state
comptroller and the legislature. This annual report shall include a
summary of city university's (1) operations and accomplishments; and (2)
revenues and expenditures, in accordance with the categories or
classifications established by the trustees of the city university for
operating and capital outlay purposes.
 2. a. On the fifteenth day of each month, from September through July
of each year, the trustees of the city university shall submit to the
chairs of the senate finance committee, the assembly ways and means
committee, the director of the budget and the state comptroller for
informational purposes, reports developed in consultation with the
aforementioned chairs and director of all disbursements of the city
university. These reports shall include but not be limited to:
 (i) a comparison of actual disbursements with the state fiscal year
expenditure plan;
 (ii) the reallocation between campuses of full-time positions and
filled full-time positions compared to annual targets;
 (iii) campus and lump sum transfers and interchanges; and
 (iv) identification of any revenue shortfalls, deficiencies,
surpluses, or budgetary actions by the governor.
 b. In addition to the items listed in paragraph a of this subdivision,
the reports submitted on the fifteenth of October through July of each
year will include all receipts of the city university and a comparison
of actual receipts with the state fiscal year revenue plan.
 c. In addition to the items listed in paragraphs a and b of this
subdivision, the reports submitted on the fifteenth day of November and
April of each year will include:
 (i) comparison of actual enrollment to enrollment targets;
 (ii) summary of target and actual full-time equivalent positions; and
 (iii) breakdown by major purpose of target and filled full-time
positions.
 3. The trustees of the city university shall submit to the governor,
the state comptroller, the legislature and the mayor of the city of New
York, within one hundred twenty days after the close of each city
university fiscal year, an annual financial statement for the senior
colleges which has been audited by an independent certified public
accountant and prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles as prescribed by the state comptroller.
 § 6233-a. Master capital plan. On or before November fifteenth of each
year, the trustees of the city university shall approve and submit to
the chairmen of the assembly ways and means committee and the senate
finance committee and to the director of the budget a master capital
plan setting forth the projects proposed to be constructed,
reconstructed, rehabilitated or otherwise substantially altered pursuant
to appropriations enacted or to be enacted during the succeeding five
years. During the selection of projects for such plan, the trustees
shall, where applicable, give due consideration to projects that support
improvements in environmental protection, energy and resource
management, solar energy and conservation with particular consideration
given to a project's potential to generate cost savings over time. Such
plan shall specify the name, location, estimated total cost at the time
the project is to be bid, the anticipated date or dates on which the
design of such project is to commence, the proposed method of financing
and the estimated economic life of each project. Such plan shall further
specify whether proposed projects constitute new construction,
substantial rehabilitation, moderate rehabilitation or minor
rehabilitation and shall indicate how projects support improvements in
environmental protection, energy and resource management, solar energy
and conservation. Such criteria for each method of financing shall
include, but not be limited to: (i) an analysis of private enterprise,
federal and any other appropriate financing standards, (ii) the
consideration of the period of economic life of projects as related to
the method of financing, and (iii) project cost ranges for the methods
of financing. Such plan specifications, categories or construction and
criteria for methods of financing shall be defined by the trustees, in
consultation with the city university construction fund.
 § 6234. Perfection of security interests. If made in connection with
the design, construction, acquisition, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
lease, improvement, operation, maintenance, furnishing or equipping of
community or senior college facilities, any pledge of or other security
interest in moneys, earnings, income, revenues, accounts, contract
rights, general intangibles or other personal property, or any other
resources held, made or created by the city university or on its behalf
by any duly authorized officer, employee or agent thereof, or by any
other person to secure such person's obligations to the city university,
shall be valid, binding and perfected from the time when such pledge or
other security interest attaches, without any physical delivery of the
collateral or further act. The lien of any such pledge or other security
interest shall be valid, binding and perfected as against all parties
having claims of any kind in tort, contract or otherwise against the
city university irrespective of whether or not such parties have notice
thereof. No instrument by which such a pledge or security interest is
created nor any financing statement need be recorded or filed. This
section shall apply notwithstanding the provisions of the uniform
commercial code.
 ARTICLE 125-A
 BOARD OF HIGHER EDUCATION OPTIONAL RETIREMENT PROGRAM
Section 6250. Definitions.
 6251. Optional retirement program established.
 6252. Rates of contribution.
 6253. Election.
 6254. Social security.
 6255. City not liable for payment of benefits.
 6256. Inconsistent provisions of other acts superseded.
 6257. Deductions from benefits of certain retired members.
 § 6250. Definitions. Wherever used in this article:
 1. The term "city university" means the city university of New York
under the jurisdiction of the board of higher education of the city of
New York.
 2. The term "board" means the board of higher education of the city of
New York.
 3. The term "eligible employees" means members of the instructional
staffs of the colleges administered by the board of higher education in
the city of New York pursuant to the provisions of article one hundred
twenty-five of the education law, who are employed in the following
titles: president, dean, director, professor, associate professor,
assistant professor, instructor, tutor, fellow, lecturer, librarian,
associate librarian, assistant librarian, library assistant, registrar,
assistant registrar, registrar's assistant, principal, first assistant,
supervisor, assistant teacher, critic teacher, teacher, college science
assistant, college science technician, college engineering technician,
and any other members of the instructional staffs of such colleges as
defined in section sixty-two hundred six, subdivision 1b of the
education law, and such other titles as the board in its discretion may
add thereto, by reason of their close relationship to the educational
purposes required to carry on the functions of the city university. No
person receiving a benefit by reason of his retirement from any
retirement or pension system of New York state or any political
subdivision thereof shall be eligible to elect the optional retirement
program.
 4. The term "optional retirement program" means the retirement program
established pursuant to this article.
 5. The term "electing employee" shall mean any eligible employee who
exercises his election pursuant to this article to come under the
optional retirement program.
 6. The term "salary" means all amounts paid by or for the city of New
York as compensation for services rendered by an eligible employee.
 7. The term "insurer" shall mean a life insurance corporation, or
other corporation subject to supervision by the department of financial
services of the state of New York.
 8. The term "city" shall mean the city of New York.
 9. The term "comptroller" shall mean the comptroller of the city of
New York.
 § 6251. Optional retirement program established. 1. There is hereby
established an optional retirement program which shall provide for the
purchase of contracts providing retirement and death benefits for or on
behalf of electing employees. Under such program the city and such
employee shall contribute, to the extent authorized or required, towards
the purchase of such contracts, which shall be issued to, and become the
property of, such employees. The board may elect to offer the optional
retirement program to eligible employees by resolution, which shall
become effective upon approval by the mayor of the city of New York.
 2. The board shall designate the insurer or insurers to which payment
of such contributions may be made and shall approve the form and content
of such contracts. In making such designation and giving such approval
the board shall give due consideration to (i) the nature and extent of
the rights and benefits to be provided by such contracts for electing
employees and their beneficiaries, (ii) the relation of such rights and
benefits to the amount of contributions to be made under this article,
(iii) the suitability of such rights and benefits to the needs and
interests of electing employees and to the interests of the city
university in the employment and retention of eligible employees and
(iv) the authority and ability of the designated insurer or insurers to
provide rights and benefits under such contracts.
 3. The board is hereby authorized to provide for the administration of
such optional retirement program and to perform or authorize the
performance of such functions as may be necessary for such purposes in
accordance with this article.
 § 6252. Rates of contribution. 1. Employer contributions. In the case
of any electing employee initially appointed on or before June
thirtieth, nineteen hundred ninety-two, the city shall, during
continuance of his employment, makes contributions at the rate of nine
percentum of that portion of his city salary upon which contributions
are or may hereafter be paid to the secretary of the treasury of the
United States pursuant to article three of the retirement and social
security law and at the rate of twelve percentum of that portion of his
city salary above said amount, out of monies which shall be appropriated
to the city university for such purposes. In the case of any electing
employee initially appointed on or after July first, nineteen hundred
ninety-two, the city shall, during continuance of his employment, make
contributions at the rate of eight percentum of his city salary during
the first seven years of such employment and at the rate of ten
percentum of his city salary, thereafter, out of monies which shall be
appropriated to the city university for such purpose. For purposes of
this subdivision, that portion of the employee's salary upon which
contributions are or may thereafter be paid to the secretary of the
treasury of the United States pursuant to article three of the
retirement and social security law shall be deemed not to exceed sixteen
thousand five hundred dollars.
 2. Employee contributions. (a) In the case of any electing employee,
contributions at the rate of three percentum of his city salary shall be
deducted as the employee contribution by the comptroller, provided
however that such employee contribution shall be made by the city in
accordance with subdivision one of this section during such period as
either section seventy-a of the retirement and social security law or
section B3-36.1 or section B20-41.1 of the administrative code of the
city of New York provides that the contribution of any member of the New
York city employees' retirement system or the New York city teachers'
retirement system in the employ of the city shall be reduced by at least
eight percentum of his compensation; and provided further, however, that
such employee contribution with respect to the fiscal year of the city
beginning on July first, nineteen hundred seventy-two and ending on June
thirtieth, nineteen hundred seventy-three shall be made by the city,
notwithstanding any of the foregoing provisions of this subdivision to
the contrary.
 (b) Notwithstanding any provision of paragraph (a) of this subdivision
or any other provision of law to the contrary, but subject to the
provisions of subdivision d of section six hundred thirteen of the
retirement and social security law in the case of any electing employee
initially appointed on or after July first, nineteen hundred ninety-two,
contributions at the rate of three percentum of his or her city salary
shall be deducted as the employee contribution by the comptroller.
 (c) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section or any other
law to the contrary, (1) on and after April first, two thousand eight
for a member who joined the optional retirement program established
pursuant to this article before April first, two thousand twelve and who
has ten or more years of membership in such optional retirement program,
the city shall contribute one-third of the three percent employee
contribution required pursuant to the provisions of this section on
behalf of such employee; and (2) on and after April first, two thousand
nine for a member who joined the optional retirement program established
pursuant to this article before April first, two thousand twelve and who
has ten or more years of membership in such optional retirement program,
the city shall contribute two-thirds of the three percent employee
contribution required pursuant to the provisions of this section on
behalf of such employee; and (3) on and after April first, two thousand
ten for a member who joined the optional retirement program established
pursuant to this article before April first, two thousand twelve and who
has ten or more years of membership in such optional retirement program,
the city shall contribute the three percent employee contribution
required pursuant to the provisions of this section on behalf of such
employee. The provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to any
electing employee who becomes a member of the optional retirement
program on or after April first, two thousand twelve.
 (d) Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, beginning April
first, two thousand thirteen any electing employee appointed on or after
April first, two thousand twelve, the rate at which each such employee
shall contribute in any current plan year (January first to December
thirty-first) shall be determined by reference to the wages of such
member in the second plan year (January first to December thirty-first)
preceding such current plan year as follows:
 (1) members with wages of forty-five thousand dollars per annum or
less shall contribute three per centum of annual wages;
 (2) members with wages greater than forty-five thousand per annum, but
not more than fifty-five thousand per annum shall contribute three and
one-half per centum of annual wages;
 (3) members with wages greater than fifty-five thousand per annum, but
not more than seventy-five thousand per annum shall contribute four and
one-half per centum of annual wages;
 (4) members with wages greater than seventy-five thousand per annum
but not more than one hundred thousand per annum shall contribute five
and three-quarters per centum of annual wages; and
 (5) members with wages greater than one hundred thousand per annum
shall contribute six per centum of annual wages.
 Notwithstanding the foregoing, during each of the first three plan
years (January first to December thirty-first) in which such member has
established membership in the Board of Higher Education Optional
Retirement Program, such employee shall contribute a percent of annual
wages in accordance with the preceding schedule based upon a projection
of annual wages provided by the employer.
 3. Payment of contributions pursuant to subdivisions one and two of
this section shall be made to the designated insurer or insurers upon
audit and warrant of the comptroller.
 4. In the case of an electing employee initially appointed on or after
the effective date of the election to offer such programs established by
the board, no contributions pursuant to subdivisions one and two of this
section shall be made by the city until his completion of one year of
service and continuance in service thereafter. Employee contributions,
if any, required during this initial year of service shall be deducted
and held by the comptroller. At the end of his initial year of service,
a single contribution in an amount determined pursuant to subdivisions
one and two of this section, with interest at the rate of four percentum
per annum, shall be made, upon audit and warrant of the comptroller, to
the designated insurer or insurers, on behalf of such employee continued
in service. In the case of an electing employee who does not continue in
service with the board beyond his initial year of service, the amount of
employee contribution, if any, deducted from his salary shall be
refunded to him, with interest at the rate of four percentum per annum.
 5. The provisions of subdivision four of this section shall not apply
to any electing employee who, at the time of initial appointment, owns a
contract determined by the board to be similar to those contracts to be
purchased under the optional retirement program and issued by the
designated insurer or insurers.
 § 6253. Election. 1. Election of the optional retirement program. (a)
Each eligible employee initially appointed on or after the effective
date of the election to offer such program established by the board
shall, within thirty days of his entry into service, elect (i) to join
the New York city teachers' retirement system in accordance with the
provisions of law applicable thereto, or (ii) to elect the optional
retirement program established pursuant to this article; provided
however, that such persons initially appointed on or after the effective
date of the election to offer such program may defer such election until
the ninetieth day following such effective date of the election to offer
such program established by the board. Any such deferred election shall
be effective as of the date of entry into service.
 (b) In the event an eligible employee fails to make an election as
provided in paragraph (a) of this subdivision, he shall be deemed to
have elected membership in the New York City teachers' retirement
system. Such membership shall be effective as of the date of entry into
service.
 (c) The amount, if any, required to have been contributed by any
employee in accordance with an election, a deferred election or failure
to elect pursuant to paragraph (a) or (b) of this subdivision shall be
collected by payroll deductions in such manner as may be provided by the
comptroller for those persons electing the optional retirement program,
or in the case of membership in the New York city teachers' retirement
system, by the retirement system.
 (d) Eligible employees appointed before the effective date of the
election to offer such program may elect the optional retirement program
established pursuant to this article. Such election shall be made on or
before the ninetieth day following the effective date of such offer, and
shall become effective on or as of the first day of January next
following the effective date of such offer.
 (e) Any employee who becomes eligible to elect the optional retirement
program by reason of his appointment, promotion, transfer or
reclassification to an eligible position may elect the optional
retirement program established pursuant to this article. Such election
shall be made within thirty days after notice in writing to such
employee of his eligibility, and shall become effective on the date of
such election, except that in no case shall such election become
effective prior to the first day of January next following the effective
date of the offer of such program.
 (f) No election by an eligible employee of the optional retirement
program shall be effective unless it shall be accompanied by an
appropriate application, where required, for the issuance of a contract
or contracts under the program.
 2. Ineligibility for retirement system membership. Any employee who
elects the optional retirement program shall be ineligible for
membership in the New York city teachers' or New York city employees'
retirement system so long as he shall remain continuously employed in
any position by the board and shall continue in the optional retirement
program.
 3. (a) Any eligible employee of the board who is a member or
transferred contributor of either the New York city employees'
retirement system or the New York city teachers' retirement system at
the time he elects the optional retirement program offered by the board
pursuant to this article shall be deemed to be a person who terminates
membership on the effective date of such election, for the purpose of
determining his eligibility for rights and benefits in either such
system; provided, however, that if he does not withdraw his accumulated
contributions, (i) his continued service at the city university shall be
deemed to be member service in either the New York city employees'
retirement system or the New York city teachers' retirement system for
the purpose of determining his eligibility for any retirement allowance
or ordinary death benefit under either such system dependent upon a
specified period of total service or upon attainment of a specified age
while in service or upon death while in service; and (ii) the amount of
any such benefit to which he or his estate or person designated by him
may become entitled under either such system shall be computed only on
the basis of service otherwise creditable to him therein and his
compensation during such service.
 (b) Electing employees and their beneficiaries shall not be entitled
to any right or benefit under either the New York city employees'
retirement system or the New York city teachers' retirement system other
than a retirement allowance or ordinary death benefit to the extent
expressly provided for in this section. Such employee shall not be
eligible for any benefit pursuant to section B3-36.0, subdivision two or
section B3-36.0, subdivision three of the administrative code of the
city of New York or section two hundred forty-five of the military law.
 § 6254. Social security. Every electing employee shall have old-age,
survivors, and disability insurance coverage provided by the federal
social security act in accordance with the provisions of article three
of the retirement and social security law.
 § 6255. City not liable for payment of benefits. Neither the city nor
the board shall be a party to any contract purchased in whole or in part
with contributions made under the optional retirement program
established and administered pursuant to this article. No retirement,
death, or other benefits shall be payable by the city or by the board
under such optional retirement program. Such benefits shall be paid to
electing employees or their beneficiaries by the designated insurer or
insurers in accordance with the terms of their contracts.
 § 6256. Inconsistent provisions of other acts superseded. Insofar as
the provisions of this article are inconsistent with the provisions of
any other act, general or special, the provisions of this article shall
be controlling.
 § 6257. Deductions from benefits of certain retired members. 1.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a member who is retired from
the board of higher education optional retirement program shall have the
right, at any time after such member's retirement, to execute and file a
deduction authorization card with the designated insurer or insurers
upon audit and warrant of the comptroller authorizing the deduction from
such member's retirement allowance of membership dues and such member's
share of the cost for employee organization-sponsored benefit plans and
the payment thereof to a retiree organization of which the member is
then a member and which is then affiliated with either an employee
organization certified or recognized as the collective bargaining
representative of all employees in the negotiating unit of which the
member was a part prior to his or her retirement or with an employee
organization with which such employee organization is then affiliated.
The designated insurer or insurers upon audit and warrant of the
comptroller shall thereafter deduct from the retirement allowance of
such member the amount of membership dues and such amounts required to
be paid by such member for such authorized employee
organization-sponsored benefit plans, and shall transmit the sum so
deducted to said retiree organization. Such authorization shall continue
in effect until revoked in writing by such member. For purposes of this
section, the term "employee organization-sponsored benefit plans" shall
include any and all insurance plans and/or other benefit plans sponsored
by such retiree organization whether provided by (a) a not-for-profit
corporation licensed under article forty-three of the insurance law; (b)
any insurance company authorized to do business in this state; (c) a
health maintenance organization issued a certificate of authority
pursuant to article forty-four of the public health law; or (d) a
self-insurance arrangement, welfare fund or benefit fund.
 2. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a retired member shall
have the right, at any time after his or her retirement, to execute and
file a deduction authorization card with the designated insurer or
insurers upon audit and warrant of the comptroller authorizing the
payment of voluntary contributions to the political committee, as
defined in subdivision one of section 14-100 of the election law, of
such member's employee organization, provided such organization is
certified or recognized pursuant to article fourteen of the civil
service law as the representative of all employees in the negotiating
unit in which such retired member was then employed. Such authorization
shall continue in effect until revoked in writing by such member. The
designated insurer or insurers upon audit and warrant of the comptroller
shall determine the cost of administering deductions for voluntary
contributions to the political committee and the cost incurred for
administering such contributions shall be paid from the funds of the
political committee.
 ARTICLE 125-B
 CITY UNIVERSITY CONSTRUCTION FUND
Section 6270. Short title.
 6271. Definitions.
 6272. Fund continued.
 6273. Purposes of fund.
 6274. Administration of fund.
 6275. General powers.
 6276. Agreements with dormitory authority.
 6277. Authority of city to convey real property and grant
 consents to dormitory authority.
 6278. Resources of fund.
 6279. Payments to fund.
 6280. Actions against fund.
 6281. Municipal regulations.
 6282. Exemption from taxation.
 § 6270. Short title. This article may be cited as the "city
university construction fund act."
 § 6271. Definitions. For the purposes of this article:
 1. "Dormitory authority" means the dormitory authority of the state of
New York as established by the dormitory authority act.
 2. "City" means the city of New York.
 3. "City university" means the city university of New York, including
the senior colleges and the community colleges governed and administered
by the board of higher education pursuant to article one hundred
twenty-five of this chapter.
 4. "Facility" means a housing unit for the use of students, married
students, faculty, staff and the families of such married students,
faculty and staff, an academic building, administration building,
library, laboratory, classroom or other building or structure essential,
necessary or useful in the academic program of the city university,
including all necessary and usual attendant and related facilities and
equipment.
 5. "Fund" means the city university construction fund as established
by this article.
 6. "Senior college" shall have the same meaning as in subdivision five
of section six thousand two hundred two of this chapter.
 7. "Community college" shall have the same meaning as in subdivision
four of section six thousand two hundred two of this chapter.
 § 6272. Fund continued. The city university construction fund
created by chapter seven hundred eighty-two of the laws of nineteen
hundred sixty-six is hereby continued. The fund is a corporate
governmental agency constituting a public benefit corporation. It has
the powers and privileges of a corporation and all of its business shall
be transacted, all funds invested, all warrants for money drawn and
payments made, and all cash and securities and other personal property
held under its corporate name. For all purposes of this article and the
dormitory authority act, the fund shall be deemed to be an "educational
institution."
 § 6273. Purposes of fund. The purposes of the fund shall be (i) to
provide facilities for the city university, and (ii) to support the
educational purposes of the city university.
 § 6274. Administration of fund. (1) For the period beginning July
first, nineteen hundred seventy-nine and ending December thirty-first,
nineteen hundred seventy-nine, the fund shall continue to be
administered by the trustees of the city university construction fund in
office as of June thirtieth, nineteen hundred seventy-nine. Effective
January first, nineteen hundred eighty the fund shall be administered by
seven trustees, among whom shall be two ex-officio trustees, one of whom
shall be the director of the division of the budget of the state of New
York, or his or her designee and the other of whom shall be the
chairperson of the board of trustees of the city university. The five
other trustees shall be appointed as follows:
 (a) The governor shall appoint two trustees, one of whom shall be a
trustee of the city university, the other of whom shall be subject to
the advice and consent of the senate.
 (b) The mayor shall appoint one trustee, who shall be subject to the
advice and consent of the senate.
 (c) The temporary president of the senate shall appoint one trustee.
 (d) The speaker of the assembly shall appoint one trustee.
 Each trustee, except ex officio trustees, shall serve for a term
expiring at the end of the term of the officer making the appointment.
In the event of a vacancy occurring in the office of a trustee by death,
resignation, termination of membership on the board of trustees of the
city university of New York, or otherwise, a successor shall be chosen
in the same manner as was the trustee whose office became vacant, to
serve for the balance of the unexpired term.
 (2) The chairperson and the vice-chairperson of the trustees of the
fund shall be appointed by and shall serve at the pleasure of the
governor. The chairperson shall preside over all meetings of the
trustees and shall have such other duties as the trustees of the fund
may direct. The vice-chairperson shall preside over all meetings of the
trustees of the fund in the absence of the chairperson and shall have
such other duties as the trustees of the fund may direct.
 (3) The trustees of the fund shall serve without salary, but each
trustee shall be reimbursed for his, or her actual and necessary
expenses incurred in the performance of his or her official duties as a
trustee of the fund. The trustees of the fund may engage in private
employment or in a profession or business (if not otherwise prohibited
from so doing by virtue of any other public office), subject to the
limitations contained in sections seventy-three and seventy-four of the
public officers law. The fund shall, for the purposes of such sections,
be a "state agency", and the trustees thereof shall be "officers" of the
agency for the purposes of said sections.
 (4) Notwithstanding any inconsistent provisions of law, general,
special or local, no officer or employee of the state of New York, any
city, county, town or village, any other political or civil division of
the state, and municipality, any governmental entity operating any
public school or college, any school district or any other public
special district, any public authority, commission or board or any other
public agency or instrumentality or unit of government which exercises
governmental powers under the laws of the state, shall forfeit his or
her office or employment by reason of his or her acceptance of
appointment as a trustee, officer or agent of the fund.
 (5) The fund may delegate to one or more of its trustees, or officers,
agents or employees, such powers and duties as the trustees may deem
proper, but all contracts involving an estimated expense of ten thousand
dollars or more and all leases, subleases or other agreements to be
entered into pursuant to this article shall be approved prior to
execution by no less than four trustees of the fund.
 (6) The fund may appoint officers, employees and agents as it may
require and it will prescribe their duties and fix their compensation.
 (7) On or before November fifteenth of each year, the fund shall
submit, and thereafter may resubmit, to the comptroller of the state of
New York, the state director of the budget, the city director of
management and budget, the chairman of the senate finance committee, and
the chairman of the assembly ways and means committee, a financial
statement for the preceding city fiscal year, a report of its activities
during that year, and a report on its program for both the current and
next succeeding city fiscal years including but not limited to: (i) the
total amount of instructional and non-instructional fees the fund
estimates it will receive in the succeeding city fiscal year; (ii) the
estimated cost of the administration of the fund in the succeeding city
fiscal year; (iii) the amounts, if any, of all rentals and such other
payments estimated to become due in the succeeding city fiscal year to
the dormitory authority from the fund pursuant to any leases, subleases
or other agreements entered or to be entered into between the fund and
the dormitory authority prior to July first, nineteen hundred
eighty-five, to provide for senior college facilities and community
college facilities, or pursuant to any agreement supplemental thereto;
(iv) the amounts, if any, of all rentals and such other payments
estimated to become due in the succeeding city fiscal year to the
dormitory authority from the fund pursuant to any leases, subleases or
other agreements between the fund and the dormitory authority entered or
to be entered into on or after July first, nineteen hundred eighty-five
or pursuant to any agreement supplemental thereto, to provide facilities
for senior colleges and community colleges; and (v) the amount of all
moneys anticipated to be transferred to the city university in the
succeeding city fiscal year pursuant to the provisions of subdivision
(b) of section sixty-two hundred seventy-eight of this article. Such
report shall separately state the amounts of all rentals and such other
payments estimated to become due in the succeeding city fiscal year
pursuant to any leases, subleases or other agreements between the fund
and the dormitory authority which are allocable to senior college
facilities and community college facilities.
 § 6275. General powers. The fund shall have the following powers in
addition to those specially conferred elsewhere in this article:
 (1) to sue and to be sued;
 (2) to have a seal and alter the same at its pleasure;
 (3) to make and alter by-laws for its organization and internal
management;
 (4) to prescribe a system of accounts, with the approval of the state
comptroller;
 (5) to accept jurisdiction over and to hold, use and improve, in
accordance with such terms and conditions as the fund and the city
university shall determine any or all real property acquired by, under
the jurisdiction of, or assigned to the use of the board of higher
education for purposes of the city university, together with such rights
and privileges as may be incidental and appurtenant thereto;
 (6) to purchase real property necessary or convenient for its
corporate purposes in its own name and to execute and deliver deeds for
real property held in its own name;
 (7) to purchase, receive, lease or otherwise acquire personal property
necessary and convenient for its corporate purposes and to transfer,
sublease or otherwise make such personal property available to the board
of higher education or the dormitory authority or to sell or otherwise
to dispose of such personal property that, in the judgment of the fund,
is no longer necessary for its corporate purposes;
 (8) subject to other provisions of law, to give, donate, transfer,
grant or lend to the city university upon such terms and conditions as
is deemed appropriate such sums of money as are not required for other
purposes;
 (9) to make and execute contracts, leases, subleases and all other
instruments or agreements necessary or convenient for the exercise of
its corporate powers and purposes to an amount not exceeding
seventy-five thousand dollars without prior approval by any other state
officer or agency; notwithstanding the foregoing, all contracts, leases,
subleases, and all other instruments or agreements exceeding
seventy-five thousand dollars in amount shall be subject to section one
hundred twelve of the state finance law;
 (10) with the consent of the board of higher education, to use the
agents, employees and facilities of the city university;
 (11) to engage the services of construction, engineering,
architectural, legal and financial consultants, surveyors and
appraisers, on a contract basis or as employees, for professional
service and technical assistance and advice;
 (12) to cause facilities to be designed, constructed, acquired,
reconstructed, rehabilitated, improved, operated, maintained, furnished
and equipped and made secure in accordance with the provisions of this
article;
 (13) to procure insurance against loss in connection with any facility
in such amounts and from such insurers as it deems desirable;
 (14) to accept, administer and disburse federal, state, and city aid;
and
 (15) to do any and all things necessary or convenient to carry out its
corporate powers and purposes.
 § 6276. Agreements with dormitory authority. (a) To fulfill the
purposes contained in subdivision a of section sixty-two hundred
seventy-three of this article, the fund may enter into leases, subleases
or other agreements with the dormitory authority to which the board of
higher education may be a party under which the authority may provide
facilities for the use of the city university. The fund may enter into
an agreement with the dormitory authority to which the board of higher
education and the city of New York shall be parties under which the
authority may acquire, design, construct or otherwise provide and
furnish and equip facilities for the use of Hunter College which may
include therein a police and fire station upon a site set forth in and
in accordance with the terms of such agreement, as authorized in
paragraph f of subdivision two of section sixteen hundred eighty of the
public authorities law. The provisions of the dormitory authority act
shall govern the relationships of the dormitory authority, the fund, and
the board of higher education in the city of New York with respect to
all such leases, subleases or other agreements and actions thereunder,
and the fund may apply to the payment of rentals and other payments
required from the fund by any such leases, subleases or other agreements
and may pledge as security for such payments to the dormitory authority
with respect to such leases, subleases or other agreements all or part
of the resources of the fund. The dormitory authority shall not issue
obligations for the provision of a senior or community college facility
unless a certificate of availability of funds has been approved by the
director of the budget and an appropriation for such facility has been
enacted.
 (b) Neither the state, nor the city or the city university of New
York, shall be liable for any rentals payable by the fund pursuant to
the terms of any lease, sublease or other agreement entered into by the
fund under this article. Any such lease, sublease or other agreement
shall contain among its terms a statement to that effect.
 (c) Housing units provided under this article for faculty, staff and
married students and the families thereof shall be used and occupied
pursuant to leases or other agreements between the faculty, staff and
married students and the city university, the provisions of which have
been approved by the dormitory authority and the city university
construction fund. There shall be paid to the city university, pursuant
to such leases or other agreements by such faculty, staff and married
students, except the chancellor of the city university and the
presidents of any of the senior colleges or graduate institutions
thereof and their families, rentals, the total amount of receipts from
which rentals in each city fiscal year is to be at least equal to (i)
the portion of the rentals to be paid to the dormitory authority by the
fund in that city fiscal year which is allocable to such housing units
and (ii) the expense of all direct and indirect costs of operation of
such housing units. From such receipts the city university shall account
for and pay to the fund an amount equal to the portion of the rentals to
be paid to the dormitory authority by the fund in that city fiscal year
which is allocable to such housing units, and the fund shall pay such
amount to the dormitory authority in accordance with its agreements
therewith. The estimated amount of rentals allocable to such housing
units shall be separately stated from the amount required to be included
in the city university construction fund's report submitted pursuant to
clause three of subdivision seven of section sixty-two hundred
seventy-four of this article and shall not be included in the amount
equal to the aggregate of all rentals and such other payments due to the
dormitory authority from the fund of which the state and city are each
obligated to pay to the fund one-half pursuant to section sixty-two
hundred seventy-nine of this article.
 (d) Any pledge of or other security interest in moneys, earnings,
income, revenues, accounts, contract rights, general intangibles or
other personal property, or any other resources held, made or created by
the fund or on its behalf by any duly authorized officer, employee or
agent thereof including the comptroller of the city of New York when
acting as agent pursuant to this article or by any other person to
secure such person's obligations to the fund, shall be valid, binding
and perfected from the time when such pledge or other security interest
attaches, without any physical delivery of the collateral or further
act. The lien of any such pledge or other security interest shall be
valid, binding and perfected as against all parties having claims of any
kind in tort, contract or otherwise against the fund irrespective of
whether or not such parties have notice thereof. No instrument by which
such a pledge or other security interest is created nor any financing
statement need be recorded or filed. This subdivision shall apply
notwithstanding the provisions of the uniform commercial code.
 § 6277. Authority of city to convey real property and grant consents
to dormitory authority. (a) Notwithstanding the provisions of any
general, special or local law, charter or ordinance to the contrary, on
request of the fund and with the approval of the city board of estimate,
the city of New York may sell, convey, lease, exchange or otherwise make
available to the dormitory authority, for a nominal consideration, any
interest in real property of the city designated by the board of higher
education as suitable for a facility. Such sale, conveyance, lease,
exchange, or other disposition may be made at nominal cost and without
the requirement of public auction or sealed bids, or restriction as to
the term of any such lease or arrangement, and the provisions of
subdivision b of section three hundred eighty-four of the New York city
charter shall not apply in such cases. Conveyances made pursuant to this
section shall include but shall not be limited to real property on which
are situated facilities of, or are under the jurisdiction of, or
assigned to, the board of higher education.
 (b) Notwithstanding the provisions of any general, special or local
law, charter or ordinance to the contrary, on request of the fund, the
city board of estimate in behalf of the City of New York may grant
revocable or irrevocable consents or rights of any kind or nature
whatsoever, providing for or involving or relating to the occupation or
use of any of the streets of the city, whether on, under or over the
surface thereof, to the dormitory authority, on such terms and
conditions and for such period of time or duration as may be determined
by the board of estimate to be in the public interest.
 § 6278. Resources of fund. (a) Subject to the provisions of this
article, the trustees of the fund shall receive, accept, invest,
administer, expend and disburse for its corporate purposes all monies
for the city university construction fund from whatever sources derived
including (1) payments by the state pursuant to the provisions of
subdivision one of section sixty-two hundred seventy-nine of this
article; (2) payments by the city of New York or by the state
comptroller pursuant to the provisions of subdivision two of section
sixty-two hundred seventy-nine of this article; (3) all instructional
and non-instructional fees received by the fund under section sixty-two
hundred fifteen of this chapter; (4) payments by the state pursuant to
the provisions of subdivision four of section sixty-two hundred
seventy-nine of this article; (5) payments by the city pursuant to the
provisions of subdivision five of section sixty-two hundred seventy-nine
of this article; and (6) any other payments, gifts, or appropriations to
the fund from any other source exclusive of any other monies
appropriated by the state for the benefit of the city university.
 (b) The monies of the fund shall be paid to the comptroller of the
city of New York as agent of the fund, who shall not commingle such
monies with any other monies. All city university instructional and
noninstructional fees received by the fund which, together with other
moneys of the fund available for payment of rentals and other payments
due to the dormitory authority from the fund pursuant to any lease,
sublease, or other agreement entered into between the dormitory
authority and the fund, exceed the amount required by the terms of any
lease, sub-lease or other agreement with the dormitory authority to be
retained for the payment of such rentals and such other payments and the
costs of administration of such fund shall be transferred to the city
university for the support, maintenance and operation of such
university.
 (c) The monies in any of the fund's accounts shall be paid out on
checks signed by the comptroller of the city of New York on requisitions
of the chairman of the trustees of the fund or of such other officer or
employee as the trustees shall authorize to make such requisition.
 (d) Subject to the terms of any lease, sublease, or agreement
undertaken by the fund, any such monies of the fund not required for
immediate use may, at the discretion of the fund, be invested in
obligations of the United States, of an agency, corporation or other
instrumentality thereof, of the state or of the city; in obligations the
principal and interest of which are guaranteed by the United States, by
an agency, corporation or other instrumentality thereof or by the state;
or in interest-bearing certificates of deposit of a bank or trust
company located in and authorized to do business in the state of New
York, each such certificate to be secured in amounts equal to the amount
of each such certificate by pledges of obligations of the United States,
of an agency, corporation or other instrumentality thereof, of the
state, of the city or of obligations the principal and interest of which
are guaranteed by the United States, by an agency, corporation or other
instrumentality thereof or by the state. The comptroller of the city of
New York, as agent of the fund, shall make the investments when so
requested by the fund.
 (e) The comptroller of the city of New York or his legally authorized
representative from time to time may examine the books and accounts of
the fund, including its receipts, disbursements, contracts, reserves,
investments, and any other matters relating to its financial standing.
Such an examination shall be conducted by the comptroller of the city of
New York at least once every five years; in lieu of such an examination,
the comptroller of the city of New York may accept from the fund an
external examination of the fund's books and accounts made at the
request of the trustees of the fund.
 (f) In addition to the provisions of subdivision (e) of this section,
the comptroller of the state of New York or his legally authorized
representative may also from time to time examine the books and accounts
of the fund, including its receipts, disbursements, contracts, reserves,
investments, and any other matters relating to its financial standing.
 (g) To the extent practicable, the trustees of the fund shall ensure
that all monies received during a fiscal year are expended prior to the
end of such fiscal year.
 (h) On or before the first of February each year, the comptroller
shall certify to the governor, the temporary president of the senate,
the speaker of the assembly, the chair of the senate finance committee
and the chair of the assembly ways and means committee, the amount of
money deposited in the fund during the preceding calendar year as the
result of revenue derived pursuant to section six hundred thirty-f of
the tax law.
 (i) On or before the first of February each year, the trustees of the
fund shall provide a written report to the temporary president of the
senate, the speaker of the assembly, the chair of the senate finance
committee, the chair of the assembly ways and means committee, the chair
of the senate committee on higher education, the chair of the assembly
committee on higher education, and the public. Such report shall include
how the monies of the fund were utilized during the preceding calendar
year and shall include:
 (1) the amount of money dispersed from the fund;
 (2) recipients of awards from the fund;
 (3) the amount awarded to each recipient;
 (4) the purposes for which such awards were granted; and
 (5) a summary financial plan for such monies which shall include
estimates of all receipts and all disbursements for the current and
succeeding fiscal years, along with the actual results from the prior
fiscal year.
 § 6279. Payments to fund. To enable the fund to realize its corporate
purposes, as provided in section sixty-two hundred seventy-three of this
article, the following monies shall be made available to the fund as
hereinafter provided:
 (1) The state shall, in addition to any other state financial
assistance, annually appropriate and pay to the fund an amount equal to
the aggregate of all rentals and such other payments due to the
dormitory authority from the fund pursuant to any lease, sublease or
other agreement entered into between the dormitory authority and the
fund prior to July first, nineteen hundred eighty-five or pursuant to
any agreement supplemental thereto, pursuant to which the fund and the
dormitory authority provide senior college facilities, for the city
fiscal year commencing July first succeeding the filing of the report
required to be submitted by the fund pursuant to subdivision seven of
section sixty-two hundred seventy-four of this article. Such amount
shall be paid to the fund as follows: (i) on or before the fifteenth day
of July of the fiscal year of the city, the amount required to be paid
by the fund under any such lease, sublease or other agreement on or
before the first day of August of such city fiscal year; (ii) on or
before the fifteenth day of November of the fiscal year of the city, the
amount required to be paid by the fund under any such lease, sublease or
other agreement on or before the tenth day of December of such city
fiscal year; (iii) on or before the fifteenth day of May of the fiscal
year of the city, the amount required to be paid by the fund under any
such lease, sublease or other agreement on or before the tenth day of
June of such city fiscal year; and (iv) on such day or days as shall be
prescribed under any such lease, sublease or other agreements, the
amount required to be paid by the fund under any such lease, sublease or
other agreements entered into on or after April first, nineteen hundred
ninety-nine.
 The state shall, in addition to any other state financial assistance,
annually appropriate and pay to the fund an amount equal to one-half the
aggregate of all rentals and such other payments due to the dormitory
authority from the fund pursuant to any lease, sublease or other
agreement entered into between the dormitory authority and the fund
prior to July first, nineteen hundred eighty-five or pursuant to any
agreement supplemental thereto, pursuant to which the fund and the
dormitory authority provide community college facilities, for the city
fiscal year commencing July first succeeding the filing of the report
required to be submitted by the fund pursuant to subdivision seven of
section sixty-two hundred seventy-four of this article, which amount
shall be payable as follows: (a) fifty per centum of such amount shall
be payable, (i) with respect to any portion thereof required to be paid
by the fund under any such lease, sublease or other agreement on or
before the first day of August of such city fiscal year, on or before
the fifteenth day of July, and (ii) with respect to any portion thereof
so required to be paid by the fund on or before the tenth day of
December of such city fiscal year, on or before the fifteenth day of
November; (b) fifty per centum of such amount shall be payable on or
before the fifteenth day of May of such city fiscal year; and (c) fifty
per centum of such amount shall be payable on such day or days as shall
be prescribed under any such lease, sublease or other agreements, the
amount required to be paid by the fund under any such lease, sublease or
other agreements entered into on or after April first, nineteen hundred
ninety-nine.
 (2) The city shall, in addition to any other city financial
assistance, annually pay to the fund an amount equal to one-half of the
aggregate of all rentals and such other payments due to the dormitory
authority from the fund pursuant to any lease, sublease or other
agreement entered into between the dormitory authority and the fund
prior to July first, nineteen hundred eighty-five or pursuant to any
agreement supplemental thereto, for the city fiscal year commencing July
first succeeding the filing of the report required to be submitted by
the fund pursuant to subdivision seven of section sixty-two hundred
seventy-four of this article, which amount shall be payable as follows:
(a) fifty per centum of such amount shall be payable, (i) with respect
to any portion thereof required to be paid by the fund under any such
lease, sublease or other agreement on or before the first day of August
of such city fiscal year, on or before the fifteenth day of July, and
(ii) with respect to any portion thereof so required to be paid by the
fund on or before the tenth day of December of such city fiscal year, on
or before the fifteenth day of November; and (b) fifty per centum of
such amount shall be payable on or before the fifteenth day of May of
such city fiscal year; provided, however, that such amount shall have
been first appropriated by the city to the fund or shall otherwise have
been made lawfully available to the fund for such purposes; provided,
further, that the amount required to be paid to the fund by the city at
any time on account of the rentals and such other payments due to the
dormitory authority from the fund pursuant to any lease, sublease or
other agreement entered into between the dormitory authority and the
fund prior to July first, nineteen hundred eighty-five or pursuant to
any agreement supplemental thereto, pursuant to which the fund and the
dormitory authority provide senior college facilities, shall be reduced
by an amount equal to the amount by which the payment made by the state
pursuant to the first paragraph of subdivision one of this section on
account of such lease, sublease or other agreement exceeds one-half of
the amount then required to be paid by the state on account of such
lease, sublease or other agreement. In the event of the failure of the
city to pay the fund, pursuant to the schedule of payments established
by this subdivision, all or part of such amounts, the fund shall
forthwith make and deliver to the comptroller of the state of New York a
certificate stating such amount and the sum, if any, paid by the city to
the fund with respect to such amount, and further stating the difference
between such amount and such sum, and, after the state comptroller shall
have given written notice to the city director of management and budget,
such difference, but not to exceed sixty-five million dollars in any one
city fiscal year, shall be paid to the fund by the state comptroller out
of the next succeeding payment of state aid apportioned to the city of
New York as per capita aid for the support of local government pursuant
to section fifty-four of the state finance law during such city fiscal
year. The amount so paid over to the fund shall be deducted from the
corresponding apportionment of such per capita state aid otherwise
payable to the city of New York, and shall not obligate the state to
make or entitle the city of New York to receive any additional
apportionment or payment of per capita state aid. Notwithstanding any
other provision of law, the city shall have the power to contract
indebtedness and to issue its obligations pursuant to the local finance
law for the purpose of financing any payment authorized or required to
be made by the city by this subdivision. Any such payment shall
constitute an object or purpose for which the period of probable
usefulness is hereby determined to be five years.
 (3) (a) The state shall, in addition to any other state assistance,
annually appropriate and pay to the city of New York for the
twelve-month period commencing July first, nineteen hundred eighty-two
and thereafter, an amount equal to the amount paid by the city pursuant
to subdivision two of this section attributable to senior college
facilities.
 (b) For the purposes of this section and subdivision seven of section
sixty-two hundred seventy-four of this article, the term "senior college
facilities" shall be deemed to mean and refer to any facility of the
city university which is or has been financed by bonds, notes or other
obligations of the dormitory authority pursuant to any lease, sublease
or other agreement between the dormitory authority and the fund which
relates to an educational unit of the city university which was, or is,
included as a senior college on the date as of which such lease,
sublease or other agreement is dated.
 (c) In addition to the amounts specified in paragraph (a) of this
subdivision, the state shall, in addition to any other state assistance,
annually appropriate and pay to the city of New York for the twelve
month period commencing July first, nineteen hundred eighty-two and
thereafter an amount equal to the amount paid by the city pursuant to
subdivision two of this section attributable to facilities of New York
city college of technology and to that educational unit of the college
of Staten Island whose primary purpose is providing associate and
certificate programs in general and technical educational subjects.
 (4) The state shall, in addition to any other state financial
assistance, annually appropriate and pay to the fund for the benefit of
the city university an amount equal to the aggregate of all rentals and
other payments due to the dormitory authority from the fund on account
of senior college facilities and one-half of all rentals and other
payments due to the dormitory authority from the fund on account of
community college facilities, which rentals and other payments are
payable by the fund pursuant to any lease, sublease or other agreement
entered into between the dormitory authority and the fund on or after
July first, nineteen hundred eighty-five, other than pursuant to an
agreement supplemental to any lease, sublease or other agreement entered
into between the dormitory authority and the fund prior to July first,
nineteen hundred eighty-five, for the city fiscal year commencing July
first succeeding the filing of the report required to be submitted by
the fund pursuant to subdivision seven of section sixty-two hundred
seventy-four of this article. Such amount shall be paid to the fund as
follows: (i) on or before the fifteenth day of July of the fiscal year
of the city, the amount required to be paid by the fund on account of
senior college facilities and fifty per centum of the amount required to
be paid by the fund on account of community college facilities under any
such lease, sublease or other agreement on or before the first day of
August of such city fiscal year; (ii) on or before the fifteenth day of
November of the fiscal year of the city, the amount required to be paid
by the fund on account of senior college facilities and fifty per centum
of the amount required to be paid by the fund on account of community
college facilities under any such lease, sublease or other agreement on
or before the tenth day of December of such city fiscal year; and (iii)
on or before the fifteenth day of May of the fiscal year of the city,
the amount required to be paid by the fund on account of senior college
facilities and fifty per centum of the amount required to be paid by the
fund on account of community college facilities under any such lease,
sublease or other agreement on or before the tenth day of June of such
city fiscal year. In the event of the failure of the state to pay the
fund when due pursuant to this subdivision all or part of such amounts,
the fund shall forthwith make and deliver to the comptroller of the
state of New York a certificate stating the amount of the payment
required to have been made by the state, the amount paid by the state
and the amount remaining unpaid by the state. The comptroller of the
state of New York, after giving written notice to the state director of
the budget, shall pay to the fund the amount set forth in such
certificate as remaining unpaid, which amount shall be paid from any
moneys appropriated by the state pursuant to section sixty-two hundred
twenty-one of this chapter or any successor provisions of law for or on
account of the net operating costs of senior colleges and not yet paid
during such city fiscal year and from any moneys appropriated by the
state pursuant to subdivision one of section sixty-three hundred four of
this chapter or any successor provisions of law for or on account of
operating costs of community colleges and not yet paid during such city
fiscal year or from any other moneys appropriated by the state for or on
account of the operating costs of senior or community colleges and not
yet paid during such city fiscal years, which moneys are appropriated in
lieu of or in addition to moneys appropriated pursuant to such
provisions of law. The amount required to be paid by the comptroller of
the state of New York pursuant to this subdivision shall be paid to the
fund as soon as practicable after receipt of the certificate of the fund
and notice to the state director of the budget is given whether or not
the moneys from which such payment is to be made are then payable to the
city or the city university; provided, however, that any amounts
described in clause (i), (ii) or (iii) of this subdivision that are
payable other than semi-annually, including for variable rate bonds,
interest rate exchange or similar agreements, or other financing
arrangements permitted by law, may be paid at such other times as the
state may elect, but in no event later than the fifteenth day of the
month preceding the month during which the fund is required by such
lease, sublease or agreement to pay such amounts.
 (5) The city shall, in addition to any other city financial
assistance, annually appropriate and pay to the fund for the benefit of
the city university an amount equal to: (i) one-half of the aggregate of
all rentals and such other payments where the dormitory authority has
financed the entire capital cost of constructing community college
facilities, and (ii) all of the aggregate rentals and such other
payments where the dormitory authority has financed only the local
sponsor's portion of the capital cost of constructing community college
facilities pursuant to any lease, sublease or other agreement entered
into between the dormitory authority and the fund on or after July
first, nineteen hundred eighty-five, other than pursuant to an agreement
supplemental to any lease, sublease or other agreement entered into
between the dormitory authority and the fund prior to July first,
nineteen hundred eighty-five, for the city fiscal year commencing July
first succeeding the filing of the report required to be submitted by
the fund pursuant to subdivision seven of section sixty-two hundred
seventy-four of this article. Such amount shall be paid to the fund as
follows: (i) on or before the fifteenth day of July of the fiscal year
of the city, fifty per centum of the amount required to be paid by the
fund on account of community college facilities under any such lease,
sublease or other agreement on or before the first day of August of such
city fiscal year; (ii) on or before the fifteenth day of November of the
fiscal year of the city, fifty per centum of the amount required to be
paid by the fund on account of community college facilities under any
such lease, sublease or other agreement on or before the tenth day of
December of such city fiscal year; and (iii) on or before the fifteenth
day of May of the fiscal year of the city, fifty per centum of the
amount required to be paid by the fund on account of community college
facilities under any such lease, sublease or other agreement on or
before the tenth day of June of such city fiscal year. In the event of
the failure of the city to pay the fund when due pursuant to this
subdivision all or part of such amounts, the fund shall forthwith make
and deliver to the comptroller of the state of New York a certificate
stating the amount of the payment required to have been made by the
city, the amount paid by the city and the amount remaining unpaid by the
city. The comptroller of the state of New York, after giving written
notice to the city director of management and budget, shall pay to the
fund the amount set forth in such certificate as remaining unpaid, which
amount shall be paid, first, from the next succeeding payments of state
aid apportioned to the city as per capita aid for the support of local
government pursuant to section fifty-four of the state finance law
during such city fiscal year, provided that the amount the comptroller
of the state of New York may pay pursuant to this subdivision from such
next succeeding payment of state aid shall be limited to an amount
which, together with (i) the amount of such state aid theretofore paid
and then to be paid by the comptroller of the state of New York pursuant
to subdivision two of this section, (ii) the amount of such state aid
theretofore paid pursuant to this subdivision and (iii) the maximum
amount which may thereafter be required to be paid pursuant to
subdivision two of this section, in each such case during the city
fiscal year in which the payment is to be made pursuant to this
subdivision, does not exceed sixty-five million dollars; and, if the
amount of such state aid so paid by the comptroller of the state of New
York is less than the amount set forth in the certificate of the fund as
remaining unpaid, then from any moneys appropriated by the state
pursuant to section sixty-two hundred twenty-one of this chapter or any
successor provisions of law for or on account of the net operating costs
of senior colleges and not yet paid during such city fiscal year and
from any moneys appropriated by the state pursuant to subdivision one of
section sixty-three hundred four of this chapter or any successor
provisions of law for or on account of operating costs of community
colleges and not yet paid during such city fiscal year or from any
moneys appropriated by the state for or on account of the operating
costs of senior or community colleges and not yet paid during such city
fiscal year, which moneys are appropriated in lieu of or in addition to
moneys appropriated pursuant to such provisions of law. The amount
required to be paid by the comptroller of the state of New York pursuant
to this subdivision shall be paid to the fund as soon as practicable
after receipt of the certificate of the fund and notice to the city
director of management and budget is given, whether or not the state aid
or other moneys from which such payment is to be made is then payable to
the city or the city university. The amount of the state aid or other
moneys payable to the city or the city university from which the
comptroller of the state of New York has made a payment pursuant to this
subdivision shall be reduced by the amount so paid to the fund
notwithstanding the amount appropriated and apportioned by the state to
the city or the city university, and the state shall not be obligated to
make and the city or the city university shall not be entitled to
receive any additional apportionment or payment of such state aid or
other moneys; provided, however, that any amounts described in clause
(i), (ii) or (iii) of this subdivision that are payable other than
semi-annually, including for variable rate bonds, interest rate exchange
or similar agreements, or other financing arrangements permitted by law,
may be paid at such other times as the city may elect, but in no event
later than the fifteenth day of the month preceding the month during
which the fund is required by such lease, sublease or agreement to pay
such amounts.
 (6) The amounts of money required to be paid pursuant to this section
shall be determined from the report required to be submitted by the fund
pursuant to subdivision seven of section sixty-two hundred seventy-four
of this article. Nothing contained in subdivision four or five of this
section shall be construed to create an obligation upon the state to
appropriate moneys for or on account of the operating costs of senior or
community colleges, to preclude the state from reducing the amount of
moneys appropriated or level of assistance provided for the operating
costs of senior or community colleges from the amount appropriated or
level of assistance provided in any prior city fiscal year, or to
preclude the state from altering or modifying the manner in which it
provides for or provides assistance for the operating costs of senior or
community colleges.
 (7) Notwithstanding the designation of Medgar Evers college as a
senior college, for the period commencing July first, nineteen hundred
ninety-four and thereafter, the city of New York shall include Medgar
Evers college facilities in its calculation of amounts due the fund
pursuant to subdivision five of this section and for purposes of
paragraph c of subdivision one of section sixty-three hundred four of
this chapter.
 § 6280. Actions against fund. (a) Except in an action for wrongful
death, an action against the fund for personal injury or property damage
or founded on tort shall not be commenced more than one year and ninety
days after the cause of action therefor shall have accrued, nor unless a
notice of claim shall have been served on a trustee of the fund or
officer or employee thereof designated by the fund for such purpose,
within the time limited by, and in compliance with the requirements of,
section fifty-e of the general municipal law. An action against the fund
for wrongful death shall be commenced in accordance with the notice of
claim and time limitation provisions of title eleven of article nine of
the public authorities law.
 (b) The venue of every action, suit or special proceeding brought
against the fund shall be laid in the county in which the cause of
action arose for all claims which arise within the city of New York, or
in the county of New York.
 (c) Neither any trustee of the fund nor any officer, employee, or
agent of the fund, while acting within the scope of his authority, shall
be subject to any personal liability resulting from the providing of
facilities for the city university or from any other exercise or
carrying out of any of the fund's purposes or powers.
 (d) Upon an appeal taken by the city university construction fund in
any action or other proceeding to which the fund is a party, the service
of notice of appeal shall perfect the appeal and shall stay the
execution of the judgment or order appealed from without any undertaking
or other security being furnished by the fund.
 (e) No provision of this article shall be construed as a defense and
indemnification provision within the meaning of section eighteen of the
public officers law or any other similar law or as otherwise precluding
any employee, as defined in said section of the public officers law, of
the fund from recourse to the provisions thereof.
 § 6281. Municipal regulations. (a) No county, town or village,
including but not limited to the city of New York, shall have the power
to modify or change the plans and specifications for facilities to be
provided pursuant to agreements between the dormitory authority and the
city university construction fund, or the construction, plumbing,
heating, lighting or other mechanical branch of work necessary to
complete the work in question, nor to require that any person, firm or
corporation employed on any such work shall perform any such work in any
other or different manner from that provided by such plans and
specifications, nor to require that any such person, firm or corporation
obtain any other or additional authority or permit from such county,
city, town or village, including but not limited to the city of New York
as a condition of doing such work, nor shall any condition whatever be
imposed by any such county, city, town or village, including but not
limited to the city of New York in relation to the work being done
pursuant to the aforesaid agreements, and such work shall be in
accordance with the drawings, plans, specifications and contracts in
relation thereto; and the doing of any such work for the dormitory
authority by any person, firm or corporation in accordance with the
terms of such drawings, plans, specifications or contracts shall not
subject said person, firm or corporation to any liability or penalty,
civil or criminal, other than as may be stated in such contracts or
incidental to the proper enforcement thereof.
 (b) Notwithstanding any other provision of this article or any other
law, any contract let by the dormitory authority and/or the city
university construction fund for the purposes of this article shall be
in conformity with the provisions of section one hundred one of the
general municipal law.
 § 6282. Exemption from taxation. The moneys and property of the fund
and its operations shall be exempt from taxation.
 ARTICLE 126
 COMMUNITY COLLEGES AND STATE-AIDED FOUR-YEAR COLLEGES
Section 6301. Definitions.
 6302. Authorization to establish community colleges.
 6303. Programs and curricula of community colleges.
 6303-a. Graduation, achievement and placement program.
 6304. Financing of community colleges.
 6304-A. Reports to local sponsors.
 6305. Non-resident and out-of-state students.
 6306. Administration of community colleges--boards of
 trustees.
 6307. Establishment of state-aided four-year colleges.
 6308. Defense and indemnification of community college
 trustees, officers and employees.
 6309. Reimbursement of defense costs incurred by or on behalf
 of community college trustees, officers and employees.
 6310. Community college regions - administration and finance.
 6311. New York opportunity promise scholarship.
 § 6301. Definitions. As used in this article, unless the context shall
otherwise require, the following terms shall mean:
 1. "State university trustees." Board of trustees of the state
university.
 2. "Community colleges." Colleges established and operated pursuant to
the provisions of this article, either individually or jointly, by
counties, cities, intermediate school districts, school districts
approved by the state university trustees, or individually by community
college regions approved by the state university trustees, and providing
two-year post secondary programs pursuant to regulations prescribed by
the state university trustees and receiving financial assistance from
the state therefor.
 3. "Local sponsor." Any city, county, intermediate school district,
school district approved by the state university trustees, or community
college region approved by the state university trustees, sponsoring or
participating in the establishment or operation of a community college.
 4. "Community college region." A community college local sponsor
composed of two or more contiguous counties, cities or school districts,
or any combination thereof, which are eligible to appoint members to a
community college regional board of trustees.
 5. "Resident." A person who has resided in the state for a period of
at least one year and in the county, city, town, intermediate school
district, school district or community college region, as the case may
be, for a period of at least six months, both immediately preceding the
date of such person's registration in a community college or, for the
purposes of section sixty-three hundred five of this article, his or her
application for a certificate of residence; provided, however, that this
term shall include any student who is not a resident of New York state,
other than a non-immigrant noncitizen within the meaning of paragraph
(15) of subsection (a) of section 1101 of title 8 of the United States
Code, if such student:
 (i) attended an approved New York high school for two or more years,
graduated from an approved New York high school and applied for
attendance at an institution or educational unit of the state university
within five years of receiving a New York state high school diploma; or
 (ii) attended an approved New York state program for general
equivalency diploma exam preparation, received a general equivalency
diploma issued within New York state and applied for attendance at an
institution or educational unit of the state university within five
years of receiving a general equivalency diploma issued within New York
state; or
 (iii) was enrolled in an institution or educational unit of the state
university in the fall semester or quarter of the two thousand one--two
thousand two academic year and was authorized by such institution or
educational unit to pay tuition at the rate or charge imposed for
students who are residents of the state.
 Provided, further, that a student without lawful immigration status
shall also be required to file an affidavit with such institution or
educational unit stating that the student has filed an application to
legalize his or her immigration status, or will file such an application
as soon as he or she is eligible to do so.
 In the event that a person qualified as above for state residence, but
has been a resident of two or more counties in the state during the six
months immediately preceding his application for a certificate of
residence pursuant to section sixty-three hundred five of this chapter,
the charges to the counties of residence shall be allocated among the
several counties proportional to the number of months, or major fraction
thereof, of residence in each county.
 6. "Certificate of residence form". A standard form as developed by
the chancellor of the state university of New York, in conjunction with
the chancellor of the city university of New York.
 § 6302. Authorization to establish community colleges. 1. Any local
sponsor, other than a community college region, acting through its local
legislative body or board, or other appropriate governing agency, which
in the case of the city of New York acting as a local sponsor shall be
the mayor of that city, may by local law, resolution, order or
ordinance, and pursuant to the master plan, standards and regulations
prescribed by the state university trustees and with the approval of
said trustees:
 a. Establish a community college.
 b. Elect to participate in and pay an appropriate share of the
expenses involved in the community college program of any other local
sponsor consenting to such arrangement.
 c. Combine with one or more other local sponsors for the joint
establishment and operation of a community college.
 2. Pursuant to section sixty-three hundred ten of this article, any
eligible county, city or school district acting through its local
legislative body or board, may by local law or resolution, and pursuant
to the master plan, standards and regulations prescribed by the state
university trustees, and with the approval of said trustees, combine
with one or more contiguous counties, cities or school districts, or any
combination thereof, to constitute a community college region for the
purpose of operating, as local sponsor, an existing community college
which is currently sponsored by a city or school district other than a
school district located in a city with a population of one million or
more.
 3. In the city of New York, the board of education, with the approval
of the state university trustees, may act as a local sponsor in the
establishment and operation, as a community college, of a post secondary
technical vocational training institution which is partly supported by
such board of education and partly supported by an educational
foundation for an industry chartered by the board of regents. In
addition to the community college programs and curricula authorized by
this article, the institution may offer such baccalaureate, masters
degree programs and curricula in support of its mission, in accordance
with standards and regulations prescribed by the state university
trustees, as may be authorized pursuant to the provisions of the master
plan. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the institution shall
be financed and administered in the manner provided for community
colleges.
 4. Community colleges so established and operated shall be eligible to
receive financial assistance from the state as hereinafter provided,
which shall be paid to the local sponsor or sponsors, provided, however,
that in the case of any local sponsor which shall have assigned such
financial assistance to the dormitory authority, such payment shall be
made to the commissioner of taxation and finance for deposit in the
community college tuition and instructional income fund.
 5. Whenever a plan for a community college, other than a plan for
participation in a community college region, shall have been formulated
by a county board of supervisors and approved as provided in this
section, the board of supervisors may submit the question of the
establishment of the community college contemplated by such plan to a
referendum at any general election at which all the voters of the county
may vote. The form of the proposition shall be determined by the board
of supervisors and shall include an estimate of the county's share of
the initial capital cost and an estimate of the county's share of the
annual cost of maintenance and operation. If the majority of the voters
voting on such proposition shall approve the establishment of the
community college, such college shall be deemed established and the
board of supervisors shall proceed forthwith to exercise the powers and
authority conferred upon it in this article.
 6. a. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, community colleges
established under this article shall have the authority to:
 (i) Determine that the bidder on a contract for the purchase of
apparel or sports equipment is not an acceptable bidder based on either
of the following considerations:
 (A) the labor standards applicable to the manufacture of the apparel
or sports equipment, including but not limited to employee compensation,
working conditions, employee rights to form unions, and the use of child
labor, or
 (B) the bidder's failure to provide information sufficient for the
state agency or corporation to determine the labor conditions applicable
to the manufacture of the apparel or sports equipment.
 (ii) Include in the internal policies and procedures governing
procurement of apparel a prohibition against the purchase of apparel or
sports equipment from any vendor based upon either or both of the
following considerations:
 (A) the labor standards applicable to the manufacture of the apparel
or sports equipment, including but not limited to employee compensation,
working conditions, employee rights to form unions, and the use of child
labor; or
 (B) the bidder's failure to provide sufficient information for said
state agencies to determine the labor standards applicable to the
manufacture of the apparel or sports equipment.
 b. For the purposes of this subdivision the term:
 (i) "apparel" shall mean goods, such as, but not limited to, sports
uniforms, including gym uniforms, required school uniforms, shoes,
including, but not limited to, athletic shoes or sneakers, sweatshirts,
caps, hats, and other clothing, whether or not imprinted with a school's
name or logo, academic regalia, lab coats and staff uniforms; and
 (ii) "sports equipment" shall mean equipment, such as, but not limited
to, balls, bats and other goods intended for use by those participating
in sports and games.
 § 6303. Programs and curricula of community colleges. 1. Community
colleges shall provide two-year programs of post high school nature
combining general education with technical education relating to the
occupational needs of the community, area or community college region in
which the college is located and those of the state and the nation
generally. Special courses and extension work may be provided for
part-time students.
 2. Training for certain occupational skills may be limited to selected
community colleges by the state university trustees in order to avoid
unnecessary duplication or overlapping of facilities and programs.
 3. The curricula in community colleges shall be designed to serve the
needs of students who seek two years of post secondary education and
whose needs would not ordinarily be met by the usual four-year college
curriculum. However, such colleges shall nevertheless provide sufficient
general education to enable qualified students who so desire to transfer
after completion of the community college program to institutions
providing regular four-year courses except that the provision of such
general education sufficient for transfer to institutions providing
regular four-year courses shall be at the option of the local sponsor in
any of the community colleges established upon discontinuance of a state
institute of applied arts and sciences and upon discontinuance of the
veterans vocational school at Troy pursuant to the provisions of section
fifty-nine hundred nine of former article one hundred nineteen of this
chapter.
 4. The curricula of the community colleges shall be developed with the
assistance and guidance of the state university trustees and shall be
subject to their approval, and such modifications, amendments and
revisions as they may from time to time prescribe.
 5. Notwithstanding the provisions of any other general, special or
local law, rule or regulation, community colleges may permit persons
sixty years of age or over to audit courses given therein without
tuition, examination, grading or credit therefor upon a space available
basis, subject to the provisions of section sixty-three hundred four of
this chapter, as determined by the president of each such institution,
provided that such audit attendance does not deny course attendance at a
community college by an individual who is otherwise qualified under the
regulations and the provisions of section sixty-three hundred four of
this chapter. The provisions of this paragraph shall not affect any
state aid to community colleges granted pursuant to article one hundred
twenty-six of this chapter.
 6. Notwithstanding the provisions of any other general, special or
local law, rule or regulation, each community college, or the entity or
entities responsible for setting tuition at such institution, shall be
authorized to set a reduced rate of tuition and/or fees, or to waive
tuition and/or fees entirely, for students participating in any dual or
concurrent enrollment program with no reduction in other state, local,
or other support for such students earning college credit that such
higher education partner would otherwise be eligible to receive;
provided that, for purposes of this provision, a dual or concurrent
enrollment program shall mean one or more college courses taken by a
high school student through a community college while such student is
still enrolled in high school or boards of cooperative educational
services and for which the student may receive both high school and
college credit.
 § 6303-a. Graduation, achievement and placement program. 1.
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have
the following meanings:
 (a) "Plan" shall mean the graduation, achievement and placement (GAP)
program plan to be developed by the state university trustees pursuant
to subdivision two of this section, after consultation with the
community college presidents, councils and faculty.
 (b) "Program" shall mean the GAP program to be developed by the state
university trustees pursuant to subdivision two of this section.
 2. By no later than July first, two thousand fourteen, the state
university trustees shall develop, as part of the master plan to be
submitted pursuant to section three hundred fifty-four of this chapter,
a comprehensive plan to be incorporated into its two thousand sixteen
master plan and fully implemented no later than July first, two thousand
eighteen at each of the state university of New York community colleges.
Such plan shall seek to develop a remedial education program to
accomplish the following goals:
 (a) Improve community college outcomes by reducing the time to degree
completion or transfer to a four year college;
 (b) Reduce state and local sponsor expenditures on remedial
coursework;
 (c) Improve overall community college graduation rates and employment
prospects.
 3. Each community college shall utilize features in its program
identified in the SUNY task force on remediation report, issued pursuant
to chapter fifty-seven of the laws of two thousand twelve, and shall
consider other features of successful existing programs, including, but
not limited to the following:
 (a) Adoption of a consistent definition of "college readiness" for
student placement into remedial programs using multiple measures of
student achievement;
 (b) Accelerated developmental education program offerings;
 (c) Incorporating remedial instruction into the beginning of
college-level programs, either as introductory courses or integrated
into initial college-level courses;
 (d) Utilize supplemental academic support for developmental students
enrolled in college level courses as well as other contextualization
models;
 (e) A consolidated course schedule that permits students to take
classes in a morning, afternoon or evening schedule so as to enable
students to balance school, work and other personal responsibilities;
 (f) An advisement model that directs counselors with assigned
caseloads to meet with students monthly from program entry until
graduation;
 (g) Career and employment services that provide students with
interview training, job skills and career planning;
 (h) Academic support services that provide tutoring from qualified
undergraduate or graduate students or faculty; and
 (i) Comprehensive evaluation and the use of data to assess the
effectiveness of the program.
 4. Each community college shall be required to implement, on a partial
basis, its program by the two thousand fourteen--two thousand fifteen
academic year.
 5. Each community college shall report on the implementation of the
program and shall report on measures of student success for each student
enrolled in such program. Such report shall include but not be limited
to:
 (a) Annual number and percentage of entering first-time students
enrolled in remedial (developmental) education courses in math,
english/reading or both and complete a college-level course in the same
subject.
 (b) Annual number and percentage of entering first-time degree or
certificate seeking students who complete entry college-level math,
english and reading courses within the first two consecutive academic
years.
 (c) Number and percentage of entering degree or certificate seeking
students enrolling from fall to spring and fall to fall at an
institution of higher education.
 § 6304. Financing of community colleges. 1. The master plan, standards
and regulations prescribed by the state university trustees shall
include provisions for financing the capital costs and operating costs
of such colleges in the following manner:
 a. State financial aid shall be one-third of the amount of operating
costs, as approved by the state university trustees. Operating costs
shall not include any payment of debt service or rentals or other
payments by a local sponsor to the dormitory authority pursuant to any
lease, sublease or other agreement entered into between the dormitory
authority and a local sponsor. Such aid for a college shall, however, be
for two-fifths of operating costs for any fiscal year of the college
during which it is implementing a program of full opportunity provided a
plan has been approved by the state university trustees. Such plan,
which shall be submitted by the college only after approval by the board
of trustees and the local sponsor or sponsors, shall
 (i) establish a policy of offering acceptance in an appropriate
program of the college to all applicants residing in the sponsorship
area who graduated from high school within the prior year and to
applicants who are high school graduates and who were released from
active duty with the armed forces of the United States within the prior
year;
 (ii) provide for full implementation of such policy by the fall
semester of nineteen hundred seventy or, if the college demonstrates to
the state university trustees that full implementation by such time
would not be feasible and in the best interests of the college, provide
for a timetable to achieve such full implementation within five years
which provides for substantial growth in registration each year;
 (iii) make provision for and contain adequate assurances of the
expenditure of funds by the sponsor or sponsors at a level pursuant to
state university regulations, at least that necessary to implement the
plan;
 (iv) provide for adequate programs of remediation, instruction and
counselling to meet the needs of all students to be served by the
college. The trustees may require periodic reports or certifications
from colleges which have submitted plans which have been approved and
may, in appropriate cases, revoke such approval in case a college is in
default of implementing its plan.
 b. (i) Operating costs shall not include any payment of debt service
or rentals or other payments by a local sponsor to the dormitory
authority pursuant to any lease, sublease or other agreement entered
into between the dormitory authority and a local sponsor. Such operating
costs shall be subject to such maximum limitations and joint regulations
as shall be prescribed by both the city university trustees and the
state university trustees with the approval of the director of the
budget. Such limitations shall be based upon maximum allowances per
student for each student in attendance in the case of operating costs,
or in accordance with such other factors as may be deemed appropriate.
Operating costs shall include courses offered for the purpose of
providing occupational training or assistance to business for the
creation and retention of job opportunities and for the improvement of
productivity, through contracts or arrangements between a community
college and a business, labor organization, or not-for-profit
corporations or other nongovernmental organizations, including
labor-management committees composed of labor, business and community
leaders organized to promote labor-management relations, productivity,
the quality of working life, industrial development, and retention of
business in the community.
 (ii) By December thirty-first, nineteen hundred seventy-three, the
state university trustees shall develop a new formula for the financing
of the operating costs of community colleges. Such formula may include
maximum limitations, regulations, and incentives to achieve compliance
with the code of standards and procedures for community colleges.
 The state university trustees shall present to the governor proposed
legislation incorporating such formula into law for consideration during
the nineteen hundred seventy-four regular session of the legislature.
The state university trustees shall also present a detailed analysis of
the fiscal impact of such a formula on the state and on each community
college within the state.
 Such formula or the amended version thereof, upon enactment into law,
shall replace any limitations and regulations then in existence
concerning the financing of community colleges promulgated pursuant to
this section.
 (iii) The state university trustees shall, on or before December
thirty-first in each year, make a report to the governor and legislature
as to the status of community college programs and curricula provided
for in article one hundred twenty-six of this chapter. Such report shall
also contain recommendations for any revision or alteration in the
formula for financing the operating costs of community colleges.
 (iv) The state university trustees shall promulgate regulations,
effective the first day of July, nineteen hundred seventy-four, which
shall include a code of standards and procedures for the administration
and operation of community colleges. Such code of standards and
procedures, may include, but not be limited to, minimum and maximum
standards for academic curricula, minimum and maximum qualitative and
quantitative standards for facilities, and standard administrative
procedures, which may include schedules and formats for the preparation
and submission of annual budgets by the boards of trustees and the local
sponsors to the state university trustees, schedules for local sponsors'
disbursements to the community colleges of their provided shares of
operating costs and systems of accounts for use by the boards of
trustees and the local sponsors of the community colleges. Such
regulations may supplement, replace or amend any limitations and
regulations then in existence promulgated pursuant to this section.
 b-1. (i) Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, for the
community college fiscal year two thousand thirteen--two thousand
fourteen and thereafter, each program that confers a credit-bearing
certificate, an associate of occupational studies degree, or an
associate of applied science degree, shall demonstrate that it is
preparing students for current and future job opportunities by
partnering with employers as follows:
 (A) The program is a partnership between the community college and one
or more employers to train and employ students in a specific occupation;
 (B) The program has an advisory committee made up of members of whom
the majority are employers in the occupation or sector, or a related
sector, or is otherwise advised by one or more employers in the
occupation or sector, that employ or will employ workers in the region
where the community college is located, and such committee serves to
advise the community college on the program's curriculum, recruitment,
placement and evaluation so that it remains up-to-date with employer
needs; or
 (C) The program is in a high-tech sector and is in demand for current
or projected job growth, including those sectors identified by the
regional economic development council, and is advised by current or
potential future employers in the occupation or sector.
 (ii) On or before January first, two thousand fourteen for the
community college fiscal year two thousand thirteen--two thousand
fourteen, November first, two thousand fourteen for the community
college fiscal year two thousand fourteen--two thousand fifteen and
November first of each community college fiscal year thereafter, the
state university trustees and the city university trustees shall each
submit a job linkage report to the director of the budget, the chairs of
the senate and assembly higher education committees and the chair of the
senate finance committee and the chair of the assembly ways and means
committee, including an accounting of full time equivalent enrollment in
programs that confer credit-bearing certificates, associate of
occupational studies degrees, or associate of applied science degrees,
in such a form and manner as the director of the budget may require to
verify compliance with subparagraph (i) of this paragraph.
 b-2. (i) Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, within
amounts appropriated for incentive funding, the state university of New
York and city university of New York shall make awards to community
colleges from the next generation NY job linkage program incentive fund
based on measures of student success for all students enrolled in
programs that confer a credit-bearing certificate, an associate of
occupational studies degree, or an associate of applied science degree,
including, but not limited to:
 (A) The number of students who are employed following degree or
certificate completion and their wage gains, if any, as determined by
the department of labor, which shall be given the greatest weighting
among all measures of student success;
 (B) The number of degree completions, certificate completions and
student transfers to other institutions of higher education;
 (C) The number of degree and certificate completions under clause (B)
of this paragraph by students considered academically at-risk due to
economic disadvantage or other factor of under-representation within the
field of study; veterans; and the disabled;
 (D) The number of students who make adequate progress towards
completion of a degree or certificate, which may include accelerated
completion of a developmental education program;
 (E) The number of degree completions in innovative programs designed
to enable students to balance school, work and other personal
responsibilities; and
 (F) The number of students engaged in career and employment
opportunities including apprenticeships, cooperative education programs
or other paid work experience that is an integral part of their academic
program.
 (ii) Awards shall be made on a pro-rata basis in accordance with a
methodology and in a form and manner developed by the director of the
budget, in consultation with the state university and city university.
 (iii) On or before December first of each year, or an alternative date
as determined by the director of the budget in consultation with the
state university and city university, the state university trustees and
the city university trustees shall each submit a plan for approval by
the director of the budget to allocate amounts available for the next
generation NY job linkage program incentive fund in accordance with this
paragraph.
 c. The local sponsor or sponsors shall provide one-half of the amount
of the capital costs, or so much as may be necessary, and one-third or,
in the case of a college implementing a program of full opportunity for
local residents, four-fifteenths of the operating costs, or so much as
may be necessary, by appropriations from general revenues or from funds
derived from special tax levies earmarked in part or whole for such
purposes, by the use of gifts of money or, with the consent of the state
university trustees, by the use of property, gifts of property or by the
furnishing of services or, where a community college region is the local
sponsor, in the manner provided by section sixty-three hundred ten of
this chapter. Where the local sponsor or sponsors provide all or a
portion of its or their share of capital or operating costs in real or
personal property or in services, the valuation of such property and
services for the purpose of determining the amount of state aid shall be
made by the state university trustees with the approval of the director
of the budget. Local sponsors and, in the case of community college
regions, any county, city or school district which has appointed members
to a community college regional board of trustees may authorize the
issuance of bonds or notes pursuant to the provisions of the local
finance law to provide any portion or all of its requisite share of such
costs for which a period of probable usefulness has been established in
the local finance law. Where a county or city is the local sponsor of a
community college, or appoints members to a community college regional
board of trustees, the expenditures of the county or city for the
college, or community college region, shall be a purpose of the county
or city provided, however, that taxes to pay the local sponsor's share
of operating costs, or the operating shares of the community college
region charged to the county, may be charged back to the cities and
towns in the county in proportion to the number of students attending
the community college each term who were residents of each such city or
town at the beginning of such term.
 Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, in the case of
community college regions, a community college regional board of
trustees as finance board of the region may authorize the issuance of
bonds, notes or other evidence of indebtedness or the effectuation of a
financing transaction by the community college region with the dormitory
authority pursuant to the provisions of article eight of title four of
the public authorities law to provide all or any portion of such costs
for which a period of possible usefulness has been established in the
local finance law. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the
community college region shall itself have the power to borrow money for
specific objects or purposes or a class or classes of objects or
purposes described in section 11.00 of the local finance law by
adoption, by two-thirds of the voting strength of the regional board of
trustees thereof, of a bond resolution as described in section 32.00 of
the local finance law and shall include the recitation described in
section 80.00 of the local finance law. Said bond resolution shall
include the power to enter into financing transactions with the
dormitory authority in accordance with the provisions of article eight
of title four of the public authorities law. Upon adoption and receipt
of the approvals described in subdivision ten of section sixty-three
hundred ten of this article, the community college region shall publish
a legal notice of estoppel as described in section 81.00 of the local
finance law, which shall be applicable to said bond resolution. A
community college region is hereby authorized to pledge any revenues or
other monies to the payment of any obligations issued, or any financing
agreement entered into with the dormitory authority.
 d. Tuition and fees charged students shall be fixed so as not to
exceed in the aggregate more than one-third of the amount of operating
costs of the community college.
 1-b. For the purpose of budgeting and expending funds and for the
purpose of determining eligibility for state financial aid for operating
costs pursuant to subdivision one of this section, subject to rules and
regulations of the state university trustees and the approval of the
director of the budget, the community colleges in the city of New York
sponsored by the board of higher education or by the city of New York
where the board of higher education has been designated as the trustees
of such colleges, shall be treated as a single community college.
 2. Community colleges shall be empowered and authorized through their
boards of trustees, to accept gifts, grants, bequests and devises
absolutely or in trust for such purposes as may be appropriate or proper
for effectuating the programs and objectives of such colleges.
 3. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent any local
sponsor or sponsors from creating and operating community colleges which
exceed maximum cost limitations or allowances prescribed by the state
university trustees, provided however, that the excess costs over such
prescribed limits or allowances shall be borne and paid for or otherwise
made available to or by such sponsors.
 4. Where two or more local sponsors jointly establish and operate a
community college, the local share of the capital costs shall be
apportioned among them according to their respective equalized assessed
valuations or such other factors or bases as may be provided or
prescribed in the plans, standards and regulations prescribed by the
state university trustees. The local share of the operating expenses
shall be apportioned among such joint sponsors in accordance with the
number of students who are residents of their respective areas, or such
other factors as may be prescribed in the plans, standards and
regulations by the state university trustees.
 5. Any community college may, with the consent and approval of its
local legislative body or board, community college regional board of
trustees, or other appropriate governing agency, and the state
university trustees, require lesser tuition charges or fees from persons
who are residents of the sponsoring community, communities or community
college region than the amount necessary in the aggregate to provide
one-third of the operating costs, or provide tuition to such persons
without charge, provided that the local legislative body or board,
community college regional board of trustees or other appropriate
governing agency appropriates sufficient funds, or sufficient funds are
made available from other sources to provide the amount which would
normally be provided by such tuition and fees. Each community college
shall provide that upon request by a student who is an eligible veteran
the payment of tuition and fees, less the amounts payable for such
purposes from scholarships or other financial assistance awarded said
veteran pursuant to article thirteen of this chapter, article one
hundred thirty of this chapter or any other community college, state or
federal financial aid program, shall be deferred in such amounts and
until such times as the several payments of veterans' benefits under the
Veterans' Readjustment Benefit Act of l966, as amended, are received by
the veteran, provided that the veteran has filed a claim for such
benefits and presents to the community college proof of eligibility,
extent of entitlement to benefits and the need for deferral until the
receipt of such benefits.
 5-a. Notwithstanding the provisions of any general, special or local
law to the contrary, the fiscal year of a community college other than
in the city of New York and other than one sponsored by a school
district, shall begin with the first day of September and end with the
thirty-first day of August in each year. All of the provisions of law
fixing times or dates within which or by which certain acts shall be
performed in relation to the preparation and adoption of the budget of a
city or a county, including but not limited to submission of a budget
estimate, filing of a tentative budget, public hearing and adoption of a
budget, shall apply to the budget of a community college sponsored by
such city or county but shall be correspondingly changed, as to time, to
relate to the commencement of the fiscal year of the community college;
provided, however, that after the budget for the community college shall
have been adopted, the local legislative body or board or other
appropriate governing body shall provide for the raising of taxes
required by such budget, without any decrease in amount, in the same
manner and at the same time prescribed by law for the annual levy of
taxes by or for the city or county. All of the provisions of law fixing
times and dates within which or by which certain acts shall be performed
in relation to the preparation and adoption of the budget of a school
district shall apply to the budget of a community college sponsored by a
school district. The provisions of this subdivision shall not apply to
community college regions.
 5-b. Moneys raised by taxation for maintenance of a community college
and moneys received from all other sources for purposes of the community
college, other than in the city of New York, shall be kept separate and
distinct from any other moneys of the sponsor or sponsors and shall not
be used for any other purpose. The amount of taxes levied for
maintenance of a community college shall be credited thereto and made
available therefor within the fiscal year of such community college. The
provisions of this subdivision shall not apply to community college
regions.
 6. The local legislative body or board, or other appropriate governing
agency, other than a community college regional board of trustees, shall
provide the local sponsor's share of the community college operating and
capital costs in conformance with such sponsor's annual budgetary
appropriation, and shall direct that payment of all appropriations for
maintenance of the college be made to the board of trustees of the
college for expenditure by the board, subject to the terms and
conditions of such appropriations appearing in such budget and to such
regulations regarding the custody, deposit, audit and payment thereof as
such local legislative body or board, or other appropriate governing
agency, may deem proper to carry out the terms of the budget; provided
that any local sponsor which, as of January first, nineteen hundred
eighty-eight, provided for audit and payment of charges against the
community college in the same manner as it provides for other charges
against the local sponsor, may continue to do so for a period not to
extend beyond September first, nineteen hundred eighty-nine.
 Such local legislative body or board, or other appropriate governing
agency, shall authorize the board of trustees of the college to elect a
treasurer, establish a bank account or accounts in the name of the
college and deposit therein moneys received or collected by the college,
including moneys appropriated and paid by the local sponsor, moneys
received from tuition, fees, charges, sales of products and services,
and from all other sources. The board of trustees of the college shall,
subject to the requirements specified in or imposed pursuant to this
subdivision, authorize the treasurer to pay all proper bills and
accounts of the college, including salaries and wages, from funds in its
custody. The treasurer shall execute a bond or official undertaking to
the board of trustees of the college in such sum and with such sureties
as that board shall require, the expense of which shall be a college
charge.
 The board of trustees of the college similarly shall authorize the
treasurer to establish and maintain petty cash funds, not in excess of
two hundred dollars each, for specified college purposes or
undertakings, from which may be paid, in advance of audit, properly
itemized and verified or certified bills for materials, supplies or
services furnished to the college for the conduct of its affairs and
upon terms calling for the payment of cash to the vendor upon the
delivery of any such materials or supplies or the rendering of any such
services. Lists of all expenditures made from such petty cash funds
shall be presented to the board of trustees at each regular meeting
thereof, together with the bills supporting such expenditures, for audit
and the board shall direct reimbursement of such petty cash funds from
the appropriate budgetary item or items in an amount equal to the total
of such bills which it shall so audit and allow. Any of such bills or
any portion of any of such bills as shall be disallowed upon audit shall
be the personal responsibility of the treasurer and such official shall
forthwith reimburse such petty cash fund in the amount of such
disallowances.
 The board of trustees of the college shall provide for periodic audits
of all accounts maintained at its direction and render such reports
respecting any and all receipts and expenditures of the college as the
local legislative body or board, or other appropriate governing agency,
may direct.
 7. The board of trustees of the college, or the community college
regional board of trustees may require any bank or banker in which
community college moneys are on deposit or are to be deposited to file
with the board a surety bond payable to the college executed by a surety
company authorized to transact business in this state and securing to
the college the payment of such deposits and the agreed interest
thereon, if any. In lieu of a surety bond, the board may require any
such bank or banker to deposit with it outstanding unmatured obligations
of the United States of America, the state of New York, or of any
municipality or college of the state of New York, as security for such
moneys so deposited; but such obligations shall be subject to the
approval of the board and shall be deposited in such place and held
under such conditions as the board may determine. Every depositary of
college moneys is hereby authorized and empowered to secure deposits of
such moneys as provided in this subdivision.
 8. a. The state shall, in addition to any other funds that may be
appropriated for assistance to community colleges, annually appropriate
and pay
 (i) to the local sponsor of each community college, except a community
college where the local sponsor has entered into an agreement with the
dormitory authority to finance and construct a community college
facility, an amount equal to the aggregate of all rentals and all
payments due and payable to the dormitory authority pursuant to any
lease, sublease, or other agreement entered into between the dormitory
authority and such local sponsor, whether or not such local sponsor
shall be liable therefor, for each twelve-month period beginning on the
next succeeding July first, and
 (ii) to the local sponsor of each community college where the local
sponsor has entered into an agreement with the dormitory authority to
finance and construct a community college facility, an amount equal to
one-half of all rentals and all payments due and payable to the
dormitory authority pursuant to any lease, sublease, or other agreement
entered into between the dormitory authority and such local sponsor,
whether or not such local sponsor shall be liable therefor, for each
twelve-month period beginning on the next succeeding July first,
provided, however, if such a local sponsor shall thereafter agree to
finance the costs of providing all or part of a community college
facility the state shall, instead, annually appropriate and pay to such
local sponsor an amount equal to that portion of all rentals and all
payments due and payable to the dormitory authority during the
twelve-month period beginning on the next succeeding July first pursuant
to any lease, sublease or other agreement providing for such financing
which portion represents the state's share (one-half) of the cost of
each facility being financed, whether or not the local sponsor shall be
liable to pay such rentals and payments, and
 (iii) to the local sponsor of each community college which has
financed the entire capital cost of constructing a community college
facility, an amount equal to one-half of the annual debt service on
obligations issued by such local sponsor for the purpose of constructing
such facility. No local sponsor of a community college shall be eligible
for assistance pursuant to the provisions of this paragraph unless: (a)
a first instance appropriation has been enacted into state law prior to
the commencement of construction; and (b) the state comptroller has
approved the interest rate of any and all obligations issued by such
local sponsor after July twenty-fourth, nineteen hundred seventy-six to
finance the cost of such facility prior to the issuance of such
obligations; and (c) all contracts for the construction of such facility
entered into by such local sponsor after July twenty-fourth, nineteen
hundred seventy-six have been approved by the director of the budget
prior to the awarding of such contracts.
 (iv) notwithstanding any other provision of this paragraph to the
contrary, if the dormitory authority and the state university of New
York shall have entered into an agreement pursuant to subdivision
twenty-one of section sixteen hundred seventy-eight of the public
authorities law and paragraph x of subdivision two of section three
hundred fifty-five of this chapter, the amounts otherwise payable to the
local sponsors of the community colleges pursuant to this subparagraph
on account of the state's share of the cost of each facility being
financed shall be payable to the dormitory authority in accordance with
subdivision five of section ninety-seven-p of the state finance law.
 b. For the purposes of this subdivision, all references to the local
sponsor of a community college shall be deemed, in the case of community
college regions, to refer to those counties, cities or school districts
which have appointed members to a community college regional board of
trustees.
 c. For purposes of this subdivision, the reference to the local
sponsor of a community college may be deemed, in the case of a community
college region, to alternatively refer to the community college regional
board of trustees thereof.
 9. a. Where construction of a community college facility has commenced
pursuant to the provisions of a lease, sublease or other agreement with
the dormitory authority or prior to July twenty-fourth, nineteen hundred
seventy-six, the local sponsor of such community college may elect to
finance the entire capital cost of constructing such facility pursuant
to the provisions of subdivision ten of this section, provided, however,
that the proceeds of obligations issued by such local sponsor to finance
the capital cost of constructing such facility may be paid to the
dormitory authority to the extent of amounts owing under a lease,
sublease or other agreement with the dormitory authority entered into by
such local sponsor with respect to such facility, and provided further
that any such local sponsor which elected to refinance the entire
capital cost of constructing a community college facility pursuant to
the provisions of this subdivision, may, at the time it enters into
permanent financing of such facility, elect to do so pursuant to the
provisions of the dormitory authority act or subdivision ten of this
section.
 b. For the purposes of this subdivision, all references to the local
sponsor of a community college shall be deemed, in the case of community
college regions, to refer to those counties, cities or school districts
which have appointed members to a community college regional board of
trustees.
 10. a. Each local sponsor of a community college shall have full power
and authority to finance all or a portion of the capital costs of a
community college facility pursuant to the provisions of the local
finance law and to expend the proceeds therefrom to pay such costs.
 b. For the purposes of this subdivision, the reference to the local
sponsor of a community college shall be deemed, in the case of community
college regions, to refer to those counties, cities or school districts
which have appointed members to a community college regional board of
trustees.
 c. A community college region shall have full power and authority to
finance all or a portion of the capital costs of a regional community
college facility pursuant to the provisions of article eight of title
four of the public authorities law and to expend the proceeds therefrom
to pay such costs.
 11. a. The following terms, when used or referred to in this
subdivision, shall have the following meaning:
 (i) "Credit card" means any credit card, credit plate, charge card,
charge plate, courtesy card, debit card, other identification card,
value transfer device as defined by the state comptroller or device
issued by a person to another person which may be used to obtain a cash
advance or a loan or credit, or to purchase or lease property or
services on the credit of the person issuing the credit card or a person
who has agreed with the issuer to pay obligations arising from the use
of a credit card issued to another person.
 (ii) "Card issuer" means an issuer of a credit card, charge card or
other value transfer device.
 (iii) "Financing agency" means any agency defined as such in
subdivision eighteen of section four hundred one of the personal
property law.
 (iv) "Person" means an individual, partnership, corporation or any
other legal or commercial entity.
 b. The board of trustees of any community college may determine, by
resolution, that it is in the public interest to authorize such
community college to enter into agreements with one or more financing
agencies or card issuers to provide for the acceptance, by such officers
of the community college as may be designated pursuant to this
subdivision, of credit cards as a means of payment of tuition, expenses,
fees, charges, revenue, financial obligations or other amounts owed by
students to the community college. Any such agreement shall govern the
terms and conditions upon which a credit card proffered as a means of
payment of tuition, expenses, fees, charges, revenue, financial
obligations or other amounts shall be accepted or declined and the
manner in and conditions upon which the financing agency or card issuer
shall pay to such community college the amount of tuition, expenses,
fees, charges, revenue, financial obligations or other amounts paid by
means of a credit card pursuant to such agreement. Any such agreement
may provide for the payment by such community college to such financing
agency or card issuer of fees for the services provided by such
financing agency or card issuer pursuant to such agreement, which fees
may consist of a discount deducted from or payable in respect of the
amount of each such tuition, expense, fee, charge, revenue, financial
obligation or other amount. If fees are paid by such a discount, they
shall be post-audited by the officer or board of the community college
responsible for auditing claims against the community college.
 c. Any community college which has entered into an agreement with a
financing agency or card issuer as authorized by this subdivision may
accept credit cards as a means of payment of tuition, expenses, fees,
charges, revenue, financial obligations or other amounts, as provided in
such agreement and may pay such fees as are specified in such agreement
to such financing agency or card issuer in consideration of the services
rendered by such financing agency or card issuer thereunder.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, it shall be
the option of the board of trustees of the community college to require,
as a condition of accepting payment by credit card, that such person
offering payment by credit or charge card pay a service fee to the
community college not exceeding costs incurred by the community college
in connection with the credit or charge card payment transaction,
including any fee owed by the community college to the financing agency
or card issuer arising from that transaction.
 d. Contracts entered into pursuant to this subdivision between
community college and financing agencies or card issuers shall be
awarded in accordance with the community college's written internal
policies and procedures governing procurements.
 e. The underlying debt, lien, obligation, bill, account or other
amount owed by the student to the community college for which payment by
credit card is accepted by the community college shall not be expunged,
cancelled, released, discharged or satisfied, and any receipt or other
evidence of payment shall be deemed conditional, until the community
college has received final and unconditional payment of the full amount
due from the financing agency or card issuer for such credit card
transaction.
 f. The board of trustees, in enacting a resolution pursuant to this
subdivision, shall designate which of its officers, charged with the
duty of collecting or receiving moneys on behalf of the community
college, shall be authorized to accept credit cards as a means of
payment of tuition, expenses, fees, charges, revenue, financial
obligations and other amounts.
 g. Under circumstances where community colleges are otherwise
authorized by law to contract for the collection of tuition, expenses,
fees, charges, revenue, financial obligations or other amounts, such
contract shall provide that the contractor accept credit cards as a
mechanism for payment.
 12. a. Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, whenever an
officer of a community college is authorized pursuant to law to disburse
or transfer on behalf of the community college funds in the custody of
the officer, that officer shall be authorized to disburse or transfer
such funds by means of electronic or wire transfer. Such disbursement
shall be otherwise subject to applicable laws, provided that:
 (i) the board of trustees of the community college has entered into a
written agreement with the bank or trust company in which such funds
have been deposited, prescribing the manner in which electronic or wire
transfer of such funds shall be accomplished, identifying by number and
name those accounts from which electronic or wire transfers may be made,
identifying which officer or officers are authorized to order the
electronic or wire transfer of funds from those accounts, and
implementing a security procedure as defined in section 4-A-201 of the
uniform commercial code; and
 (ii) the bank or trust company processing the transfer shall provide
to the officer ordering the electronic or wire transfer of funds written
confirmation of each such transaction no later than the business day
following the day on which the funds are transmitted.
 b. It shall be the duty of the board of trustees of the community
college to adopt a system of internal controls for the documentation and
reporting of all transfers or disbursements of funds accomplished by
electronic or wire transfer.
 13. a. The board of trustees of any community college may determine,
by resolution, that it is in the public interest and authorize such
community college to provide for the acceptance of tuition, expenses,
fees, charges, revenue, financial obligations or other amounts via a
community college internet website. However, submission via the internet
may not be required as the sole method for the collection of tuition,
expenses, fees, charges and other amounts. Such payments shall be
accepted via the internet in a manner and condition defined by such
community college. Any method used to receive internet payments shall
comply with article one of the state technology law and any rules and
regulations promulgated and guidelines developed thereunder and, at a
minimum must:
 (i) authenticate the identity of the sender; and
 (ii) ensure the security of the information transmitted.
 b. Payments received via the internet shall be considered received by
the appropriate officer and paid by the payor at the time the internet
transaction is completed and sent by the payor.
 c. The underlying debt, lien, obligation, bill, account or other
amount owed by the student to the community college for which payment by
internet is accepted by the community college shall not be expunged,
cancelled, released, discharged or satisfied, and any receipt or other
evidence of payment shall be deemed conditional, until the community
college has received final and unconditional payment of the full amount
due.
 d. The board of trustees, in enacting a resolution pursuant to this
subdivision, shall designate which of its officers, charged with the
duty of collecting or receiving moneys on behalf of the community
college, shall be authorized to accept such payments via the internet.
 § 6304-A. Reports to local sponsors. The commissioner shall provide
the local sponsor or sponsors with a copy of each program review report
of the sponsored community college prepared by the department pursuant
to this chapter. The comptroller shall provide the local sponsor or
sponsors with a copy of each final audit or final report on the
sponsored community college prepared by the department of audit and
control. The president of the higher education services corporation
shall provide the local sponsor or sponsors with a copy of each report
of a financial aid program review of the sponsored community college.
 § 6305. Non-resident and out-of-state students. 1. In addition to
admitting residents of its own local sponsor or sponsors, each community
college shall, within the quota and under the conditions prescribed by
the state university trustees, admit non-resident students and
out-of-state students.
 2. Any community college may, with the approval of the state
university trustees, charge non-resident students sufficient tuition and
fees to cover an allocable portion of the local sponsor's share of the
operating costs of such community college in addition to regular tuition
and fees. Such community college may elect to charge to and collect
from each county within the state which has issued a certificate or
certificates of residence pursuant to subdivision three of this section
on the basis of which such non-resident students are attending such
community college, an allocable portion of the local sponsor's share of
the operating costs of such community college attributable to such
non-resident students, computed on a per student basis, together with a
further sum of not to exceed three hundred dollars each year to be
determined and approved by the state university trustees for each such
non-resident student on account of the local sponsor's share of the
capital costs incurred to provide facilities in which such non-resident
students can be accommodated; or, where such non-resident students come
from communities which have elected to participate in and pay an
appropriate share of the expenses involved in the local sponsor's
community college program, such allocable portion of operating expenses
and such further sum not to exceed three hundred dollars per student for
capital costs on account of their residents attending such community
college shall be determined and approved by the state university
trustees, and be charged to and collected from such communities.
 3. The chief fiscal officer of each county, as defined in section 2.00
of the local finance law, shall, upon application and submission to such
chief fiscal officer of satisfactory evidence in-person or
electronically, issue to any person desiring to enroll in a community
college as a non-resident student, a certificate of residence form
showing that said person is a resident of said county. No such chief
fiscal officer shall require a person desiring to enroll in a community
college as a non-resident student to disclose or furnish his or her
social security number. If the chief fiscal officer of a county refuses
to issue such a certificate on the ground that the person applying
therefor is not a resident of such county, the person applying may
appeal, in writing, electronically or by mail, to the chancellor of the
state university. The chancellor of the state university, or such
officers or employees thereof as shall be designated by the chancellor
in a manner authorized by the state university trustees, shall make a
determination after a hearing, upon ten days' notice to such chief
fiscal officer of the county, and such determination shall be final and
binding on the county. Such person shall, upon registration for each
college year, file with the college such a certificate of residence form
issued not earlier than two months prior thereto, and such certificate
of residence form shall be valid for a period of one year from the date
of issuance. The state university trustees shall be authorized to
promulgate regulations to effectuate the provisions of this subdivision.
 4. If, pursuant to subdivision two of this section, a community
college elects to charge to and collect an allocable portion of the
operating costs and a further sum on account of capital costs of such
college from each county which has issued a certificate form or
certificates of residence forms pursuant to subdivision three of this
section, on the basis of which non-resident students are attending such
community college, the president of such community college shall, within
forty-five days after the commencement of each college term or program,
submit to the chief fiscal officer of each county a list of non-resident
students attending such college on the basis of such certificates of
residence form and a voucher for the amount payable by each county for
these students. Such list and voucher shall be determined on the basis
of non-resident students enrolled in the program as of the end (or last
day) of the third week of the commencement for a program scheduled for
one semester, the end of the second for a program scheduled for an
academic quarter and the end of the first week for any program scheduled
to be completed in thirty days or less. The chancellor of the state
university, or such officers or employees thereof as shall be designated
by the chancellor in the manner authorized by the state university
trustees, shall notify the chief fiscal officers of each county of the
approved annual operating and capital charge-back rate for each
community college. The amount billed to the chief fiscal officer of each
county by the president of such community college as a charge for the
allocable portion of the operating costs and a further sum on account of
capital costs of such college for non-resident students shall be paid to
the chief fiscal officer of such college by the billed county no later
than sixty days after the county receives said billing.
 5. Amounts payable to such colleges by a county pursuant to this
section shall be a general county charge; provided, however, that with
respect to the amounts allocable to each community college a county may
charge back such amounts in whole or in part to the cities and towns in
the county in proportion to the number of students who, on the basis of
certificates of residence issued by such county, were attending each
such college as non-residents of the local sponsors thereof during the
terms for which the county has been charged, and who were residents of
each such city or town at the beginning of such terms.
 7. In the case of counties comprising the city of New York, references
in this section to a county shall mean the city of New York and
references in this section to the chief fiscal officer of a county shall
mean the comptroller of the city of New York.
 8. Part-time and out-of-state students shall be charged such tuition
and fees as may be approved by the state university trustees. Any
student attending a community college who is a member or the spouse or
the dependent of a member of the armed forces of the United States on
full-time active duty and stationed in this state, whether or not a
resident of this state, shall be charged the tuition rate for residents
as approved by the state university trustees. Any student attending a
community college in accordance with the federal GI bills and in
compliance with all applicable eligibility requirements thereof, whether
or not a resident of this state, shall be charged the tuition rate for
residents as approved by the state university trustees. Any student
attending a community college who is the spouse or the dependent of a
member of the armed forces of the United States on full-time active duty
and not stationed in this state immediately following being stationed
therein, whether or not a resident of this state, shall be charged the
tuition rate for residents as approved by the state university trustees.
 8-a. The payment of tuition and other fees and charges of a student
who is attending a community college and who is not a legal resident of
New York state but is a United States citizen, a permanent lawful
resident, an individual who is granted U or T non-immigrant status
pursuant to the Victims of Trafficking and Violence Protection Act of
2000, a person granted temporary protected status pursuant to the
Federal Immigration Act of 1990, an individual of a class of refugees
paroled by the attorney general of the United States under his or her
parole authority pertaining to the admission of noncitizens to the
United States, or an applicant without lawful immigration status may be
reduced by state-aided programs, scholarships and other financial
assistance awarded under the provisions of articles thirteen,
thirteen-A, fourteen and fourteen-A of this chapter, provided that the
student meets the requirements set forth in subparagraph (ii) of
paragraph a or subparagraph (ii) of paragraph b of subdivision five of
section six hundred sixty-one of this chapter, as applicable.
 9. A community college may expend moneys collected as capital charges
received from counties of nonresident students for up to one-half the
purchase price of equipment. A community college may include up to
one-half the purchase price of equipment in calculating capital charges
collected from counties of nonresident students. Such expenditures shall
be made pursuant to guidelines promulgated in rules and regulations of
the board of trustees of the state university. In no event shall such
expenditures qualify for state aid as capital costs.
 10. On or before March thirty-first, nineteen hundred ninety-five and
every year thereafter, the state shall reimburse each county which has
issued a certificate of residence for any non-resident student in
attendance at the fashion institute of technology during the nineteen
hundred ninety-three--ninety-four academic year and every year
thereafter in an amount equal to fifty percent of the actual amount paid
by such county on behalf of such students and on or before June first,
nineteen hundred ninety-five and every year thereafter, the state shall
reimburse each county for the remaining fifty percent of the actual
amount paid by each such county on behalf of such students.
 12. Such calculated chargeback rates shall be set on an academic year
basis and shall not vary by semester within each academic year, and no
retroactive charge shall be billed to any county based on an increased
chargeback rate after the commencement of each annual academic year.
 13. Beginning in the two thousand fourteen--two thousand fifteen
academic year, the state university of New York and the city university
of New York shall develop an on-line training program to be made
available to each county treasurer and/or financial officer, to provide
information regarding chargeback fees and guidance concerning common
forms, timelines, and policies relating to chargeback fees and the
payment thereof.
 14. Beginning in the two thousand fourteen--two thousand fifteen
academic year, the state university of New York and the city university
of New York shall assist in the development and implementation of an
on-line or electronic billing system, to be available to the counties of
this state, for the payment of chargeback fees.
 § 6306. Administration of community colleges--boards of trustees. 1.
Each community college, except in the city of New York, shall be
administered by a board of trustees of ten members, nine of whom shall
be appointed for terms of seven years in annual rotation, and one member
elected as herein provided, except that initial appointments shall be
made for terms of one to nine years respectively. Five members shall be
appointed by the local legislative body or board, or other appropriate
governing agency, one of whom may be a member of such local legislative
body or board, or other appropriate governing agency, four, from among
persons residing in the sponsoring community, by the governor and one
member elected by and from among the students of the college who shall
serve as a member of the board for a one-year term, provided, however,
that the term of the student member first elected shall be nine months
commencing October first, nineteen hundred seventy-five. The student
member shall be afforded the same parliamentary privileges as are
conferred upon voting members, including but not limited to the right to
make and second motions and to place items on the agenda. Such student
member shall be subject to every provision of any general, special or
local law, ordinance, charter, code, rule or regulation applying to the
members of such board with respect to the discharge of their duties
including, but not limited to, those provisions setting forth codes of
ethics, disclosure requirements and prohibiting business and
professional activities. The election of the student member shall be
conducted in accordance with rules and regulations promulgated by the
respective representative campus student association in accordance with
guidelines established by the state university trustees. In the event
that the student member ceases to be a student at the institution, he
shall be required to resign. The governor's initial appointments shall
be for terms of two, four, six and eight years respectively and those by
local authorities for terms of one, three, five, seven and nine years
respectively. Vacancies shall be filled for unexpired terms in the same
manner as original selections by the authority responsible for the
original selection. The board shall select its own chairman from among
its voting membership. Where two or more local sponsors join in the
establishment of a community college, the apportionment of the
appointments among them shall be made by the state university trustees.
Trustees shall receive no compensation for their services but shall be
reimbursed for their expenses actually and necessarily incurred by them
in the performance of their duties under this article. Members initially
appointed or elected under this subdivision to the board of trustees of
any community college hereafter established shall take office
immediately upon their selection and qualification, but for purposes of
determining the expiration of their respective terms and the
commencement of the terms of their successors, the term of office of
each such initial member shall be deemed to have commenced on the first
day of July of the year in which such college was established. The terms
of office of all members of the boards of trustees of community colleges
heretofore established, appointed or elected as provided in this
subdivision, shall terminate on the thirtieth day of June of the
calendar year within which such terms expire under the provisions of
this subdivision as hereby amended. For the purpose of determining such
year all initial terms of office of appointed members of the boards of
trustees of community colleges heretofore established shall be deemed to
have commenced on the first day of July of the year in which such
colleges were established and the terms of their successors for full
terms, if any, shall be deemed to have commenced upon the expiration of
the number of years from such date for which such initial appointments
were made.
 The one member elected by and from among the students of the college
may be removed by such students in accordance with rules and regulations
promulgated by the respective representative campus student association
in accordance with guidelines promulgated by the state university
trustees. In the case of community colleges in the city of New York the
year in which any such college was established for the purposes of this
subdivision shall mean the year in which it was or may be determined
that its board of trustees be appointed and serve in the manner provided
by this subdivision.
 The provisions of this subdivision shall not apply to community
college regional boards of trustees.
 1-a. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision one of this
section, the term of office of a member of the board of trustees of
Rockland Community College appointed by the local legislative body or
board shall be five years.
 2. The board of trustees of each community college shall appoint a
president for the college, subject to approval by the state university
trustees, and it shall appoint or delegate to the president the
appointment of other members of the staff. The staff of a community
college shall consist of the professional service and the
non-professional service. The professional service shall include
positions requiring the performance of educational functions in
agriculture, home economics, liberal and applied arts and sciences,
engineering, technical skills, crafts, business education, medicine,
dentistry, nursing, academic administration, library service, student
activities, student personnel services, and other professions required
to carry on the work of the community colleges. The non-professional
service shall consist of all positions not in the professional service.
The board of trustees of each community college shall adopt curricula,
subject to the approval of the state university trustees, prepare a
budget and, with the exception of community college regional boards of
trustees, submit such budget for approval by the local legislative body
or board, or other appropriate governing agency and, subject to the
general supervision of the state university trustees, discharge such
other duties as may be appropriate or necessary for the effective
operation of the college. Where the city of New York is the local
sponsor of a community college, salaries fixed by the board of trustees
of such college shall be in accordance with salary schedules approved by
the mayor of that city.
 3. In the city of New York, upon the establishment of a community
college sponsored by the board of education, the sponsoring board shall
be the trustees and shall be vested with the powers of a board of
trustees of a community college, or upon the application of the
sponsoring board, approved by the state university trustees, the board
of trustees of such community college may be appointed and serve in the
manner provided by subdivision one of this section; and upon the
establishment and continuance of a community college sponsored by the
city of New York, the local sponsor may designate the board of education
in that city as the trustee to be vested with the powers of a board of
trustees of a community college, or the local sponsor may provide that
the board of trustees of such community college shall be appointed and
serve in the manner provided by subdivision one of this section. In the
event that the board of education serves as the board of trustees of a
community college in the city of New York, its powers and duties in
relation thereto shall be as prescribed in this article for boards of
trustees of community colleges. In the city of New York, the board of
trustees of the fashion institute of technology shall, under such
by-laws as such board deems appropriate, provide for the eligibility for
sabbatical leaves of absence to members of its permanent instructional
staff; provided, however, that when such leaves are for one-half year,
they shall be at full pay, and when such leaves are for one year, they
shall be at half pay.
 3-a. (a) Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivisions one and three
of this section, effective July first, two thousand eight, the fashion
institute of technology shall be administered by a board of trustees of
twelve members. Six members shall be appointed by the local sponsor, one
of whom may be a member of such sponsor; five members shall be appointed
by the governor from among persons who reside in the city of New York;
and one member shall be elected by and from among the students of the
fashion institute of technology.
 (b) The provisions of subdivisions one and three of this section
notwithstanding, effective July first, two thousand nine, the fashion
institute of technology shall be administered by a board of trustees of
fourteen members. Seven members shall be appointed by the local sponsor,
one of whom may be a member of such sponsor; six members shall be
appointed by the governor from among persons who reside in the city of
New York; and one member shall be elected by and from among the students
of the fashion institute of technology.
 (c) The provisions of subdivisions one and three of this section
notwithstanding, effective July first, two thousand ten, the fashion
institute of technology shall be administered by a board of trustees of
sixteen members. Eight members shall be appointed by the local sponsor,
one of whom may be a member of such sponsor; seven members shall be
appointed by the governor from among persons who reside in the city of
New York; and one member shall be elected by and from among the students
of the fashion institute of technology.
 3-b. The board of trustees of each community college, and those
provided for in the city of New York by subdivision three of this
section, shall adopt a policy for admission of students who have
completed an online high school program located within the United States
consistent with the provisions of subparagraph eleven of paragraph h of
subdivision two of section three hundred fifty-five of this chapter.
 4. The board of trustees of each community college may acquire by
deed, gift, devise, bequest or lease, real or personal property suitable
for carrying out the program and purposes of the college, and pursuant
to regulations prescribed by the state university trustees may apply any
income that may be derived therefrom to the maintenance thereof; but no
lands, grounds, buildings, facilities or equipment shall be purchased or
leased unless an appropriation has been made, therefor, or unless
otherwise authorized by law. Title to personal property so acquired
shall vest in such board of trustees in its own name and such property
shall be held and used by such board for college purposes. Title to real
property so acquired shall vest in and be held by the local sponsor in
trust for the uses and purposes of the community college. Where a
community college region is the local sponsor of a community college,
title to real and personal property shall vest in the community college
regional board of trustees. The use of real or personal property given
to the board of trustees of any community college, or of the income
therefrom, to provide any part of the local sponsor's share of capital
or operating costs shall be subject to the consent of the state
university trustees and such regulations as they may prescribe.
 5. The board of trustees shall have the care, custody, control and
management of the lands, grounds, buildings, facilities and equipment
used for the purposes of such college and of all other property
belonging to such college and used for carrying out its purposes, and it
shall have power to protect, preserve and improve the same.
 5-a. a. The board of trustees of each community college shall have the
authority to appoint security officers for the community college and, in
its discretion, to designate or to revoke the designation of one or more
than one security officer as a peace officer. A security officer so
designated shall have the powers of a peace officer as set forth in
section 2.20 of the criminal procedure law. A security officer
designated as a peace officer must have satisfactorily completed or
complete, within one year of the date of such designation, a course of
law enforcement training prescribed by the municipal police training
council in consultation with the state university board of trustees. A
peace officer so designated may possess and carry a firearm as a part of
on duty employment only if authorized to do so by the president of the
community college. The geographical area of employment of a peace
officer so designated is the campus and other property of the community
college at which the peace officer serves, including that portion of a
public highway which crosses or abuts such property, and residential or
other facilities owned, operated, or maintained by a not-for-profit
entity associated with the community college for which such community
college provides security.
 b. The appointment of security officers at a community college shall
be governed by and conform with civil service laws, rules and
regulations, if applicable to the community college and its employees.
The designation of a security officer as a peace officer shall be based
on qualifications established by the community college board of
trustees, and in accordance with seniority. For purposes of this
subdivision, "seniority" means total employment service with the
community college making such designation.
 c. A security officer who has been designated a peace officer may have
such designation suspended or removed pursuant to procedures established
by the community college or in compliance with any local collective
bargaining agreement, if applicable to the community college and its
employees.
 d. The designation of peace officers pursuant to this subdivision
shall not be deemed to supersede in any way the authority of other peace
officers and police officers.
 e. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to: (i) alter
any existing collective bargaining agreement; (ii) diminish the rights
of employees pursuant to an existing collective bargaining agreement;
(iii) affect existing law with respect to an application to the public
employment relations board seeking designation by the board that certain
persons are managerial or confidential; or (iv) alter or restrict the
power of a county or community college sponsor or employee organization
to negotiate with respect to an alternate method of appointment or
promotion of security officers.
 5-b. Subject to the approval of the board of regents, the board of
trustees shall have the authority to grant honorary associate degrees.
 6. The board of trustees shall have such other powers and perform such
other duties as may be provided by law or prescribed by the state
university trustees.
 7. Subject to the approval of the local sponsor acting through its
local legislative body or board, or other appropriate governing agency,
and pursuant to such regulations and limitations as may be established
and prescribed by the state university trustees, the board of trustees
of each community college may enter into any contract or agreement
deemed necessary or appropriate for the effective operation of the
college, (1) including contracts or agreements entered into with the
federal government to enable participation in federal student loan
programs, including any and all instruments required thereunder;
provided, however, that the sponsor shall not be liable for any portion
of any defaults which it has agreed to assume pursuant to any such
agreement in an amount in excess of money appropriated or otherwise
lawfully available therefor at the time the liability for payment
arises, and (2) including contracts with non-profit corporations
organized by officers, employees, alumni or students of the college for
the furtherance of its objects and purposes. Notwithstanding the
provisions of any other law, general, special or local, such contracts
entered into with such non-profit corporation shall not be subject to
any requirement that contracts be let to the lowest responsible bidder
after advertisement for bids. Nothing contained in this subdivision
shall be deemed to diminish or impair any powers or authority otherwise
vested in the board of trustees of any community college. The provisions
of this subdivision shall not apply to community college regional boards
of trustees.
 8. Subject to the approval of the local sponsor acting through its
local legislative body or board, or other appropriate governing agency,
and pursuant to such regulations and limitations as may be established
and prescribed by the state university trustees with the approval of the
director of the budget, the board of trustees of each community college
may participate in cooperative educational programs, services and
arrangements with colleges, universities, school districts, boards of
cooperative educational services, libraries, museums and join any
cooperative association of such educational institutions formed as a
corporation pursuant to section two hundred sixteen of this chapter. The
provisions of this subdivision shall not apply to community college
regional boards of trustees.
 8-a. a. The board of trustees shall, on or before January first, two
thousand, adopt and implement a plan providing for the investigation of
any violent felony offense occurring at or on the grounds of each such
institution, and providing for the investigation of a report of any
missing student. Such plans shall provide for the coordination of the
investigation of such crimes and reports with local law enforcement
agencies. Such plans shall include, but not be limited to, written
agreements with appropriate local law enforcement agencies providing for
the prompt investigation of such crimes and reports and a requirement
that the institution shall notify the appropriate law enforcement agency
as soon as practicable but in no case more than twenty-four hours after
a report of a violent felony or that a student who resides in housing
owned or operated by such institution is missing; provided that each
institution shall: (1) inform each victim of a sexual offense of their
options to notify proper law enforcement authorities, including
on-campus and local police; (2) inform the victim of a sexual offense of
the right to report or not to report such offense to the local law
enforcement agencies; and (3) offer the option to be assisted by campus
authorities in notifying such authorities, if the victim of sexual
assault so chooses, all in compliance with applicable federal law,
including, but not limited to, the federal Campus Sexual Assault
Victims' Bill of Rights under Title 20 U.S. Code Section 1092(f).
 b. As used in this subdivision, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
 (i) "Local law enforcement agencies" means any agency or agencies
employing peace officers or police officers for the enforcement of the
laws of the state, and which has or have jurisdiction under provisions
of the criminal procedure law over offenses occurring at or on the
grounds of any institution subject to the provisions of this
subdivision.
 (ii) "Missing student" means any student of an institution subject to
the provisions of this subdivision, who resides in a facility owned or
operated by such institution and who is reported to such institution as
missing from his or her residence.
 (iii) "Violent felony offense" means a violent felony offense as
defined in subdivision one of section 70.02 of the penal law.
 9. In the case of colleges sponsored by community college regions,
references in subdivisions two, four, five, six and eight-a of this
section to the board of trustees of a community college shall mean the
community college regional board of trustees.
 10. The boards of trustees of the state university of New York
community colleges shall consult with boards of cooperative educational
services (BOCES) to identify new or existing programs offered to
students that would allow a student to pursue an associate of
occupational studies (AOS) degree from a community college upon high
school graduation. Once identified, BOCES in collaboration with the
community college boards of trustees shall make such path, identified
programs, and AOS degree options known to ensure that students are aware
that such options exist. Such notification shall begin in the eighth
grade, and include the provision of materials on AOS degree options to
school counselors in each school district in such region. Provided
however, that such boards and BOCES shall not take any action to direct
or suggest that a student should pursue a particular degree or pathway.
 11. The board of trustees of each community college shall adopt
written policies requiring that all public single-occupancy bathroom
facilities be designated as gender neutral for use by no more than one
occupant at a time or for family or assisted use. Such gender neutral
bathroom facilities shall be clearly designated by the posting of such
on or near the entry door of each facility. For purposes of this
section, "single-occupancy bathroom" shall have the same meaning as
paragraph (d) of subdivision one of section one hundred forty-five of
the public buildings law.
 * 12. (a) The use of artificial intelligence systems, as defined by
section one hundred three-e of the state technology law, shall not
affect (i) the existing rights of employees pursuant to a collective
bargaining agreement; or (ii) the existing representational
relationships among employee organizations or the bargaining
relationships between the employer and an employee organization.
 (b) The use of such artificial intelligence systems shall not result
in the: (i) discharge, displacement or loss of position, including
partial displacement such as a reduction in the hours of non-overtime
work, wages, or employment benefits, or result in the impairment of
collective bargaining agreements; or
 (ii) transfer of existing duties and functions currently performed by
employees of each community college to an artificial intelligence
system.
 (c) The use of an artificial intelligence system shall not alter the
rights or benefits, and privileges, including but not limited to terms
and conditions of employment, civil service status, and collective
bargaining unit membership status of all existing employees of each
community college shall be preserved and protected.
 * NB Repealed July 1, 2028
 § 6307. Establishment of state-aided four-year colleges. 1. Upon
recommendation of the state university trustees, counties or adjoining
cities not now adequately served by any four-year college programs, may
be empowered singly or jointly to establish and operate four-year
college programs. Such colleges shall be financed and administered in a
manner similar to that provided for community colleges herein.
 § 6308. Defense and indemnification of community college trustees,
officers and employees. 1. As used in this section, the term "employee"
shall mean any person holding a position by appointment or employment in
the service of a community college, whether or not compensated, or a
volunteer expressly authorized to participate in a community college
sponsored volunteer program, but shall not include an independent
contractor. The term employee shall include a former employee, his
estate or judicially appointed personal representative.
 2. (a) Upon compliance by the employee with the provisions of
subdivision four of this section, the local sponsor of a community
college shall provide for the defense of the employee in any civil
action or proceeding in any state or federal court arising out of any
alleged act or omission which occurred or is alleged in the complaint to
have occurred while the employee was acting within the scope of his
public employment or duties, or which is brought to enforce a provision
of section nineteen hundred eighty-one or nineteen hundred eighty-three
of title forty-two of the United States code and the act or omission
underlying the action occurred or is alleged in the complaint to have
occurred while the employee was acting within the scope of his public
employment or duties. This duty to provide for a defense shall not arise
where such civil action or proceeding is brought by or on behalf of the
local sponsor.
 (b) Subject to the conditions set forth in paragraph (a) of this
subdivision, the employee shall be entitled to be represented by the
local sponsor provided, however, that the employee shall be entitled to
representation by private counsel of his choice in any civil judicial
proceeding whenever the local sponsor determines based upon its
investigation and review of the facts and circumstances of the case that
representation by the local sponsor would be inappropriate, or whenever
a court of competent jurisdiction, upon appropriate motion or otherwise
by a special proceeding, determines that a conflict of interest exists
and that the employee is entitled to be represented by private counsel
of his choice. The local sponsor shall notify the employee in writing of
such determination that the employee is entitled to be represented by
private counsel. The local sponsor may require, as a condition to
payment of the fees and expenses of such representation, that
appropriate groups of such employees be represented by the same counsel.
The local sponsor shall certify to its chief fiscal officer that the
employee or group of employees is entitled to representation by private
counsel under the provisions of this section. Reasonable attorneys' fees
and litigation expenses shall be paid by the local sponsor to such
private counsel from time to time during the pendency of the civil
action or proceeding subject to certification that the employee is
entitled to representation under the terms and conditions of this
section by the board of trustees of the community college at which such
employee is employed and upon the audit and warrant of the chief fiscal
officer of the sponsor. Any dispute with respect to representation of
multiple employees by a single counsel or the amount of litigation
expenses or the reasonableness of attorneys' fees shall be resolved by
the court upon motion or by way of a special proceeding.
 (c) Where the employee delivers process and a request for a defense to
the local sponsor as required by subdivision four of this section, the
sponsor shall take the necessary steps including the retention of
private counsel under the terms and conditions provided in paragraph (b)
of this subdivision on behalf of the employee to avoid entry of a
default judgment pending resolution of any question pertaining to the
obligation to provide for a defense.
 3. (a) The local sponsor shall indemnify and save harmless its
employees in the amount of any judgment obtained against such employees
in any state or federal court, or in the amount of any settlement of a
claim, or shall pay such judgement or settlement; provided, that the act
or omission from which such judgment or settlement arose occurred while
the employee was acting within the scope of his public employment or
duties; the duty to indemnify and save harmless or pay prescribed by
this subdivision shall not arise where the injury or damage resulted
from intentional wrongdoing or recklessness on the part of the employee.
 (b) An employee represented by the local sponsor or by private counsel
pursuant to this section shall cause to be submitted to the board of
trustees of the community college at which he is employed any proposed
settlement which may be subject to indemnification or payment by the
local sponsor and if not inconsistent with the provisions of this
section such board of trustees of the community college at which he is
employed shall certify such settlement, and submit such settlement and
certification to the local sponsor. The local sponsor shall review such
proposed settlement as to form and amount, and shall give its approval
if in its judgment the settlement is in the best interest of the local
sponsor and the community college. Nothing in this subdivision shall be
construed to authorize the local sponsor to indemnify and save harmless
an employee with respect to a settlement or pay any such settlement not
so reviewed and approved.
 (c) Nothing in this subdivision shall authorize the local sponsor to
indemnify and save harmless an employee with respect to punitive or
exemplary damages, fines or penalties, or money recovered from an
employee pursuant to section fifty-one of the general municipal law;
provided, however, that the local sponsor shall indemnify and save
harmless its employees in the amount of any costs, attorneys' fees,
damages, fines or penalties which may be imposed by reason of an
adjudication that an employee, acting within the scope of his public
employment or duties, has, without willfulness or intent on his part,
violated a prior order, judgement, consent decree or stipulation of
settlement entered in any court of this state or of the United States.
 (d) Upon entry of a final judgment against the employee, or upon the
settlement of the claim, the employee shall cause to be served a copy of
such judgment or settlement, personally or by certified or registered
mail within thirty days of the date of entry or settlement, upon the
board of trustees of the community college at which he is employed; and
if not inconsistent with the provisions of this section, such judgment
or settlement shall be certified for payment by such board. If the local
sponsor concurs in such certification, the judgment or settlement shall
be paid upon the audit and warrant of the chief fiscal officer of the
local sponsor.
 4. The duty to defend or indemnify and save harmless prescribed by
this section shall be conditioned upon (i) delivery to the local sponsor
at its main business office by the employee of the original or a copy of
any summons, complaint, process, notice, demand or pleading within five
days after he is served with such document, and (ii) the full
cooperation of the employee in the defense of such action or proceeding
and in defense of any action or proceeding against the community college
or local sponsor based upon the same act or omission, and in the
prosecution of any appeal. Such delivery shall be deemed a request by
the employee that the local sponsor provide for his defense pursuant to
this section.
 5. The benefits of this section shall inure only to employees as
defined herein and shall not enlarge or diminish the rights of any other
party nor shall any provision of this section be construed to affect,
alter or repeal any provision of the workers' compensation law.
 6. The provisions of this section shall not in any way affect the
obligation of any claimant to give notice to the local sponsor under any
provision of law.
 7. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to impair,
alter, limit or modify the rights and obligations of any insurer under
any policy of insurance.
 8. The provisions of this section shall apply to all actions and
proceedings pending upon the effective date thereof or thereafter
instituted.
 9. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this section, the
provisions of this section shall not be construed in any way to impair,
alter, limit, modify, abrogate or restrict any immunity available to or
conferred upon any unit, entity, officer or employee of the sponsor or
any other level of government, or any right to defense and/or
indemnification provided for any governmental officer or employee by, in
accordance with, or by reason of, any other provision of state or
federal statutory or common law.
 10. If any provision of this section or the application thereof to any
person or circumstance be held unconstitutional or invalid in whole or
in part by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding of
unconstitutionality or invalidity shall in no way affect or impair any
other provision of this section or the application of any such provision
to any other person or circumstance.
 11. In the case of colleges sponsored by community college regions,
references in this section to the board of trustees of a community
college shall mean the president of colleges sponsored by such regions.
 § 6309. Reimbursement of defense costs incurred by or on behalf of
community college trustees, officers and employees. 1. As used in this
section, unless the context otherwise requires, the term "employee"
shall mean any person holding a position by appointment or employment in
the service of a community college, whether or not compensated, or a
volunteer expressly authorized to participate in a community college
sponsored volunteer program, but shall not include an independent
contractor. The term employee shall include a former employee, his or
her estate, or judicially appointed personal representative.
 2. (a) Upon compliance by the employee with the provisions of
subdivision three of this section, and subject to the conditions set
forth in paragraph (b) of this subdivision, it shall be the duty of the
local sponsor of a community college to pay reasonable attorneys' fees
and litigation expenses incurred by or on behalf of an employee in his
or her defense of a criminal proceeding in a state or federal court
arising out of any act which occurred while such employee was acting
within the scope of his or her public employment or duties, upon his or
her acquittal, or upon the dismissal of the criminal charges against him
or her, or reasonable attorney's fees incurred in connection with an
appearance before a grand jury which returns no true bill against the
employee where such appearance was required as a result of any act which
occurred while such employee was acting within the scope of his or her
public employment or duties unless such appearance occurs in the normal
course of the public employment or duties of such employee.
 (b) Upon the application for reimbursement of reasonable attorneys'
fees or litigation expenses, or both, made by or on behalf of an
employee as provided in subdivision three of this section, the local
sponsor shall determine, based upon its investigation and its review of
the facts and circumstances, whether such reimbursement shall be paid.
The local sponsor shall notify the employee in writing of such
determination. Upon determining that such reimbursement should be
provided, the local sponsor shall so certify to its chief fiscal
officer. Upon such certification, reimbursement shall be made for such
fees or expenses, or both, upon the audit and warrant of the chief
fiscal officer. Any dispute with regard to entitlement to reimbursement
or the amount of litigation expenses or the reasonableness of attorneys'
fees shall be resolved by a court of competent jurisdiction upon
appropriate motion or by way of a special proceeding.
 3. Reimbursement of reasonable attorneys' fees or litigation expenses,
or both, by the local sponsor as prescribed by this section shall be
conditioned upon (a) delivery to the local sponsor at its main business
office by the employee of a written request for reimbursement of
expenses together with, in the case of a criminal proceeding, the
original or a copy of an accusatory instrument within ten days after the
employee is arraigned upon such instrument or, in the case of a grand
jury appearance, written documentation of evidence of such appearance
and (b) the full cooperation of the employee in defense of any action or
proceeding against the community college or local sponsor based upon the
same act, and in the prosecution of any appeal.
 4. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this section, the
provisions of this section shall not be construed in any way to impair,
alter, limit, modify, abrogate, or restrict any immunity available to or
conferred upon any unit, entity, officer, or employee of the sponsor or
any other level of government, or any right to defense and/or
indemnification provided for any governmental officer or employee by, in
accordance with, or by reason of, any other provisions of state or
federal statutory or common law.
 5. If any provision of this section or the application thereof to any
person or circumstance by held unconstitutional or invalid in whole or
in part by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding of
unconstitutionality or invalidity shall in no way affect or impair any
other provision of this section or the application of any such provision
to any other person or circumstances.
 § 6310. Community college regions - administration and finance. 1.
Each community college region and community college sponsored by such
region shall be administered by a single board of trustees of fourteen
members, thirteen of whom shall be appointed for terms of seven years,
as set forth in this subdivision, and one member elected as herein
provided, except that initial appointments shall be made for terms of
one to nine years respectively. Seven members shall be appointed by the
local legislative bodies or boards of those counties eligible to appoint
members to the community college regional board of trustees. The seven
locally appointed members of such board may include one member from the
local legislative body or board of each county eligible to appoint
members to the community college regional board of trustees. Membership
in a community college regional board of trustees shall be apportioned
among the counties participating in such board in accordance with the
number of full-time equivalent students attending a community college
sponsored by such regional board who are residents of the respective
participating counties, and in accordance with such further regulations
as may be prescribed by the state university trustees. Six members shall
be appointed by the governor and one member elected by and from among
the students of the college who shall serve as a member of the board for
a one-year term, provided, however, that the term of the student member
first elected shall be nine months commencing October first, nineteen
hundred eighty-four. The student member shall be afforded the same
parliamentary privileges as are conferred upon members, including but
not limited to the right to make and second motions and to place items
on the agenda. Such student member shall be subject to every provision
of any general, special or local law, ordinance, charter, code, rule or
regulation applying to the members of such board with respect to the
discharge of their duties including, but not limited to, those
provisions setting forth codes of ethics, disclosure requirements and
prohibiting business and professional activities. The election of the
student member shall be conducted in accordance with rules and
regulations promulgated by the respective representative campus student
association in accordance with guidelines established by the state
university trustees. In the event that the student member ceases to be a
student at the institution, he shall be required to resign. The
governor's initial appointments shall be as follows: (a) two individuals
shall be appointed for terms of two and four years respectively; (b) two
individuals for terms of six years and two individuals for terms of
eight years. Appointments by local authorities shall be as follows: (a)
three individuals for terms of one, three and five years, respectively;
(b) two individuals for terms of seven years, and two individuals for
terms of nine years. Vacancies shall be filled for unexpired terms in
the same manner as original selections by the authority responsible for
the original selection. The board shall select its own chairman from
among its voting membership. Trustees shall receive no compensation for
their services but shall be reimbursed for their expenses actually and
necessarily incurred by them in the performance of their duties under
this article. Members initially appointed or elected under this
subdivision to any community college regional board of trustees
hereafter established shall take office immediately upon their selection
and qualification, but for purposes of determining the expiration of
their respective terms and the commencement of the terms of their
successors, the term of office of each such initial member shall be
deemed to have commenced on the first day of July of the year in which
such college was established. The terms of office of all members of
community college regional boards of trustees heretofore established,
appointed or elected as provided in this subdivision, shall terminate on
the thirtieth day of June of the calendar year within which such terms
expire under the provisions of this subdivision as hereby amended. For
the purpose of determining such year all initial terms of office of
appointed members of the community college regional board of trustees
heretofore established shall be deemed to have commenced on the first
day of July of the year in which such community college regions were
established and the terms of their successors for full terms, if any,
shall be deemed to have commenced upon the expiration of the number of
years from such date for which such initial appointments were made.
 The one member elected by and from among the students of the college
may be removed by such students in accordance with rules and regulations
promulgated by the respective representative campus student association
in accordance with guidelines promulgated by the state university
trustees.
 1-a. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision one of this
section, a community college region established to operate as local
sponsor of Jamestown community college shall be administered by a single
board of trustees of fifteen members, fourteen of whom shall be
appointed for terms of seven years, except that the initial appointments
shall be made as set forth in this subdivision, and one member who shall
be elected by and from among the students of the college and shall serve
as set forth in subdivision one of this section. Eight members shall be
appointed by the local governing bodies of the counties and city
eligible to appoint members to the Jamestown community college regional
board of trustees, and six members shall be appointed by the governor.
The eight locally appointed members of such board may include one member
appointed from among the local governing bodies of the counties or city
eligible to appoint members to the regional board of trustees.
Membership in the Jamestown community college regional board of trustees
shall be apportioned in accordance with the number of full-time
equivalent students attending the community college who are residents of
the respective participating counties or city, and in accordance with
such further regulations as may be prescribed by the state university
trustees.
 Upon the effective date of this subdivision, and notwithstanding any
inconsistent provision of any other law, the current Jamestown community
college board of trustees shall be redesignated the Jamestown community
college regional board of trustees and the terms of the current members
of the Jamestown community college board of trustees shall continue
until their expiration or termination as provided by section sixty-three
hundred six of this chapter. The governor's initial appointments to the
Jamestown community college regional board of trustees shall be as
follows: one individual shall be appointed for a term of three years,
and one individual shall be appointed for a term of five years. Initial
appointments by the local authorities shall be as follows: one
individual shall be appointed for a term of two years, one individual
shall be appointed for a term of four years, and one individual shall be
appointed for a term of six years. Vacancies shall be filled for
unexpired terms in the same manner as original selections by the
authority responsible for the original selection. The board shall select
its own chairman from among its voting membership. Trustees shall
receive no compensation for their services but shall be reimbursed for
their expenses actually and necessarily incurred by them in the
performance of their duties under this article. Members initially
appointed or elected under this subdivision to any community college
regional board of trustees hereafter established shall take office
immediately upon their selection and qualification, but for purposes of
determining the expiration of their respective terms and the
commencement of the terms of their successors, the term of office of
each such initial member shall be deemed to have commenced on the first
day of July of the year in which such college was established. The terms
of office of all members of community college regional boards of
trustees heretofore established, appointed or elected as provided in
this subdivision, shall terminate on the thirtieth day of June of the
calendar year within which such terms expire under the provisions of
this subdivision as hereby amended. For the purpose of determining such
year, all initial terms of office of appointed members of the community
college regional board of trustees heretofore established and the terms
of their successors for full terms, if any, shall be deemed to have
commenced upon the expiration of the number of years from such date for
which such initial appointments were made.
 The one member elected by and from among the students of the college
may be removed by such students in accordance with rules and regulations
promulgated by the respective representative campus student association
in accordance with guidelines promulgated by the state university
trustees.
 1-b. Notwithstanding any provision of this article to the contrary,
with regard to the operating costs of the Jamestown community college,
the county of Chautauqua, as a local sponsor of such college, may pay
all such operating costs incurred by such county and may also pay all
such operating costs incurred by any city within such county which is a
local sponsor of such college. The county of Chautauqua may pay all such
operating costs pursuant to this subdivision:
 (a) without any charge back to any city or town within such county; or
 (b) with a charge back of all or any portion of such operating costs
to the cities (including the city of Jamestown) and towns in such
county, in proportion to the number of students attending such community
college each term who were residents of each such city or town at the
beginning of such term.
 2. Pursuant to such regulations and limitations as may be established
and prescribed by the state university trustees, the community college
regional board of trustees may enter into any contract or agreement
deemed necessary or appropriate for the effective operation of the
college, including: (a) contracts or agreements entered into with the
federal government to enable participation in federal student loan
programs, including any and all instruments required thereunder; and (b)
contracts with non-profit corporations organized by officers, employees,
alumni or students of the college for the furtherance of its objects and
purposes. Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law, general,
special or local, such contracts entered into with such non-profit
corporation shall not be subject to any requirement that contracts be
let to the lowest responsible bidder after advertisement for bids.
Nothing contained in this subdivision shall be deemed to diminish or
impair any powers or authority otherwise vested in the community college
regional board of trustees.
 3. Pursuant to such regulations and limitations as may be established
and prescribed by the state university trustees with the approval of the
director of the budget, the community college regional board of trustees
may participate in cooperative educational programs, services and
arrangements with colleges, universities, school districts, boards of
cooperative educational services, libraries, museums and join any
cooperative association of such educational institutions formed as a
corporation pursuant to section two hundred sixteen of this chapter.
 4. The community college regional board of trustees is hereby created
a body corporate. All property which is now vested in, or shall
hereafter be conveyed or transferred to the community college regional
board of trustees, shall be held by them as a corporation.
 4-a. (a) A community college regional board of trustees shall have the
authority to appoint security officers for the community college and, in
its discretion, to designate or to revoke the designation of one or more
than one security officer as a peace officer. A security officer so
designated shall have the powers of a peace officer as set forth in
section 2.20 of the criminal procedure law. A security officer
designated as a peace officer must have satisfactorily completed or
complete, within one year of the date of such designation, a course of
law enforcement training prescribed by the municipal police training
council in consultation with the state university board of trustees. A
peace officer so designated may possess and carry a firearm as a part of
on duty employment only if authorized to do so by the president of the
community college. The geographical area of employment of a peace
officer so designated is the campus and other property of the community
college at which the peace officer serves, including that portion of a
public highway which crosses or abuts such property, and residential or
other facilities owned, operated, or maintained by a not-for-profit
entity associated with the community college for which such college
provides security.
 (b) The appointment of security officers at a community college shall
be governed by and conform with civil service laws, rules and
regulations, if applicable to the community college and its employees.
The designation of a security officer as a peace officer shall be based
on qualifications established by the community college board of
trustees, and in accordance with seniority. For purposes of this
subdivision, "seniority" means total employment service with the
community college making such designation.
 (c) A security officer who has been designated a peace officer may
have such designation suspended or removed pursuant to procedures
established by the community college or in compliance with any local
collective bargaining agreement, if applicable to the community college
and its employees.
 (d) The designation of peace officers pursuant to this subdivision
shall not be deemed to supersede in any way the authority of other peace
officers and police officers.
 (e) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to: (i) alter
any existing collective bargaining agreement; (ii) diminish the rights
of employees pursuant to an existing collective bargaining agreement;
(iii) affect existing law with respect to an application to the public
employment relations board seeking designation by the board that certain
persons are managerial or confidential; or (iv) alter or restrict the
power of a county or community college sponsor or employee organization
to negotiate with respect to an alternate method of appointment or
promotion of security officers.
 5. Two or more eligible counties appointing members to a community
college regional board of trustees shall divide the local share of the
capital costs of a community college sponsored by such community college
region according to the respective equalized assessed valuations of such
counties or such other factors as may be prescribed by the state
university trustees. The local share of the operating expenses of a
community college sponsored by a community college region shall be
apportioned among those counties appointing members to the community
college regional board of trustees on the basis of operating shares.
Such operating shares shall be allocated in proportion to the number of
students attending the community college who are residents of the
respective counties participating on the community college regional
board, calculated on the basis of full-time equivalent students, in the
same manner as the allocable portion of the local sponsor's share of
operating costs pursuant to section sixty-three hundred five of this
chapter, and such other factors as may be prescribed by the state
university trustees. Any community college sponsored by a community
college region may, under the provisions of section six thousand three
hundred five of this chapter, elect to charge an allocable portion of
the operating costs incurred by the regional sponsor, and a further sum
on account of the regional sponsor's share of capital costs, to the
counties of residence of students attending such college who are
non-residents of the community college region.
 6. The final budget of the community college region as adopted by the
regional board of trustees and approved by the state university trustees
shall be a charge against all of the counties appointing members to such
board. The regional board of trustees, after approval of its budget,
shall certify to the legislative body or board of all counties
appointing members to such regional board the respective proportionate
share of the capital and operating costs required to be raised by each
county. The counties shall add such costs, as certified, to their own
budgets and provide such certified costs by appropriations from general
revenues or from funds derived from special tax levies earmarked in part
or whole for such purposes, by the use of gifts of money or, with the
consent of the state university trustees, by the use of property, gifts
of property or by the furnishing of services. Where a county provides
all or a portion of its share of capital or operating costs in real or
personal property or in services, the valuation of such property and
services for the purpose of determining the amount of state aid shall be
made by the state university trustees with the approval of the director
of the budget. Such funds shall be turned over to the treasurer of the
community college sponsored by the community college region within the
fiscal year of such region. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
subdivision, all counties appointing members to a community college
regional board of trustees may require that any budget proposed by such
regional board, which would result in an increase in the level of
contributions to college revenues by such counties over the level of
contributions required for the previous college fiscal year, shall be
approved by the legislative body or board of all such counties.
 7. Notwithstanding the provisions of any general, special or local law
to the contrary, the fiscal year of a community college sponsored by a
community college region shall begin with the first day of September and
end with the thirty-first day of August in each year. All of the
provisions of law fixing times or dates within which or by which certain
acts shall be performed in relation to the preparation and adoption of
the budget of a county, including but not limited to submission of a
budget estimate, filing of a tentative budget, public hearing and
adoption of a budget, shall apply to the budget of a community
college-sponsored by a community college region but shall be
correspondingly changed, as to time, to relate to the commencement of
the fiscal year of the community college region; provided, however, that
after the budget for the community college region shall have been
adopted, the counties appointing members to a community college regional
board of trustees shall provide for the raising of taxes required by
such budget, without any decrease in amount, in the same manner and at
the same time prescribed by law for the annual levy of taxes by or for
the county.
 8. Moneys raised by taxation for maintenance of a community college
region and moneys received from all other sources for purposes of the
community college region shall be kept separate and distinct from any
other moneys of the counties appointing members to the community college
regional board of trustees and shall not be used for any other purpose.
The amount of taxes levied for maintenance of a community college region
shall be credited thereto and made available therefor within the fiscal
year of such community college region.
 9. The community college regional board of trustees shall direct that
payment of amounts for maintenance of the college be made in whole or in
part to the treasurer of the community college sponsored by such region
for expenditure by such officer, subject to such regulations regarding
the custody, deposit, audit and payment thereof as such board of
trustees may deem proper.
 The board of trustees may authorize the treasurer of the college to
establish a bank account or accounts in the name of the college and
deposit therein moneys received or collected by the college, including
moneys appropriated and paid by the counties appointing members to the
community college regional board of trustees, moneys received from
tuition, fees, charges, sales of products and services, and from all
other sources. The board of trustees may authorize the treasurer to pay
all proper bills and accounts of the college, including salaries and
wages, from funds in its custody. The treasurer shall execute a bond or
official undertaking to the community college regional board of trustees
in such sum and with such sureties as that board shall require, the
expense of which shall be a college charge.
 The community college regional board of trustees similarly may
authorize the treasurer to establish and maintain petty cash funds, not
in excess of two hundred dollars each, for specified college purposes or
undertakings, from which may be paid, in advance of audit, properly
itemized and verified or certified bills for materials, supplies or
services furnished to the college for the conduct of its affairs and
upon terms calling for the payment of cash to the vendor upon the
delivery of any such materials or supplies or the rendering of any such
services. Lists of all expenditures made from such petty cash funds
shall be presented to the board of trustees at each regular meeting
thereof, together with the bills supporting such expenditures, for audit
and the board shall direct reimbursement of such petty cash funds from
the appropriate budgetary item or items in an amount equal to the total
of such bills which it shall so audit and allow. Any of such bills or
any portion of any of such bills as shall be disallowed upon audit shall
be the personal responsibility of the treasurer and such official shall
forthwith reimburse such petty cash fund in the amount of such
disallowances.
 The community college regional board of trustees shall provide for
periodic audits of all accounts maintained at its direction and render
such reports respecting any and all receipts and expenditures of the
college as the local legislative body or board, or other appropriate
governing agency, may direct.
 10. All proposals for the acquisition or construction, including new
construction, additions or reconstruction of college facilities adopted
by a community college regional board of trustees shall be approved by
the legislative body or board of all counties appointing members to such
board of trustees, and the state university trustees. Upon such
approvals, each participating county may finance its proportionate share
of the cost of acquisition of such facilities either from any current
funds legally available therefor, or by the issuance of obligations
pursuant to the local finance law. All counties participating in such
regional board of trustees may together issue joint obligations pledging
the full faith and credit for all participating counties jointly and
that each such county shall pay a specified share of annual debt service
on such joint obligations in accordance with the provisions of article
five-g of the general municipal law and applicable provisions of the
local finance law.
 10-a. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision ten of this
section, upon receipt of the approvals set forth in such subdivision,
the board of trustees of the community college region may finance a duly
authorized specific object or purpose or class of objects or purposes by
the issuance of bonds, notes or other evidence of indebtedness or
pursuant to a financing transaction of the community college region with
the dormitory authority in accordance with the provisions of article
eight of title four of the public authorities law.
 11. The community college regional board of trustees, for the purpose
of administering the state civil service law, shall be deemed to be a
municipal employer. No civil service rights of an employee of any
community college or local sponsor shall be lost, impaired or affected
by reason of the enactment of this section and related amendments of
this article into law.
 12. For the purposes of article fourteen of the civil service law, the
community college regional board of trustees shall be deemed to be the
public employer and as such shall negotiate with and enter into written
agreements with employee organizations representing the instructional
staff and non-instructional staff of the community colleges that have
been certified or recognized under such article. For purposes of such
article, the president of the community college shall be deemed to be
the chief executive officer, the chief legal officer of the community
college shall be chief legal officer, and the community college regional
board of trustees shall be deemed to be the legislative body of the
government. The state public employment relations board shall have
exclusive jurisdiction for the purpose of administering the provisions
of such article.
 13. For the purpose of this section, all references in this section to
a "county" or "counties" shall be deemed to include a city or cities, or
a school district or school districts, as the case may be.
 14. a. The following terms, when used or referred to in this
subdivision, shall have the following meaning:
 (i) "Credit card" means any credit card, credit plate, charge card,
charge plate, courtesy card, debit card, other identification card,
value transfer device as defined by the state comptroller or device
issued by a person to another person which may be used to obtain a cash
advance or a loan or credit, or to purchase or lease property or
services on the credit of the person issuing the credit card or a person
who has agreed with the issuer to pay obligations arising from the use
of a credit card issued to another person.
 (ii) "Card issuer" means an issuer of a credit card, charge card or
other value transfer device.
 (iii) "Financing agency" means any agency defined as such in
subdivision eighteen of section four hundred one of the personal
property law.
 (iv) "Person" means an individual, partnership, corporation or any
other legal or commercial entity.
 b. The community college regional board of trustees of any community
college may determine, by resolution, that it is in the public interest
to authorize such community college to enter into agreements with one or
more financing agencies or card issuers to provide for the acceptance,
by such officers of the community college as may be designated pursuant
to this subdivision, of credit cards as a means of payment of tuition,
expenses, fees, charges, revenue, financial obligations or other amounts
owed by students to the community college. Any such agreement shall
govern the terms and conditions upon which a credit card proffered as a
means of payment of tuition, expenses, fees, charges, revenue, financial
obligations or other amounts shall be accepted or declined and the
manner in and conditions upon which the financing agency or card issuer
shall pay to such community college the amount of tuition, expenses,
fees, charges, revenue, financial obligations or other amounts paid by
means of a credit card pursuant to such agreement. Any such agreement
may provide for the payment by such community college to such financing
agency or card issuer of fees for the services provided by such
financing agency or card issuer pursuant to such agreement, which fees
may consist of a discount deducted from or payable in respect of the
amount of each such tuition, expenses, fee, charge, revenue, financial
obligation or other amount. If fees are paid by such a discount, they
shall be post-audited by the officer or board of the community college
responsible for auditing claims against the community college.
 c. Any community college which has entered into an agreement with a
financing agency or card issuer as authorized by this subdivision may
accept credit cards as a means of payment of tuition, expenses, fees,
charges, revenue, financial obligations or other amounts, as provided in
such agreement and may pay such fees as are specified in such agreement
to such financing agency or card issuer in consideration of the services
rendered by such financing agency or card issuer thereunder.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, it shall be
the option of the community college regional board of trustees of the
community college to require, as a condition of accepting payment by
credit card, that such person offering payment by credit or charge card
pay a service fee to the community college not exceeding costs incurred
by the community college in connection with the credit or charge card
payment transaction, including any fee owed by the community college to
the financing agency or card issuer arising from that transaction.
 d. Contracts entered into pursuant to this subdivision between a
community college and financing agencies or card issuers shall be
awarded in accordance with the community college's written internal
policies and procedures governing procurements.
 e. The underlying debt, lien, obligation, bill, account or other
amount owed by the student to the community college for which payment by
credit card is accepted by the community college shall not be expunged,
cancelled, released, discharged or satisfied, and any receipt or other
evidence of payment shall be deemed conditional, until the community
college has received final and unconditional payment of the full amount
due from the financing agency or card issuer for such credit card
transaction.
 f. The community college regional board of trustees, in enacting a
resolution pursuant to this subdivision, shall designate which of its
officers, charged with the duty of collecting or receiving moneys on
behalf of the community college, shall be authorized to accept credit
cards as a means of payment of tuition, expenses, fees, charges,
revenue, financial obligations and other amounts.
 g. Under circumstances where community colleges are otherwise
authorized by law to contract for the collection of tuition, expenses,
fees, charges, revenue, financial obligations or other amounts, such
contract shall provide that the contractor accept credit cards as a
mechanism for payment.
 15. a. Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, whenever an
officer of a community college is authorized pursuant to law to disburse
or transfer on behalf of the community college funds in the custody of
the officer, that officer shall be authorized to disburse or transfer
such funds by means of electronic or wire transfer. Such disbursements
shall be otherwise subject to applicable laws, provided that:
 (i) the community college regional board of trustees of the community
college has entered into a written agreement with the bank or trust
company in which such funds have been deposited, prescribing the manner
in which electronic or wire transfer of such funds shall be
accomplished, identifying by number and name those accounts from which
electronic or wire transfers may be made, identifying which officer or
officers are authorized to order the electronic or wire transfer of
funds from those accounts, and implementing a security procedure as
defined in section 4-A-201 of the uniform commercial code; and
 (ii) the bank or trust company processing the transfer shall provide
to the officer ordering the electronic or wire transfer of funds written
confirmation of each such transaction no later than the business day
following the day on which the funds are transmitted.
 b. It shall be the duty of the community college regional board of
trustees of the community college to adopt a system of internal controls
for the documentation and reporting of all transfers or disbursements of
funds accomplished by electronic or wire transfer.
 16. a. The community college regional board of trustees of any
community college, may determine, by resolution, that it is in the
public interest and authorize such community college to provide for the
acceptance of tuition, expenses, fees, charges, revenue, financial
obligations or other amounts via a community college internet website.
However, submission via the internet may not be required as the sole
method for the collection of tuition, expenses, fees, charges and other
amounts. Such payments shall be accepted via the internet in a manner
and condition defined by such community college. Any method used to
receive internet payments shall comply with article one of the state
technology law and any rules and regulations promulgated and guidelines
developed thereunder and, at a minimum must:
 (i) authenticate the identity of the sender; and
 (ii) ensure the security of the information transmitted.
 b. Payments received via the internet shall be considered received by
the appropriate officer and paid by the payor at the time the internet
transaction is completed and sent by the payor.
 c. The underlying debt, lien, obligation, bill, account or other
amount owed by the student to the community college for which payment by
internet is accepted by the community college shall not be expunged,
cancelled, released, discharged or satisfied, and any receipt or other
evidence of payment shall be deemed conditional, until the community
college has received final and unconditional payment of the full amount
due.
 d. The community college regional board of trustees, in enacting a
resolution pursuant to this subdivision, shall designate which of its
officers, charged with the duty of collecting or receiving moneys on
behalf of the community college, shall be authorized to accept such
payments via the internet.
 17. Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, a
community college regional board of trustees of a community college
region shall be the local sponsor of such community college for the
purposes of entering into agreements with the dormitory authority of the
state of New York on behalf of the community college pursuant to
subdivisions nine, ten, eleven, twelve, thirteen, fourteen and sixteen
of section sixteen hundred eighty of the public authorities law and
shall have full authority to perform, on behalf of such community
college, all obligations of the college under its agreements with the
dormitory authority.
 § 6311. New York opportunity promise scholarship. 1. Eligibility. A
New York opportunity promise scholarship shall be awarded to an
applicant who meets all of the following conditions:
 (a) is at least twenty-five years of age or older, but in no case more
than fifty-five years of age, as of January first of the calendar year
for the semester for which the applicant makes initial application;
 (b) has applied for a New York state tuition assistance program award
pursuant to section six hundred sixty-seven of this chapter, a federal
Pell grant pursuant to section 1070 of title 20 of the United States
code, et. seq., and any other applicable financial aid;
 (c) is matriculated at a community college of the state university of
New York or the city university of New York, as defined in subdivision
two of section sixty-three hundred one of this article or subdivision
four of section sixty-two hundred two of this title, respectively, in an
approved program directly leading to an associate's degree in a
high-demand field; provided that for the two thousand twenty-five -- two
thousand twenty-six academic year, such fields shall include but not be
limited to advanced manufacturing, technology, cybersecurity,
engineering, artificial intelligence, nursing and allied health
professions, green and renewable energy, and pathways to teaching in
shortage areas, provided further that such fields may be updated
annually thereafter by the department of labor no later than one hundred
eighty days prior to the first start date of the fall term of such
community colleges, and provided further that the eligibility of such
approved program established in the semester for which the applicant
makes initial application shall continue;
 (d) is eligible for the payment of tuition and fees at a rate no
greater than that imposed for resident students in community colleges;
and
 (e) has not already obtained any postsecondary degree, provided that
nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to prohibit the eligibility
of a student who is already enrolled in an eligible associate degree
program on the effective date of this section and who meets all the
other eligibility requirements of this subdivision.
 2. Amount. Within amounts appropriated therefor, and subject to
availability of funds, awards shall be granted for the two thousand
twenty-five -- two thousand twenty-six academic year and thereafter to
applicants who are determined to be eligible to receive such awards.
Such awards shall be calculated on a per term basis prior to the start
of each term the applicant is successfully enrolled and shall not exceed
the positive difference, if any, of (a) the sum of actual tuition, fees,
books, and applicable supplies charged to the applicant and approved by
the applicable community college, less (b) the sum of all payments
received by the applicant from all sources of financial aid received by
the applicant with the exception of aid received pursuant to federal
work-study programs authorized under sections 1087-51 through 1087-58 of
title 20 of the United States code and educational loans taken by the
applicant or guardian.
 3. Additional provisions. An eligible recipient shall complete at
least six credits per semester, for a total of at least twelve credits
per academic year, in an approved program of study. An eligible
recipient shall be continuously enrolled without a gap of more than one
academic year, provided that such duration may be extended for an
allowable interruption of study including, but not limited to, death of
a family member, medical leave, military service, and parental leave.
Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of this section, if an
applicant fails to meet the eligibility criteria of this section at any
point, no further awards shall be made to the applicant.
 4. Conditions. (a) An eligible recipient shall continue to make
satisfactory academic progress in order to maintain continued
eligibility for an award pursuant to this section.
 (b) Each campus that enrolls students pursuant to this section shall
take steps consistent with established policy to maximize the award of
credit for prior learning for participating students.
 (c) No student shall receive an award pursuant to this section for
greater than ten semesters.
 (d) A student who earns college credit pursuant to this section shall
be entitled to transfer such credit to another state university of New
York or city university of New York campus consistent with transfer
policies established by the state university of New York or city
university of New York.
 5. Reporting. By September first, two thousand twenty-six, and by
September first of each year thereafter, the chancellor of the state
university of New York and the chancellor of the city university of New
York shall each submit a report to the governor, the speaker of the
assembly, and the temporary president of the senate, including but not
limited to the following information:
 (a) enrollment data by full and part-time status;
 (b) retention and completion rates by full and part-time status;
 (c) barriers to student participation;
 (d) demographic data related to the program;
 (e) average prior learning and transfer credit awarded;
 (f) the total amount of funds awarded and the average award per
student; and
 (g) post-completion outcomes including transfer, employment, and
wages, as applicable.
 ARTICLE 127
 MILITARY SERVICE
Section 6350. Leave of absence for military service.
 6351. Preservation of educational status and financial
 resources.
 6352. Option of refund or credit.
 6353. Enforcement.
 6354. Applicability.
 § 6350. Leave of absence for military service. Whenever a student who
is: (a) a member of the national guard or other reserve component of the
armed forces of the United States and is called or ordered to active
duty, as defined in 10 USC § 101(d)(1), or (b) a member of the state
organized militia, and is called or ordered to active duty for the
state, as defined in subdivision one of section six of the military law,
the institution of higher education in which the student is enrolled
shall grant the student a military leave of absence from the institution
while such student is serving on active duty, and for one year after the
conclusion of such service.
 § 6351. Preservation of educational status and financial resources. A
student on a military leave of absence from an institution of higher
education shall be entitled, upon release from serving on active duty,
to be restored to the educational status such student had attained prior
to being called or ordered to such duty without loss of academic credits
earned, scholarships or grants awarded, or tuition and other fees paid
prior to the commencement of his or her active duty.
 § 6352. Option of refund or credit. An institution of higher education
shall refund tuition or fees paid or credit the tuition and fees to the
next period of enrollment after the student returns from a military
leave of absence, at the option of the student.
 § 6353. Enforcement. Any violation of this article shall constitute an
unfair educational practice pursuant to section three hundred thirteen
of this chapter. Any student alleging a violation of this article may
commence an administrative or judicial proceeding pursuant to section
three hundred thirteen of this chapter.
 § 6354. Applicability. This article shall apply to all institutions of
higher education and any business or trade school in the state.
 ARTICLE 129
 STATE AID FOR CERTAIN INDEPENDENT INSTITUTIONS
 OF HIGHER EDUCATION
Section 6401. State aid for certain independent institutions of higher
 learning.
 6401-a. State aid for high needs nursing programs for certain
 independent institutions of higher learning.
 6402. Enrollment grants to schools of medicine and dentistry.
 6403. Adjustments to enrollment grants.
 6404. Purchases by certain independent institutions.
 6405. State reimbursement to certain independent institutions
 of higher education which participate in the federal
 work study program.
 § 6401. State aid for certain independent institutions of higher
learning. 1. Notwithstanding the provisions of any general, special or
local law to the contrary, the commissioner is hereby authorized to
apportion for each annual period commencing July first nineteen hundred
seventy-six and to pay to any independent institution of higher
education within the state which meets the requirements of subdivision
two of this section, upon application by such institution, such amounts
of state aid as are authorized to be paid by subdivision three of this
section.
 2. (a) Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law, in order to
qualify for state aid apportionments pursuant to this section, any
institution of higher education must meet either the requirements set
forth in subparagraphs (i) through (vi) of this paragraph or, in the
alternative, the requirements set forth in paragraph (b) of this
subdivision:
 (i) The institution must be a non-profit college or university
incorporated by the regents or by the legislature, or a school of
medicine, dentistry or osteopathy authorized by the regents to confer
the degree of doctor of medicine, doctor of medical science, doctor of
dental surgery or doctor of osteopathy.
 (ii) The institution must maintain one or more earned degree programs,
culminating in an associate or higher degree.
 (iii) The institution must meet such standards of educational quality
applicable to comparable public institutions of higher education, as may
be from time to time established by the regents.
 (iv) The institution must be eligible for state aid under the
provisions of the constitution of the United States and the constitution
of the state of New York.
 (v) The institution must submit a financial statement which shall
include total assets and liabilities, in such form as may be approved by
the commissioner.
 (vi) The institution must have total endowment assets of less than
seven hundred fifty million dollars ($750,000,000), based on the most
recent academic year data collected in the Integrated Postsecondary
Education Data System, as required under Title IV of the Higher
Education Act of 1965, as amended, and reported by the Department of
Education's National Center for Education Statistics.
 (b) An institution of higher education located in this state, at least
one-half of the students of which are economically disadvantaged, and
the course credits and degrees of which are offered by a consortium of
sponsoring colleges, each of which sponsoring colleges satisfies the
following requirements, shall qualify for state aid apportionments
pursuant to this section:
 (i) The sponsoring college must be non-profit college or university
incorporated by the regents or by the legislature.
 (ii) The sponsoring college must maintain one or more earned degree
programs, culminating in an associate or higher degree.
 (iii) The sponsoring college must meet such standards of educational
quality applicable to comparable public institutions of higher
education, as may be from time to time established by the regents.
 (iv) The sponsoring college must be eligible for state aid under the
provisions of the constitution of the United States and the constitution
of the state of New York.
 (v) The sponsoring college must submit a financial statement which
shall include total assets and liabilities, in such form as may be
approved by the commissioner.
 (vi) The sponsoring college must have total endowment assets of less
than seven hundred fifty million dollars ($750,000,000), based on the
most recent academic year data collected in the Integrated Postsecondary
Education Data System, as required under Title IV of the Higher
Education Act of 1965, as amended, and reported by the Department of
Education's National Center for Education Statistics.
 3. Degree awards. The amount of such annual apportionment to each
institution meeting the requirements of subdivision two of this section
shall be computed by multiplying by not to exceed six hundred dollars
the number of earned associate degrees, by not to exceed one thousand
five hundred dollars the number of earned bachelor's degrees, by not to
exceed nine hundred fifty dollars the number of earned master's degrees,
and by not to exceed four thousand five hundred fifty dollars the number
of earned doctorate degrees, conferred by such institution during the
twelve-month period next preceding the annual period for which such
apportionment is made, provided that there shall be excluded from any
such computation the number of degrees earned by students with respect
to whom state aid other than that established by this section or section
sixty-four hundred one-a of this article is granted directly to the
institution, and provided further that, except as otherwise provided in
this subdivision, the amount apportioned for an associate degree shall
be awarded only to two year institutions qualifying under subdivision
two of this section. The regents shall promulgate rules defining and
classifying professional degrees for the purposes of this section.
Institutions qualifying for state aid pursuant to the provisions of
paragraph (b) of subdivision two of this section shall, for purposes of
this subdivision, be deemed to be the institutions which confer degrees.
For purposes of this subdivision, a two-year institution which has
received authority to confer bachelor degrees shall continue to be
considered a two-year institution until such time as it has actually
begun to confer the bachelor's degree. Thereafter, notwithstanding any
other provision of law to the contrary, an institution which was
formerly a two-year institution for the purposes of this section and
which was granted authority by the regents to confer bachelor degrees,
(a) such authority having been granted after the first day of June,
nineteen hundred ninety-three, but before the first day of July,
nineteen hundred ninety-three, (b) such authority having been granted
after the first day of May, two thousand five, but before the first day
of June, two thousand five, (c) such authority having been granted after
the first day of April, two thousand nine, but before the first day of
May, two thousand nine, or (d) such authority having been granted after
the first day of December, two thousand nine, but before the first day
of January, two thousand ten, may elect to continue to receive awards
for earned associate degrees. Should such institution so elect, it shall
not be eligible during the time of such election to receive awards for
earned bachelor's degrees. Notwithstanding the preceding provisions of
this subdivision, in the event that the total amount of such annual
apportionments to all institutions meeting the requirements of
subdivision two of this section would otherwise exceed the total amount
appropriated for unrestricted aid to independent colleges and
universities, the annual apportionment to each such institution shall be
reduced proportionally.
 4. Thirty-five percent of each such annual apportionment payable
pursuant to this section shall be paid on or before October fifteenth,
thirty-five percent shall be paid on or before February fifteenth, and
the remaining thirty percent shall be paid on or before May fifteenth.
 5. The commissioner shall promulgate regulations requiring the
submission to him, by any institution intending to apply for state aid
apportionments pursuant to this section, of reports in such form, at
such times and containing such information as he shall by such
regulations require, concerning, but not limited to such matters as the
present and contemplated future programs, curricula and facilities of
the institution, and its financial affairs, its long range plans and its
progress in implementing such plans, and its administrative practices
and procedures. No institution shall be eligible to receive any
apportionment of state aid, or portion thereof, payable pursuant to this
section unless such institution shall have submitted all reports
required pursuant to such regulations, in form satisfactory to the
commissioner.
 § 6401-a. State aid for high needs nursing programs for certain
independent institutions of higher learning. 1. Notwithstanding the
provisions of any general, special or local law to the contrary, the
commissioner is hereby authorized to grant state aid for high needs
nursing programs to any independent institution of higher education
within the state which meets the requirements of subdivision two of this
section, upon application by such institution, such amounts of state aid
as are authorized to be paid by subdivision three of this section.
 2. Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law, in order to
qualify for state aid grants pursuant to this section, any independent
institution of higher education must meet the requirements set forth in
paragraphs (a) through (d) of this subdivision.
 (a) The institution must be a non-profit college or university
incorporated by the regents or by the legislature.
 (b) The institution must maintain an earned degree program in nursing,
culminating in an associate or higher degree in nursing.
 (c) The institution must meet such standards of educational quality
applicable to comparable public institutions of higher education, as may
be from time to time established by the regents.
 (d) The institution must be eligible for state aid under the
provisions of the constitution of the United States and the constitution
of the state of New York.
 3. The commissioner shall grant such state aid awards within the
amounts appropriated for such purpose, not to exceed one million dollars
and based on availability of funds, according to a schedule to be
determined by the commissioner, to each institution meeting the
requirements of subdivision two of this section. Awards shall be
distributed in the following amounts:
 (a) Two hundred fifty dollars per student enrolled in an earned degree
program in nursing at a two year degree granting institution;
 (b) Five hundred dollars per student enrolled in an earned degree
program in nursing at a four year degree granting institution.
 4. The commissioner shall promulgate all rules and regulations
necessary for the implementation of this section.
 § 6402. Enrollment grants to schools of medicine and dentistry. 1.
The commissioner shall apportion each year to each non-public
institution of higher education offering an approved program in medicine
a sum to be determined as follows:
 (a) Two thousand one hundred fifty dollars shall be apportioned for
each full-time student enrolled.
 (b) An additional three thousand five hundred dollars shall be
apportioned for each full-time upper division student enrolled who is a
resident of the state and who:
 (i) participates in the coordinated transfer program of the
association of American medical colleges; or
 (ii) participates in the fifth pathway program; or
 (iii) participated in and successfully completed in good standing the
biomedical education program of the city college of the city university
of New York.
 2. The commissioner shall apportion each year to each non-public
institution of higher education offering an approved program in
dentistry the sum of fifty-eight hundred dollars for each full-time
student enrolled, except that aid distributed under this program shall
not exceed a sum based upon a total enrollment of eight hundred
thirty-five students at New York University and two hundred forty
students at Columbia University.
 3. Receipt of aid for eligible students pursuant to paragraph (b) of
subdivision one of this section shall preclude an institution from
receiving state aid for the same students under the provisions of
section sixty-four hundred one of this article.
 4. (a) To be eligible for assistance under this section an institution
must meet such standards of educational quality applicable to comparable
public institutions of higher education, as may be from time to time
established by the regents.
 (b) In addition, to be eligible for assistance under subdivision two
of this section an institution must annually submit to the commissioner
a complete and detailed report as to each major item of educational and
other revenue and expenditure contained in the budget for such approved
program of dentistry, for both the preceding and the current academic
years for which aid pursuant to this section has or will be received.
Such report shall also include enrollment and faculty data, and shall be
in such form as the commissioner, with the approval of the director of
the budget, may prescribe.
 The commissioner, upon review of the data contained in such report,
shall be authorized to require such institutions to file an application
with the appropriate agency of the federal government for a Financial
Distress Grant pursuant to Title VIII of the Health Professions
Educational Assistance Act of 1976, as a condition of further receipt of
assistance under subdivision two of this section.
 5. The commissioner of education may promulgate rules and regulations
to accomplish the purposes of this section.
 6. Funds appropriated for the purposes of this section shall be paid
in accordance with a payment schedule to be established by the
commissioner and approved by the director of the budget.
 § 6403. Adjustments to enrollment grants. 1. The grants provided
pursuant to paragraph (a) of subdivision one and subdivision two of
section sixty-four hundred two of this chapter shall be reduced by one
hundred per centum of the grant otherwise allocable to each first year
excess non resident student in those institutions enrolling more than
thirty per centum of nonresident students in its first year class during
the nineteen hundred seventy-nine--nineteen hundred eighty academic year
or thereafter.
 2. For purposes of this section, "nonresident student" shall mean any
entering student who does not qualify as a resident under the provisions
of paragraph b of subdivision five of section six hundred sixty-one of
this chapter.
 3. For purposes of this section "excess nonresident student" shall
mean any nonresident student enrolled in an entering first year class
after the per centum of total nonresident students in such class exceeds
thirty per centum with respect to subdivision one of this section.
 4. A reduction in grants pursuant to this section shall remain in
effect with respect to each affected class until the graduation of such
class.
 § 6404. Purchases by certain independent institutions. Any
postsecondary institution chartered under the powers of the regents
pursuant to section two hundred sixteen of this chapter or incorporated
under a special act of the legislature may make purchases of commodities
and services pursuant to the terms of contracts let by the office of
general services subject to such rules as may be established from time
to time pursuant to section one hundred sixty-three of the state finance
law which may establish limitations with respect to commodities and
services and impose such other appropriate conditions upon purchasing as
deemed necessary by the commissioner of general services in order to
protect the state's own purchasing interests; provided that each such
purchase shall have a cost of five hundred dollars or more and that said
institution shall accept sole responsibility for any payment of such
cost due the vendor.
 § 6405. State reimbursement to certain independent institutions of
higher education which participate in the federal work study program. 1.
For purposes of this section, the following terms shall be defined as
follows:
 a. "Institutional award year" shall mean the period from the first day
of July until the thirtieth day of June of the following year, next
preceding the state fiscal year in which state aid is to be paid.
 b. "Eligible expenditures" shall mean the total expenditures made by
an institution from federal college work study funds received by the
institution for the employment of students by such institution.
 2. The commissioner is hereby authorized to pay any independent,
non-profit institution of higher education incorporated by the regents
or the legislature, which maintains one or more earned degree programs,
other than seminarian or theological programs, and which participates in
the college work study program in accordance with the provisions of Part
C of Title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 as amended, upon
application by such institution, twenty-five percentum of the eligible
expenditures of the institution for the purpose of reimbursing the
institution for its expenditure of funds in such work study program.
Such payments shall commence in the state fiscal year beginning April
first, nineteen hundred eighty-one for expenditures made during the
institutional award year commencing on July first, nineteen hundred
eighty.
 3. Payments shall be made in accordance with a schedule to be
determined by the commissioner, and upon application by the institution
in such form and at such times as are determined by the commissioner.
The commissioner is authorized to promulgate such regulations as are
needed to accomplish the purposes of this section.
 4. Any institution receiving payment pursuant to this section shall
not use such funds for any purpose other than a college work study
program, and shall indicate separately the total of all funds expended
for the college work study program and the amount of reimbursement
claimed by the institution, on such form as the commissioner shall
designate.
 5. Any institution receiving funds under this section shall match such
payments dollar for dollar with additional financial aid to needy
students who are determined to be in need according to standards
approved by the commissioner and shall indicate the total of all
financial aid provided for all students during academic year nineteen
hundred eighty--nineteen hundred eighty-one and thereafter on such form
as the commissioner shall designate.
 6. Payments to institutions of higher education pursuant to
subdivision two of this section shall not exceed:
 a. For payments to be made during the state fiscal year commencing
April first, nineteen hundred eighty-one, one-third of twenty-five
percent of the eligible expenditures of an institution.
 b. For payments to be made during the state fiscal year commencing
April first, nineteen hundred eighty-two, two-thirds of twenty-five
percent of the eligible expenditures of an institution.
 c. For payments to be made during the state fiscal year commencing
April first, nineteen hundred eighty-three, and in each state fiscal
year thereafter, one hundred percent of twenty-five percent of the
eligible expenditures of an institution.
 ARTICLE 129-A
 REGULATION BY COLLEGES OF CONDUCT ON CAMPUSES AND OTHER
 COLLEGE PROPERTY USED FOR EDUCATIONAL PURPOSES
Section 6430. General provisions.
 6431. Advisory committee on campus security.
 6432. Sexual assault, domestic violence and stalking
 prevention information.
 6433. Campus crime reporting and statistics.
 6434. Investigation of crimes and crime reporting.
 6435. Appointment of private college security officers.
 6436. Bias related and hate crime prevention information.
 6436-a. Designation of a Title VI coordinator and duties.
 6437. Prohibition on the marketing of credit cards.
 6438. Notification of fire safety standards and measures in
 all college-owned or college-operated housing.
 6438-a. Opioid overdose prevention in college housing.
 6438-b. Access to medication abortion prescription drugs.
 6438-c. Student-athlete compensation.
 6438-d. Notification of alcohol or controlled substance
 violations.
 § 6430. General provisions. 1. The trustees or other governing board
of every college chartered by the regents or incorporated by special act
of the legislature and which maintains a campus, unless otherwise
provided, shall adopt written rules for implementing all policies
required pursuant to this article and for the maintenance of public
order on college campuses and other college property used for
educational purposes and provide a program for the enforcement thereof.
Such rules shall prohibit, among other things, any action or situation
which recklessly or intentionally endangers mental or physical health or
involves the forced consumption of liquor or drugs for the purpose of
initiation into or affiliation with any organization. Such rules shall
govern the conduct of students, faculty and other staff as well as
visitors and other licensees and invitees on such campuses and property.
The penalties for violations of such rules shall be clearly set forth
therein and shall include provisions for the ejection of a violator from
such campus and property, in the case of a student or faculty violator
his or her suspension, expulsion, or other appropriate disciplinary
action, and in the case of an organization which authorizes such
conduct, recision of permission for that organization to operate on
campus property. Such penalties shall be in addition to any penalty
pursuant to the penal law or any other law to which a violator or
organization may be subject.
 2. A copy of such rules shall be given to all students enrolled in
said college and shall be deemed to be part of the by-laws of all
organizations operating on said campus which shall review annually such
by-laws with individuals affiliated with such organizations.
 3. Each college shall annually file with the department on or before
the first day of July a certificate of compliance with the provisions of
this article.
 4. If a college fails to file a certificate of compliance pursuant to
subdivision three of this section within sixty days of the time
required, such college shall not be eligible to receive any state aid or
assistance until such certificate of compliance is duly filed.
 5. Each college shall file a copy of all written rules adopted as
required in this article with the department on or before the first day
of July, two thousand four, and once every ten years thereafter.
 6. Nothing contained in this article shall:
 a. be construed to limit or restrict the freedom of speech and
peaceful assembly; or
 b. prevent or limit a college from setting forth additional standards
of conduct for students.
 § 6431. Advisory committee on campus security. 1. The president or
chief administrative officer of each college, except those independent
colleges ineligible to receive state aid under section sixty-four
hundred one of this title, shall appoint an advisory committee on campus
security.
 2. Such committee shall consist of a minimum of six members, at least
half of whom shall be female; one-third of the committee shall be
appointed from a list of students that contains at least twice the
number to be appointed which is provided by the largest student
governance organization on such campus, one-third thereof shall be
appointed from a list of faculty members that contains twice the number
to be appointed which is provided by the largest faculty organization on
such campus, and one-third of whom shall be selected by the president or
chief administrative officer.
 3. The committee shall review current campus security policies and
procedures and make recommendations for their improvement. It shall
specifically review current policies and procedures for:
 a. educating the campus community, including security personnel and
those persons who advise or supervise students, about sexual assault,
domestic violence and stalking offenses pursuant to section sixty-four
hundred thirty-two of this article, and bias related and hate crimes
pursuant to section sixty-four hundred thirty-six of this article;
 b. educating the campus community about personal safety and crime
prevention;
 c. reporting sexual assaults, domestic violence, stalking incidents
and hate crimes and assisting victims during investigations;
 d. referring complaints to appropriate authorities;
 e. counseling victims; and
 f. responding to inquiries from concerned persons.
 4. The committee shall report, in writing, to the college president or
chief administrative officer on its findings and recommendations at
least once each academic year, and such report shall be available upon
request.
 5. Nothing in this section shall be construed to alter, amend, modify
or affect existing standards for civil liability.
 § 6432. Sexual assault, domestic violence and stalking prevention
information. Each college shall inform incoming students about sexual
assault, domestic violence and stalking prevention measures through
programs which may include workshops, seminars, discussion groups, and
film presentations, in order to disseminate information, promote
discussion, encourage reporting, and facilitate prevention of sexual
assault, domestic violence and stalking. Such information shall include,
but not be limited to:
 1. the applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations relating to such
offenses;
 2. the penalties for the commission of a sex offense, a domestic
violence incident and a stalking offense;
 3. the procedures in effect at the college for dealing with such
offenses;
 4. the availability of counseling and other support services for the
victims of such offenses;
 5. the nature of and common circumstances relating to sex offenses,
incidents of domestic violence and stalking offenses on college
campuses; and
 6. the methods the college employs to advise and to update students
about security procedures.
 § 6433. Campus crime reporting and statistics. Each college that
receives state aid shall indicate on their website how to access the
campus crime statistics that are filed annually with the United States
Department of Education as required under Title 20 of the U.S. Code
Section 1092(f).
 The information on each college's website shall include the United
States Department of Education's website address for campus crime
statistics and a link to statistics for that college. Each college shall
report and post incidents of hate crime offenses as a separate, clearly
designated category on their website.
 The president or chief administrative officer of each college shall,
working with the advisory committee on campus safety, inform students
and prospective students of the existence of the campus crime statistics
and other campus safety policies and procedures as part of the college's
onboarding process.
 § 6434. Investigation of crimes and crime reporting. 1. Each college
shall adopt and implement a plan providing for the investigation of any
hate crime or violent felony offense occurring at or on the grounds of
each such institution, and providing for the investigation of a report
of any missing student. Such plans shall provide for the coordination of
the investigation of such crimes and reports with local law enforcement
agencies. Such plans shall include, but not be limited to, written
agreements with appropriate local law enforcement agencies providing for
the prompt investigation of such crimes and reports and a requirement
that the institution shall notify the appropriate law enforcement agency
as soon as practicable but in no case more than twenty-four hours after
a report of a hate crime, or a violent felony or a report that a student
who resides in housing owned or operated by such institution is missing;
provided that each institution shall: (1) inform each victim of a sexual
offense of their options to notify proper law enforcement authorities,
including on-campus and local police; (2) inform the victim of a sexual
offense of the right to report or not to report such offense to local
law enforcement agencies; and (3) offer the option to be assisted by
campus authorities in notifying such authorities, if the victim of
sexual assault so chooses, all in compliance with applicable federal
law, including, but not limited to, the federal Campus Sexual Assault
Victims' Bill of Rights under Title 20 U.S. Code Section 1092(f).
 2. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
 a. "Local law enforcement agencies" means any agency or agencies
employing peace officers or police officers for the enforcement of the
laws of the state, and which has or have jurisdiction under provisions
of the criminal procedure law over offenses occurring at or on the
grounds of any institution subject to the provisions of this section.
 b. "Missing student" means any student of an institution subject to
the provisions of this section, who resides in a facility owned or
operated by such institution and who is reported to such institution as
missing from his or her residence.
 c. "Violent felony offense" means a violent felony offense as defined
in subdivision one of section 70.02 of the penal law.
 d. "Hate crime" shall have the same meaning as section 485.05 of the
penal law.
 § 6435. Appointment of private college security officers. 1.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the trustees
or other governing board of each independent non-profit college which
maintains a campus or other property for educational purposes outside
the limits of any city having a population of one million or more and is
chartered by the regents or incorporated by special act of the
legislature may request that security guards employed by such college be
appointed as private college campus security officers by the sheriff of
the county in which the college is located pursuant to section six
hundred sixty-two of the county law or by the chief law enforcement
officer of a city where the college is located, pursuant to section two
hundred nine-aa of the general municipal law, as added by chapter six
hundred eleven of the laws of nineteen hundred ninety-five. Security
guards appointed as such campus security officers may exercise within
their geographic area of authority as defined hereinafter any or all of
the following powers:
 a. to make a warrantless arrest of a person (i) for any offense when
he or she has reasonable cause to believe that such person has committed
such offense in his or her presence and (ii) for a crime when he or she
has reasonable cause to believe that such person has committed such
crime, whether in his or her presence or otherwise, and follow such
person in continuous close pursuit into public places beyond the
geographic area of authority to make such warrantless arrest; provided,
however, that such campus security officers shall comply with the
post-arrest procedures set forth in section 140.40 of the criminal
procedure law and shall not interfere with an ongoing criminal
investigation conducted by any police officer;
 b. to use physical force, other than deadly physical force, upon
another person when and to the extent that he or she reasonably believes
such to be necessary to effect an arrest pursuant to paragraph a of this
subdivision or to prevent the escape from custody of such person and use
deadly physical force for such purpose when he or she reasonably
believes such to be necessary to defend himself or herself or a third
person from what he or she reasonably believes to be the use or imminent
use of deadly physical force;
 c. to carry and utilize a police baton and noxious materials designed
and intended for prevention of crime and enforcement of law and order;
provided, however, that no such campus security officer shall carry or
use such police baton or noxious materials before receiving training in
the use thereof. Training in the use of a baton shall include, but not
be limited to, the defensive use of the baton and instruction in the
legal use of physical force pursuant to article thirty-five of the penal
law;
 d. to temporarily possess stolen property, weapons, appliances and
substances described in article two hundred sixty-five of the penal law
and article thirty-three of the public health law whenever appropriate
for the prevention of crime, preservation of evidence and enforcement of
law and order, and as soon thereafter as practicable deliver such stolen
property, weapons, appliances and substances to a police officer;
 e. to issue appearance tickets pursuant to subdivision three of
section 150.20 of the criminal procedure law;
 f. to issue uniform appearance tickets pursuant to article
twenty-seven of the parks, recreation and historic preservation law and
to issue simplified traffic information pursuant to section 100.25 of
the criminal procedure law and section two hundred seven of the vehicle
and traffic law;
 g. to issue a uniform navigation summons and/or complaint pursuant to
section nineteen of the navigation law;
 h. to issue uniform appearance tickets pursuant to article seventy-one
of the environmental conservation law; and
 i. to seize an alcoholic beverage upon observing a person under
twenty-one years of age openly in possession of an alcoholic beverage as
defined in section three of the alcoholic beverage control law, with
intent to consume such beverage in violation of section sixty-five-c of
such law.
 2. For purposes of this section, "geographical area of authority"
means any real property owned by or under the control of the college by
which the security guard is employed and located within the geographic
boundaries of the county wherein the appointment was made.
 3. To become eligible for appointment as a private college campus
security officer a security guard must first successfully complete a
course of instruction in public and private law enforcement approved by
the municipal police training council, the security guard advisory
council, or the department of state or other comparable course offered
or recognized by a department or agency of the state of New York as
providing appropriate training for the exercise of the powers enumerated
in this section. Such training shall also comply with all requirements
of article seven-A of the general business law and any regulations
promulgated thereunder.
 4. To be eligible for appointment as a private college campus security
officer, an applicant shall be of good character, cooperate in a
background check as may be required by the county sheriff or chief law
enforcement officer, be at least twenty-one years of age at the time of
appointment, be a citizen of the United States, and be in compliance
with the requirements of, and duly registered in accordance with, the
provisions of article seven-A of the general business law and any
regulations promulgated thereunder.
 5. The duration of the appointment shall be coexistent with the period
of employment except as otherwise provided in this section, section six
hundred sixty-two of the county law or section two hundred nine-aa of
the general municipal law, as added by chapter six hundred eleven of the
laws of nineteen hundred ninety-five.
 6. Any independent non-profit college which requests appointment of
any of its security guards as a private college campus security officer
as provided for in subdivision one of this section shall indemnify and
hold harmless, the appointing sheriff, the county in which such sheriff
serves, the appointing chief law enforcement officer and the city in
which such chief law enforcement officer serves from liability and
damages including cost of defense to the extent proximately caused by
the intentional or negligent acts or omissions of the college's security
guards while acting pursuant to their scope of employment by the
college.
 7. A college shall immediately notify the appointing sheriff or chief
law enforcement officer whenever a security guard appointed by the
college as a private college campus security officer is arrested,
suspended from employment, transferred, terminated or disabled so as to
be incapable of performing campus security officer duties. Upon receipt
of such notice, the sheriff or chief law enforcement officer shall
immediately revoke such appointment.
 8. Private college campus security officers appointed in accordance
with this section shall not be subject to assignment under section two
hundred nine-f of the general municipal law or any mutual aid provisions
of law.
 § 6436. Bias related and hate crime prevention information. Each
college shall inform incoming students about bias related and hate crime
prevention measures through programs which may include workshops,
seminars, discussion groups, and film presentations, in order to
disseminate information about bias related and hate crimes, promote
discussion, encourage reporting of incidents of bias related and hate
crimes, and facilitate prevention of such incidents. Such information
shall include, but not be limited to:
 1. the applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations on bias related
crime, including the provisions and coverage of the hate crimes act of
2000 codified in article four hundred eighty-five of the penal law;
 2. the penalties for commission of bias related and hate crimes;
 3. the procedures in effect at the college for dealing with bias
related and hate crimes;
 4. the availability of counseling and other support services for the
victims of bias related and hate crimes;
 5. the nature of and common circumstances relating to bias related and
hate crimes on college campuses; and
 6. the methods the college employs to advise and to update students
about security procedures.
 * § 6436-a. Designation of a Title VI coordinator and duties. 1.
Purpose and designation of coordinator. (a) To ensure students are
protected from illegal discrimination based on characteristics, as
further described in applicable state and federal law, institutions
shall engage in proper coordination of these efforts through a
centralized process and with a centralized point of contact for all
compliance, similar to the role of the Title IX coordinator and their
role in the implementation of applicable federal laws, rules and
regulations, and state law, including article one hundred twenty-nine-B
of this title.
 (b) Within ninety days of the effective date of this section, an
institution, defined as a college or university chartered by the regents
or incorporated by special act of the legislature that maintains a
campus in New York state shall designate a Title VI coordinator to
ensure compliance with Title VI of the federal civil rights act of 1964,
codified at 42 U.S.C. 2000d et seq., 34 C.F.R. Part 100, and any other
related applicable laws, rules or regulations.
 2. Responsibilities of the Title VI coordinator when receiving reports
of discrimination or harassment. If the Title VI coordinator receives a
report, the Title VI coordinator shall:
 (a) offer supportive measures for the student or students making a
complaint;
 (b) notify any students who report conduct that may reasonably
constitute discrimination or harassment under this section and Title VI
of the federal civil rights act of 1964, of the institution's policies
and/or procedures; and
 (c) ensure there is a process for investigation and resolution of
complaints consistent with obligations under federal and state law.
 3. Developing training to promote equal access and participation. The
division of human rights, in coordination with institutions of public
and private higher education located within the state, shall develop
model training for students and employees to ensure institutional
compliance. Such training or institutionally developed equivalents shall
be delivered annually to all students and employees commencing with the
first full academic year after this section shall take effect, and each
academic year thereafter.
 4. Notification of policies and procedures. The Title VI coordinator
shall notify all students and employees each academic year of the
institution's policies and procedures for reporting discrimination and
harassment.
 (a) Form of notification. The Title VI coordinator shall ensure that
the annual notification includes:
 (i) the institution's nondiscrimination policy statement;
 (ii) website links to all policies and procedures for reporting
discrimination and harassment to the institution;
 (iii) the contact information of the Title VI coordinator; and
 (iv) any other information the Title VI coordinator and the
institution deem necessary.
 5. Designees. The Title VI coordinator may have a designee or
designees to assist in carrying out the functions set forth in this
section, and may work with other employees to carry out the functions
set forth in this section, provided, however, the Title VI coordinator
shall be ultimately responsible for coordinating and overseeing the
institution's compliance with this section and with Title VI of the
federal civil rights act of 1964.
 6. Training for Title VI coordinator and designee or designees. All
Title VI coordinators and their designees shall be trained in their
duties and responsibilities set forth in this section and Title VI of
the federal civil rights act of 1964.
 7. Recordkeeping. (a) The Title VI coordinator shall be responsible
for appropriate recordkeeping related to any reports and complaints of
discrimination and harassment, in accordance with applicable state and
federal law, including all records related to assessments of reports,
records documenting actions the institution took to meet its
obligations, and any records of training attendance and materials.
 8. Other duties. The Title VI coordinator may perform other relevant
duties as established by the institution.
 * NB Effective August 26, 2026
 § 6437. Prohibition on the marketing of credit cards. Each college
shall prohibit the advertising, marketing, or merchandising of credit
cards on college campuses to students, except pursuant to an official
college credit card marketing policy. An official college credit card
marketing policy may include:
 1. registration of on-campus credit card marketers;
 2. limiting credit card marketers to specific dates and specific areas
of the campus as designated by the college;
 3. prohibiting credit card marketers from offering gifts to a student
in exchange for completing a credit card application; and
 4. informing students about good credit management practices through
programs which may include workshops, seminars, discussion groups, and
film presentations.
 § 6438. Notification of fire safety standards and measures in all
college-owned or college-operated housing. Each college shall provide
written notification to students residing in college-owned or
college-operated housing with regard to a description of such housing
facility's fire safety system, including whether the housing is or is
not equipped with a sprinkler system. Each college shall also indicate,
within such written notification, how to access the campus fire safety
report on student housing as required under Title 20 of the U.S. Code
Section 1092(i). For the purposes of this section, "sprinkler system"
shall have the same meaning as in section one hundred fifty-five-a of
the executive law.
 § 6438-a. Opioid overdose prevention in college housing. 1. Every
campus of the state university of New York and every campus of the city
university of New York shall provide training in the administration of
opioid antagonists pursuant to a program approved under section
thirty-three hundred nine of the public health law to every resident
assistant employed by such campus. Such campuses shall provide and
maintain onsite in each college-owned or college-operated housing opioid
antagonists, as defined in section thirty-three hundred nine of the
public health law, in quantities and types deemed by the commissioner of
health. Such opioid antagonists shall be accessible by every resident
assistant for use during emergencies to any student, staff or other
individual on college-owned or college-operated housing premises
suspected of having an opioid overdose whether or not there is a
previous history of opioid abuse.
 2. Each campus of the state university of New York and every campus of
the city university of New York may designate additional employees who
volunteer to administer opioid antagonists in the event a resident
assistant is not physically present at a suspected overdose incident,
provided that such employee is trained in the administration of opioid
antagonists by a program approved under section thirty-three hundred
nine of the public health law.
 3. Any person or entity acting reasonably and in good faith in
compliance with this section shall not be subject to criminal, civil or
administrative liability solely by reason of such action.
 § 6438-b. Access to medication abortion prescription drugs. 1. Every
campus of the state university of New York and every campus of the city
university of New York shall provide access to medication abortion to
all students enrolled at such institutions by either:
 (a) employing or contracting with individuals authorized to prescribe
medication abortion prescription drugs within their lawful scope of
practice pursuant to title eight of this chapter; or
 (b) providing students with information and referrals to providers
authorized to prescribe medication abortion prescription drugs within
their lawful scope of practice pursuant to title eight of this chapter.
 2. Twenty-four months after the effective date of this section, and
annually on such date thereafter, the board of trustees of the state
university of New York and the board of trustees of the city university
of New York shall each submit a report to the governor, the temporary
president of the senate and the speaker of the assembly that includes,
but is not limited to, the following:
 (a) whether campuses provide access to medication abortion pursuant to
paragraph (a) or paragraph (b) of subdivision one of this section; and
 (b) the number of individuals at each campus authorized to prescribe
such prescription drugs.
 § 6438-c. Student-athlete compensation. 1. For the purposes of this
section:
 (a) "student-athlete" shall mean (i) a student enrolled at a college
and participating in intercollegiate athletics, or (ii) an individual
who has completed at least their sophomore year of high school or
international equivalent and is eligible, or may in the future be
eligible, to attend a college and participate in intercollegiate
athletics. Such term shall not include an individual permanently
ineligible to participate in a particular interscholastic or
intercollegiate sport; and
 (b) "team contract" shall mean any written agreement between a
student-athlete and a college, or division, department, program or team
thereof, which includes goals and objectives, standards, prohibitions,
broadcast, advertising or marketing rights or consents, rules or
expectations applicable to the student-athlete.
 2. (a) A college shall not uphold any rule, requirement, standard, or
other limitation that prevents a student-athlete from earning
compensation pursuant to this section as a result of the use of the
student-athlete's name, image, or likeness.
 (b) An athletic association, conference, or other group or
organization with authority over intercollegiate athletics, including,
but not limited to, the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA),
shall not prevent a student-athlete from earning compensation pursuant
to this section as a result of the use of the student-athlete's name,
image, or likeness.
 (c) An athletic association, conference, or other group or
organization with authority over intercollegiate athletics, including,
but not limited to, the NCAA, shall not prevent a college from: (i)
participating in intercollegiate athletics as a result of allowing a
student-athlete pursuant to this section from earning compensation as a
result of the use of the student-athlete's name, image, or likeness; or
(ii) identifying, facilitating, enabling, or supporting opportunities
for a student-athlete to earn compensation for the student-athlete's
name, image, or likeness.
 (d) An athletic association, conference, or other group or
organization with authority over intercollegiate athletics, including,
but not limited to the NCAA, shall not and shall not authorize its
member institutions to:
 (i) prevent a college from participation in intercollegiate athletics
because a student-athlete in attendance has previously earned or intends
to earn compensation for the use of his or her name, image, or likeness;
 (ii) entertain a complaint, open an investigation, or take any other
adverse action against a college for engaging in any activity protected
in this section or for involvement in a student-athlete's name, image,
or likeness; or
 (iii) penalize or prevent a college from participation in
intercollegiate athletics because an individual or entity whose purpose
includes supporting or benefitting the college or its athletic programs
or student-athletes violates the collegiate athletic association's rules
or regulations with regard to a student-athlete's name, image, or
likeness.
 3. A college, athletic association, conference, or other group or
organization with authority over intercollegiate athletics shall not
provide a prospective student-athlete with compensation in relation to
the student-athlete's name, image, or likeness.
 4. (a) A college, athletic association, conference, or other group or
organization with authority over intercollegiate athletics shall not
prevent a student-athlete from obtaining professional representation in
relation to name, image, or likeness contracts or legal matters,
including, but not limited to, representation provided by athlete agents
or legal representation provided by attorneys.
 (b) Professional representation obtained by a student-athlete shall be
from persons registered and/or licensed by the state. Professional
representation provided by athlete agents shall be by persons registered
pursuant to article thirty-nine-E of the general business law. Legal
representation of student-athletes shall be by attorneys licensed
pursuant to article fifteen of the judiciary law.
 (c) Athlete agents representing student-athletes shall comply with the
federal Sports Agent Responsibility and Trust Act, established in
chapter 104 of title 15 of the United States Code, in their
relationships with student-athletes.
 5. A scholarship from the college in which a student-athlete is
enrolled that provides the student-athlete with the cost of attendance
at that college is not compensation for purposes of this section, and a
scholarship shall not be revoked due to earning compensation as a result
of the use of the student-athlete's name, image, or likeness, or due to
obtaining legal or athletic agent representation in relation to name,
image, or likeness matters.
 6. (a) A student-athlete shall not enter into a contract providing
compensation to the student-athlete for use of the student-athlete's
name, image, or likeness if a provision of the contract causes a
conflict pursuant to paragraph (d) of this subdivision.
 (b) A student-athlete who enters into a contract providing
compensation to the student-athlete for use of the student-athlete's
name, image, or likeness shall disclose the contract in advance of
executing it to an official of the college, as designated by the
college.
 (c) A college asserting a conflict pursuant to paragraph (a) of this
subdivision shall disclose to the student-athlete or the
student-athlete's legal representation the relevant contractual
provisions that are in conflict; provided, however, that a college shall
not be required to disclose any financial terms of such contract unless
otherwise required by applicable law.
 (d) A college asserting a conflict pursuant to paragraph (a) of this
subdivision may assert a conflict based on, but not limited to, the
following grounds:
 (i) the proposed contract would cause the student-athlete to violate
the team contract; or
 (ii) the proposed contract would cause the student-athlete to violate
the college's student handbook or code of conduct; or
 (iii) the proposed contract would conflict with an existing contract
or sponsorship the college participates in; or
 (iv) the proposed contract would reasonably be judged to cause
financial loss or reputational damage to the college; or
 (v) the proposed contract would require actions by the student-athlete
during team activities; or
 (vi) the proposed contract would require actions by the
student-athlete during scheduled classes; or
 (vii) the proposed contract would use the college's name, brand,
copywritten materials, trademarks, service marks, symbols, nicknames,
trade dress, insignia, mascot, uniform styles, colors, imagery, campus
landmarks, or any other intellectual property or indicia; or
 (viii) the proposed contract would require the student-athlete to
display a sponsor's product, logo, brand, or other indicia, or otherwise
advertise for a sponsor, during official team activities; or
 (ix) the proposed contract would require the student-athlete to
display a sponsor's product, logo, brand or other indicia, or otherwise
advertise for a sponsor at any time, and such sponsor is a competitor
of, or offers products or services within the same category as a sponsor
of the college.
 7. A team of a college's athletic program shall not prevent a
student-athlete from using the student-athlete's name, image, or
likeness for a commercial purpose when the student-athlete is not
engaged in official team activities, except where there is a conflict
pursuant to paragraph (d) of subdivision six of this section or any
other prohibition in this section.
 8. Each college athletic program that participates in Division 1 NCAA
athletics shall offer a student-athlete assistance program or programs,
designed to provide student-athletes participating in Division 1
athletics with tools aimed to enhance their well-being and experiences
in the classroom, off the field of play, and beyond their tenure as
student-athletes. The student-athlete assistance program may include but
not be limited to:
 (a) a dedicated financial distress fund that would support
student-athletes in times of financial need. Disbursements from such
fund are not compensation for the purposes of this section;
 (b) access to ongoing mental health support services provided by
counselors specially trained to understand the unique issues and
pressures student-athletes confront;
 (c) access to broad-based financial literacy training, with a specific
emphasis on the issues and opportunities relevant to student-athletes,
during and beyond their tenure at the college;
 (d) a degree completion assistance program that provides former
student-athletes who disenrolled from the college in good academic
standing and who earned the NCAA Academic Progress Rate eligibility
point for Division I institutions, before completing their degree,
access to need-based financial aid and counseling assistance required to
support undergraduate degree completion;
 (e) access to training regarding sex-based discrimination and
harassment that ensures student-athletes fully understand their rights
and responsibilities under the law, including how to make a report of
discrimination or harassment on their campus;
 (f) access to leadership training that will set the conditions for
student-athletes to become successful leaders, improve communication
skills, make positive decisions, and manage conflict; and
 (g) access to a career development program, positioned to assist
student-athletes in transferring the valuable skills developed during
intercollegiate athletic participation, to a successful post-college
career.
 * § 6438-d. Notification of alcohol or controlled substance
violations. 1. Every institution of higher education shall make
publicly accessible its policy on notifying a parent, guardian, or
emergency contact of a violation by a student under the age of
twenty-one for the use or possession of alcohol or a controlled
substance. Such violations may include but shall not be limited to, rule
infractions, violations of federal, state, or local law, or controlled
substance or alcohol related hospitalizations or overdoses.
 2. All institutions of higher education shall conduct regular training
on the provisions of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (20
U.S.C. § 1232g; 34 CFR Part 99) related to health and safety emergencies
and its impact on such institutions' response to student alcohol or
controlled substance related hospitalizations or overdoses. These
trainings shall be conducted for relevant administration and staff as
identified by the institution. Such institutions may set the time
intervals and parameters for such trainings.
 * NB Effective July 1, 2026
 ARTICLE 129-B
 IMPLEMENTATION BY COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES OF SEXUAL
 ASSAULT, DATING VIOLENCE, DOMESTIC VIOLENCE AND STALKING PREVENTION AND
 RESPONSE POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
Section 6439. Definitions.
 6440. General provisions.
 6441. Affirmative consent to sexual activity.
 6442. Policy for alcohol and/or drug use amnesty.
 6443. Students' bill of rights.
 6444. Response to reports.
 6445. Campus climate assessments.
 6446. Options for confidential disclosure.
 6447. Student onboarding and ongoing education.
 6448. Privacy in legal challenges.
 6449. Reporting aggregate data to the department.
 § 6439. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms have
the following meanings:
 1. "Institution" shall mean any college or university chartered by the
regents or incorporated by special act of the legislature that maintains
a campus in New York.
 2. "Title IX Coordinator" shall mean the Title IX Coordinator and/or
his or her designee or designees.
 3. "Bystander" shall mean a person who observes a crime, impending
crime, conflict, potentially violent or violent behavior, or conduct
that is in violation of rules or policies of an institution.
 4. "Code of conduct" shall mean the written policies adopted by an
institution governing student behavior, rights, and responsibilities
while such student is matriculated in the institution.
 5. "Confidentiality" may be offered by an individual who is not
required by law to report known incidents of sexual assault or other
crimes to institution officials, in a manner consistent with state and
federal law, including but not limited to 20 U.S.C. 1092(f) and 20
U.S.C. 1681(a). Licensed mental health counselors, medical providers
and pastoral counselors are examples of institution employees who may
offer confidentiality.
 6. "Privacy" may be offered by an individual when such individual is
unable to offer confidentiality under the law but shall still not
disclose information learned from a reporting individual or bystander to
a crime or incident more than necessary to comply with this and other
applicable laws, including informing appropriate institution officials.
Institutions may substitute another relevant term having the same
meaning, as appropriate to the policies of the institution.
 7. "Accused" shall mean a person accused of a violation who has not
yet entered an institution's judicial or conduct process.
 8. "Respondent" shall mean a person accused of a violation who has
entered an institution's judicial or conduct process.
 9. "Reporting individual" shall encompass the terms victim, survivor,
complainant, claimant, witness with victim status, and any other term
used by an institution to reference an individual who brings forth a
report of a violation.
 10. "Sexual activity" shall have the same meaning as "sexual act" and
"sexual contact" as provided in 18 U.S.C. 2246(2) and 18 U.S.C. 2246(3).
 11. "Domestic violence", "dating violence", "stalking" and "sexual
assault" shall be defined by each institution in its code of conduct in
a manner consistent with applicable federal definitions.
 § 6440. General provisions. 1. Every institution shall:
 a. adopt written rules implementing this article by amending its code
of conduct or other comparable policies;
 b. annually file with the department on or before the first day of
July, beginning in two thousand sixteen, a certificate of compliance
with the provisions of this article; and
 c. file a copy of all written rules and policies adopted as required
in this article with the department on or before the first day of July,
two thousand sixteen, and once every ten years thereafter, except that
the second filing shall coincide with the required filing under article
one hundred twenty-nine-A of this chapter, and continue on the same
cycle thereafter.
 2. All institutional services and protections afforded to reporting
individuals under this article shall be available to all students and
applicable to conduct that has a reasonable connection to that
institution. When such conduct involves students or employees from two
or more institutions, such institutions may work collaboratively to
address the conduct provided that such collaboration complies with the
Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act codified at 20 U.S.C. 1232g;
34 C.F.R. Part 99.
 3. If an institution fails to file a certificate of compliance on or
before September first beginning in two thousand sixteen, such
institution shall be ineligible to receive state aid or assistance until
it files such a certificate. The department shall conduct audits of
institutions by random selection, at any time after September first, two
thousand sixteen, to ensure compliance with the provisions of this
article, and shall post information and statistics regarding compliance
with this article on the department's website.
 4. A copy of such rules and policies shall be provided by each
institution to all students enrolled in said institution using a method
and manner appropriate to its institutional culture. Each institution
shall also post such rules and policies on its website in an easily
accessible manner to the public.
 5. The protections in this article apply regardless of race, color,
national origin, religion, creed, age, disability, sex, gender identity
or expression, sexual orientation, familial status, pregnancy,
predisposing genetic characteristics, military status, domestic violence
victim status, or criminal conviction.
 6. The provisions of this article shall apply regardless of whether
the violation occurs on campus, off campus, or while studying abroad.
 7. Institutions shall, where appropriate, utilize applicable state and
federal law, regulations, and guidance in writing the policies required
pursuant to this article.
 8. Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit in any way the
provisions of the penal law that apply to the criminal action analogous
to the student conduct code violations referenced herein. Action pursued
through the criminal justice process shall be governed by the penal law
and the criminal procedure law.
 9. Nothing in this article shall be construed to create a new private
right of action for any person.
 10. Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent an
institution from continuing an investigation when required by law to
continue such investigation.
 § 6441. Affirmative consent to sexual activity. 1. Every institution
shall adopt the following definition of affirmative consent as part of
its code of conduct: "Affirmative consent is a knowing, voluntary, and
mutual decision among all participants to engage in sexual activity.
Consent can be given by words or actions, as long as those words or
actions create clear permission regarding willingness to engage in the
sexual activity. Silence or lack of resistance, in and of itself, does
not demonstrate consent. The definition of consent does not vary based
upon a participant's sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, or gender
expression."
 2. Each institution's code of conduct shall reflect the following
principles as guidance for the institution's community:
 a. Consent to any sexual act or prior consensual sexual activity
between or with any party does not necessarily constitute consent to any
other sexual act.
 b. Consent is required regardless of whether the person initiating the
act is under the influence of drugs and/or alcohol.
 c. Consent may be initially given but withdrawn at any time.
 d. Consent cannot be given when a person is incapacitated, which
occurs when an individual lacks the ability to knowingly choose to
participate in sexual activity. Incapacitation may be caused by the lack
of consciousness or being asleep, being involuntarily restrained, or if
an individual otherwise cannot consent. Depending on the degree of
intoxication, someone who is under the influence of alcohol, drugs, or
other intoxicants may be incapacitated and therefore unable to consent.
 e. Consent cannot be given when it is the result of any coercion,
intimidation, force, or threat of harm.
 f. When consent is withdrawn or can no longer be given, sexual
activity must stop.
 § 6442. Policy for alcohol and/or drug use amnesty. 1. Every
institution shall adopt and implement the following policy as part of
its code of conduct: "The health and safety of every student at the
{Institution} is of utmost importance. {Institution} recognizes that
students who have been drinking and/or using drugs (whether such use is
voluntary or involuntary) at the time that violence, including but not
limited to domestic violence, dating violence, stalking, or sexual
assault occurs may be hesitant to report such incidents due to fear of
potential consequences for their own conduct. {Institution} strongly
encourages students to report domestic violence, dating violence,
stalking, or sexual assault to institution officials. A bystander acting
in good faith or a reporting individual acting in good faith that
discloses any incident of domestic violence, dating violence, stalking,
or sexual assault to {Institution's} officials or law enforcement will
not be subject to {Institution's} code of conduct action for violations
of alcohol and/or drug use policies occurring at or near the time of the
commission of the domestic violence, dating violence, stalking, or
sexual assault."
 2. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit an
institution's ability to provide amnesty in additional circumstances.
 § 6443. Students' bill of rights. Every institution shall adopt and
implement the following "Students' Bill of Rights" as part of its code
of conduct which shall be distributed annually to students, made
available on each institution's website, posted in campus residence
halls and campus centers, and shall include links or information to file
a report and seek a response, pursuant to section sixty-four hundred
forty-four of this article, and the options for confidential disclosure
pursuant to section sixty-four hundred forty-six of this article: "All
students have the right to: 1. Make a report to local law enforcement
and/or state police; 2. Have disclosures of domestic violence, dating
violence, stalking, and sexual assault treated seriously; 3. Make a
decision about whether or not to disclose a crime or violation and
participate in the judicial or conduct process and/or criminal justice
process free from pressure by the institution; 4. Participate in a
process that is fair, impartial, and provides adequate notice and a
meaningful opportunity to be heard; 5. Be treated with dignity and to
receive from the institution courteous, fair, and respectful health care
and counseling services, where available; 6. Be free from any suggestion
that the reporting individual is at fault when these crimes and
violations are committed, or should have acted in a different manner to
avoid such crimes or violations; 7. Describe the incident to as few
institution representatives as practicable and not be required to
unnecessarily repeat a description of the incident; 8. Be protected from
retaliation by the institution, any student, the accused and/or the
respondent, and/or their friends, family and acquaintances within the
jurisdiction of the institution; 9. Access to at least one level of
appeal of a determination; 10. Be accompanied by an advisor of choice
who may assist and advise a reporting individual, accused, or respondent
throughout the judicial or conduct process including during all meetings
and hearings related to such process; and 11. Exercise civil rights and
practice of religion without interference by the investigative, criminal
justice, or judicial or conduct process of the institution."
 § 6444. Response to reports. 1. Every institution shall ensure that
reporting individuals are advised of their right to:
 a. Notify university police or campus security, local law enforcement,
and/or state police;
 b. Have emergency access to a Title IX Coordinator or other
appropriate official trained in interviewing victims of sexual assault
who shall be available upon the first instance of disclosure by a
reporting individual to provide information regarding options to
proceed, and, where applicable, the importance of preserving evidence
and obtaining a sexual assault forensic examination as soon as possible,
and detailing that the criminal justice process utilizes different
standards of proof and evidence and that any questions about whether a
specific incident violated the penal law should be addressed to law
enforcement or to the district attorney. Such official shall also
explain whether he or she is authorized to offer the reporting
individual confidentiality or privacy, and shall inform the reporting
individual of other reporting options;
 c. Disclose confidentially the incident to institution
representatives, who may offer confidentiality pursuant to applicable
laws and can assist in obtaining services for reporting individuals;
 d. Disclose confidentially the incident and obtain services from the
state or local government;
 e. Disclose the incident to institution representatives who can offer
privacy or confidentiality, as appropriate, and can assist in obtaining
resources for reporting individuals;
 f. File a report of sexual assault, domestic violence, dating
violence, and/or stalking and the right to consult the Title IX
Coordinator and other appropriate institution representatives for
information and assistance. Reports shall be investigated in accordance
with institution policy and a reporting individual's identity shall
remain private at all times if said reporting individual wishes to
maintain privacy;
 g. Disclose, if the accused is an employee of the institution, the
incident to the institution's human resources authority or the right to
request that a confidential or private employee assist in reporting to
the appropriate human resources authority;
 h. Receive assistance from appropriate institution representatives in
initiating legal proceedings in family court or civil court; and
 i. Withdraw a complaint or involvement from the institution process at
any time.
 2. Every institution shall ensure that, at a minimum, at the first
instance of disclosure by a reporting individual to an institution
representative, the following information shall be presented to the
reporting individual: "You have the right to make a report to university
police or campus security, local law enforcement, and/or state police or
choose not to report; to report the incident to your institution; to be
protected by the institution from retaliation for reporting an incident;
and to receive assistance and resources from your institution."
 3. Every institution shall ensure that reporting individuals have
information about resources, including intervention, mental health
counseling, and medical services, which shall include information on
whether such resources are available at no cost or for a fee. Every
institution shall also provide information on sexually transmitted
infections, sexual assault forensic examinations, and resources
available through the New York state office of victim services,
established pursuant to section six hundred twenty-two of the executive
law.
 4. Every institution shall ensure that individuals are provided the
following protections and accommodations:
 a. When the accused or respondent is a student, to have the
institution issue a "no contact order" consistent with institution
policies and procedures, whereby continued intentional contact with the
reporting individual would be a violation of institution policy subject
to additional conduct charges; if the accused or respondent and a
reporting individual observe each other in a public place, it shall be
the responsibility of the accused or respondent to leave the area
immediately and without directly contacting the reporting individual.
Both the accused or respondent and the reporting individual shall, upon
request and consistent with institution policies and procedures, be
afforded a prompt review, reasonable under the circumstances, of the
need for and terms of a no contact order, including potential
modification, and shall be allowed to submit evidence in support of his
or her request. Institutions may establish an appropriate schedule for
the accused and respondents to access applicable institution buildings
and property at a time when such buildings and property are not being
accessed by the reporting individual;
 b. To be assisted by the institution's police or security forces, if
applicable, or other officials in obtaining an order of protection or,
if outside of New York state, an equivalent protective or restraining
order;
 c. To receive a copy of the order of protection or equivalent when
received by an institution and have an opportunity to meet or speak with
an institution representative, or other appropriate individual, who can
explain the order and answer questions about it, including information
from the order about the accused's responsibility to stay away from the
protected person or persons;
 d. To an explanation of the consequences for violating these orders,
including but not limited to arrest, additional conduct charges, and
interim suspension;
 e. To receive assistance from university police or campus security in
effecting an arrest when an individual violates an order of protection
or, if university police or campus security does not possess arresting
powers, then to call on and assist local law enforcement in effecting an
arrest for violating such an order, provided that nothing in this
article shall limit current law enforcement jurisdiction and procedures;
 f. When the accused or respondent is a student determined to present a
continuing threat to the health and safety of the community, to subject
the accused or respondent to interim suspension pending the outcome of a
judicial or conduct process consistent with this article and the
institution's policies and procedures. Both the accused or respondent
and the reporting individual shall, upon request and consistent with the
institution's policies and procedures, be afforded a prompt review,
reasonable under the circumstances, of the need for and terms of an
interim suspension, including potential modification, and shall be
allowed to submit evidence in support of his or her request;
 g. When the accused is not a student but is a member of the
institution's community and presents a continuing threat to the health
and safety of the community, to subject the accused to interim measures
in accordance with applicable collective bargaining agreements, employee
handbooks, and rules and policies of the institution;
 h. To obtain reasonable and available interim measures and
accommodations that effect a change in academic, housing, employment,
transportation or other applicable arrangements in order to help ensure
safety, prevent retaliation and avoid an ongoing hostile environment,
consistent with the institution's policies and procedures. Both the
accused or respondent and the reporting individual shall, upon request
and consistent with the institution's policies and procedures, be
afforded a prompt review, reasonable under the circumstances, of the
need for and terms of any such interim measure and accommodation that
directly affects him or her, and shall be allowed to submit evidence in
support of his or her request.
 5. Every institution shall ensure that every student be afforded the
following rights:
 a. The right to request that student conduct charges be filed against
the accused in proceedings governed by this article and the procedures
established by the institution's rules.
 b. The right to a process in all student judicial or conduct cases,
where a student is accused of sexual assault, domestic violence, dating
violence, stalking, or sexual activity that may otherwise violate the
institution's code of conduct, that includes, at a minimum: (i) notice
to a respondent describing the date, time, location and factual
allegations concerning the violation, a reference to the specific code
of conduct provisions alleged to have been violated, and possible
sanctions; (ii) an opportunity to offer evidence during an
investigation, and to present evidence and testimony at a hearing, where
appropriate, and have access to a full and fair record of any such
hearing, which shall be preserved and maintained for at least five years
from such a hearing and may include a transcript, recording or other
appropriate record; and (iii) access to at least one level of appeal of
a determination before a panel, which may include one or more students,
that is fair and impartial and does not include individuals with a
conflict of interest. In order to effectuate an appeal, a respondent and
reporting individual in such cases shall receive written notice of the
findings of fact, the decision and the sanction, if any, as well as the
rationale for the decision and sanction. In such cases, any rights
provided to a reporting individual must be similarly provided to a
respondent and any rights provided to a respondent must be similarly
provided to a reporting individual.
 c. Throughout proceedings involving such an accusation of sexual
assault, domestic violence, dating violence, stalking, or sexual
activity that may otherwise violate the institution's code of conduct,
the right:
 i. For the respondent, accused, and reporting individual to be
accompanied by an advisor of choice who may assist and advise a
reporting individual, accused, or respondent throughout the judicial or
conduct process including during all meetings and hearings related to
such process. Rules for participation of such advisor shall be
established in the code of conduct.
 ii. To a prompt response to any complaint and to have the complaint
investigated and adjudicated in an impartial, timely, and thorough
manner by individuals who receive annual training in conducting
investigations of sexual violence, the effects of trauma, impartiality,
the rights of the respondent, including the right to a presumption that
the respondent is "not responsible" until a finding of responsibility is
made pursuant to the provisions of this article and the institution's
policies and procedures, and other issues including, but not limited to
domestic violence, dating violence, stalking or sexual assault.
 iii. To an investigation and process that is fair, impartial and
provides a meaningful opportunity to be heard, and that is not conducted
by individuals with a conflict of interest.
 iv. To have the institution's judicial or conduct process run
concurrently with a criminal justice investigation and proceeding,
except for temporary delays as requested by external municipal entities
while law enforcement gathers evidence. Temporary delays should not last
more than ten days except when law enforcement specifically requests and
justifies a longer delay.
 v. To review and present available evidence in the case file, or
otherwise in the possession or control of the institution, and relevant
to the conduct case, consistent with institution policies and
procedures.
 vi. To exclude their own prior sexual history with persons other than
the other party in the judicial or conduct process or their own mental
health diagnosis and/or treatment from admittance in the institution
disciplinary stage that determines responsibility. Past findings of
domestic violence, dating violence, stalking, or sexual assault may be
admissible in the disciplinary stage that determines sanction.
 vii. To receive written or electronic notice, provided in advance
pursuant to the college or university policy and reasonable under the
circumstances, of any meeting they are required to or are eligible to
attend, of the specific rule, rules or laws alleged to have been
violated and in what manner, and the sanction or sanctions that may be
imposed on the respondent based upon the outcome of the judicial or
conduct process, at which time the designated hearing or investigatory
officer or panel shall provide a written statement detailing the factual
findings supporting the determination and the rationale for the sanction
imposed.
 viii. To make an impact statement during the point of the proceeding
where the decision maker is deliberating on appropriate sanctions.
 ix. To simultaneous (among the parties) written or electronic
notification of the outcome of a judicial or conduct process, including
the sanction or sanctions.
 x. To be informed of the sanction or sanctions that may be imposed on
the respondent based upon the outcome of the judicial or conduct process
and the rationale for the actual sanction imposed.
 xi. To choose whether to disclose or discuss the outcome of a conduct
or judicial process.
 xii. To have all information obtained during the course of the conduct
or judicial process be protected from public release until the appeals
panel makes a final determination unless otherwise required by law.
 6. For crimes of violence, including, but not limited to sexual
violence, defined as crimes that meet the reporting requirements
pursuant to the federal Clery Act established in 20 U.S.C.
1092(f)(1)(F)(i)(I)-(VIII), institutions shall make a notation on the
transcript of students found responsible after a conduct process that
they were "suspended after a finding of responsibility for a code of
conduct violation" or "expelled after a finding of responsibility for a
code of conduct violation." For the respondent who withdraws from the
institution while such conduct charges are pending, and declines to
complete the disciplinary process, institutions shall make a notation on
the transcript of such students that they "withdrew with conduct charges
pending." Each institution shall publish a policy on transcript
notations and appeals seeking removal of a transcript notation for a
suspension, provided that such notation shall not be removed prior to
one year after conclusion of the suspension, while notations for
expulsion shall not be removed. If a finding of responsibility is
vacated for any reason, any such transcript notation shall be removed.
 7. Institutions that lack appropriate on-campus resources or services
shall, to the extent practicable, enter into memoranda of understanding,
agreements or collaborative partnerships with existing community-based
organizations, including rape-crisis centers and domestic violence
shelters and assistance organizations, to refer students for assistance
or make services available to students, including counseling, health,
mental health, victim advocacy, and legal assistance, which may also
include resources and services for the respondent.
 8. Institutions shall, to the extent practicable, ensure that students
have access to a sexual assault forensic examination by employing the
use of a sexual assault nurse examiner in their campus health center or
entering into memoranda of understanding or agreements with at least one
local health care facility to provide such a service.
 9. Nothing in this article shall be deemed to diminish the rights of
any member of the institution's community under any applicable
collective bargaining agreement.
 § 6445. Campus climate assessments. 1. Every institution shall
conduct, no less than every other year, a campus climate assessment to
ascertain general awareness and knowledge of the provisions of this
article, including student experience with and knowledge of reporting
and college adjudicatory processes, which shall be developed using
standard and commonly recognized research methods.
 2. The assessment shall include questions covering, but not be limited
to, the following:
 a. the Title IX Coordinator's role;
 b. campus policies and procedures addressing sexual assault;
 c. how and where to report domestic violence, dating violence,
stalking or sexual assault as a victim, survivor or witness;
 d. the availability of resources on and off campus, such as
counseling, health and academic assistance;
 e. the prevalence of victimization and perpetration of domestic
violence, dating violence, stalking, or sexual assault on and off campus
during a set time period;
 f. bystander attitudes and behavior;
 g. whether reporting individuals disclosed to the institution and/or
law enforcement, experiences with reporting and institution processes,
and reasons why they did or did not report;
 h. the general awareness of the difference, if any, between the
institution's policies and the penal law; and
 i. general awareness of the definition of affirmative consent.
 3. Every institution shall take steps to ensure that answers to such
assessments remain anonymous and that no individual is identified.
Institutions shall publish results of the surveys on their website
provided that no personally identifiable information or information
which can reasonably lead a reader to identify an individual shall be
shared.
 4. Information discovered or produced as a result of complying with
this section shall not be subject to discovery or admitted into evidence
in any federal or state court proceeding or considered for other
purposes in any action for damages brought by a private party against an
institution, unless, in the discretion of the court, any such
information is deemed to be material to the underlying claim or defense.
 § 6446. Options for confidential disclosure. 1. In accordance with
this article, every institution shall ensure that reporting individuals
have the following:
 a. Information regarding privileged and confidential resources they
may contact regarding domestic violence, dating violence, stalking or
sexual assault;
 b. Information about counselors and advocates they may contact
regarding domestic violence, dating violence, stalking, or sexual
assault;
 c. A plain language explanation of confidentiality which shall, at a
minimum, include the following provision: "Even {Institution} offices
and employees who cannot guarantee confidentiality will maintain your
privacy to the greatest extent possible. The information you provide to
a non-confidential resource will be relayed only as necessary for the
Title IX Coordinator to investigate and/or seek a resolution.";
 d. Information about how the institution shall weigh a request for
confidentiality and respond to such a request. Such information shall,
at a minimum, include that if a reporting individual discloses an
incident to an institution employee who is responsible for responding to
or reporting domestic violence, dating violence, stalking, or sexual
assault but wishes to maintain confidentiality or does not consent to
the institution's request to initiate an investigation, the Title IX
Coordinator must weigh the request against the institution's obligation
to provide a safe, non-discriminatory environment for all members of its
community. The institution shall assist with academic, housing,
transportation, employment, and other reasonable and available
accommodations regardless of reporting choices;
 e. Information about public awareness and advocacy events, including
guarantees that if an individual discloses information through a public
awareness event such as candlelight vigils, protests, or other public
event, the institution is not obligated to begin an investigation based
on such information. The institution may use the information provided at
such an event to inform its efforts for additional education and
prevention efforts;
 f. Information about existing and available methods to anonymously
disclose including, but not limited to information on relevant
confidential hotlines provided by New York state agencies and
not-for-profit entities;
 g. Information regarding institutional crime reporting including, but
not limited to: reports of certain crimes occurring in specific
geographic locations that shall be included in the institution's annual
security report pursuant to the Clery Act, 20 U.S.C. 1092(f), in an
anonymized manner that identifies neither the specifics of the crime nor
the identity of the reporting individual; that the institution is
obligated to issue timely warnings of crimes enumerated in the Clery Act
occurring within relevant geography that represent a serious or
continuing threat to students and employees, except in those
circumstances where issuing such a warning may compromise current law
enforcement efforts or when the warning itself could potentially
identify the reporting individual; that a reporting individual shall not
be identified in a timely warning; that the Family Educational Rights
and Privacy Act, 20 U.S.C. 1232g, allows institutions to share
information with parents when i. there is a health or safety emergency,
or ii. when the student is a dependent on either parent's prior year
federal income tax return; and that generally, the institution shall not
share information about a report of domestic violence, dating violence,
stalking, or sexual assault with parents without the permission of the
reporting individual.
 2. The institution may take proactive steps, such as training or
awareness efforts, to combat domestic violence, dating violence,
stalking or sexual assault in a general way that does not identify those
who disclose or the information disclosed.
 3. If the institution determines that an investigation is required, it
shall notify the reporting individuals and take immediate action as
necessary to protect and assist them.
 4. The institution should seek consent from reporting individuals
prior to conducting an investigation. Declining to consent to an
investigation shall be honored unless the institution determines in good
faith that failure to investigate does not adequately mitigate a
potential risk of harm to the reporting individual or other members of
the community. Honoring such a request may limit the institution's
ability to meaningfully investigate and pursue conduct action against an
accused individual. Factors used to determine whether to honor such a
request include, but are not limited to:
 a. Whether the accused has a history of violent behavior or is a
repeat offender;
 b. Whether the incident represents escalation in unlawful conduct on
behalf of the accused from previously noted behavior;
 c. The increased risk that the accused will commit additional acts of
violence;
 d. Whether the accused used a weapon or force;
 e. Whether the reporting individual is a minor; and
 f. Whether the institution possesses other means to obtain evidence
such as security footage, and whether available information reveals a
pattern of perpetration at a given location or by a particular group.
 § 6447. Student onboarding and ongoing education. 1. Every institution
shall adopt a comprehensive student onboarding and ongoing education
campaign to educate members of the institution's community about
domestic violence, dating violence, stalking, and sexual assault, in
compliance with applicable federal laws, including the Clery Act as
amended by the Violence Against Women Act reauthorization of 2013, 20
U.S.C. 1092(f).
 2. Included in this campaign shall be a requirement that all new
first-year and transfer students shall, during the course of their
onboarding to their respective institution, receive training on the
following topics, using a method and manner appropriate to the
institutional culture of each institution:
 a. The institution prohibits sexual and interpersonal violence and
will offer resources to any victims and survivors of such violence while
taking administrative and conduct action regarding any accused
individual within the jurisdiction of the institution;
 b. Relevant definitions including, but not limited to, the definitions
of sexual assault, domestic violence, dating violence, stalking,
confidentiality, privacy, and consent;
 c. Policies apply equally to all students regardless of sexual
orientation, gender identity, or gender expression;
 d. The role of the Title IX Coordinator, university police or campus
security, and other relevant offices that address domestic violence,
dating violence, stalking, and sexual assault prevention and response;
 e. Awareness of violence, its impact on victims and survivors and
their friends and family, and its long-term impact;
 f. Bystander intervention and the importance of taking action to
prevent violence when one can safely do so;
 g. Risk assessment and reduction including, but not limited to, steps
that potential victims, perpetrators, and bystanders can take to lower
the incidence of violations, which may contain information about the
dangers of drug and alcohol use, including underage drinking and binge
drinking, involuntary consumption of incapacitating drugs and the danger
of mislabeled drugs and alcohol, the importance of communication with
trusted friends and family whether on campus or off campus, and the
availability of institution officials who can answer general or specific
questions about risk reduction; and
 h. Consequences and sanctions for individuals who commit these crimes
and code of conduct violations.
 3. Every institution shall train all new students, whether first-year
or transfer, undergraduate, graduate, or professional.
 4. Every institution shall use multiple methods to educate students
about violence prevention and shall share information on domestic
violence, dating violence, stalking and sexual assault prevention with
parents of enrolling students.
 5. Every institution shall offer to all students general and specific
training in domestic violence, dating violence, stalking and sexual
assault prevention and shall conduct a campaign that complies with the
Violence Against Women Act, 20 U.S.C. 1092(f), to educate the student
population. They shall, as appropriate, provide or expand specific
training to include groups such as international students, students that
are also employees, leaders and officers of registered or recognized
student organizations, and online and distance education students. They
shall also provide specific training to members of groups that the
institution identifies as high-risk populations.
 6. Every institution shall require that each student leader and
officer of student organizations recognized by or registered with the
institution, as well as those seeking recognition by the institution,
complete training on domestic violence, dating violence, stalking, or
sexual assault prevention prior to receiving recognition or
registration, and each institution shall require that each
student-athlete complete training on domestic violence, dating violence,
stalking, or sexual assault prevention prior to participating in
intercollegiate athletic competition.
 7. Every institution must regularly assess programs and policies
established pursuant to this article to determine effectiveness and
relevance for students.
 § 6448. Privacy in legal challenges. Pursuant to subdivision (i) of
rule three thousand sixteen of the civil practice law and rules, in any
proceeding brought against an institution which seeks to vacate or
modify a finding that a student was responsible for violating an
institution's rules regarding a violation covered by this article, the
name and identifying biographical information of any student shall be
presumptively confidential and shall not be included in the pleadings
and other papers from such proceeding absent a waiver or cause shown as
determined by the court. Such witnesses shall be identified only as
numbered witnesses. If such a name or identifying biographical
information appears in a pleading or paper filed in such a proceeding,
the court, absent such a waiver or cause shown, shall direct the clerk
of the court to redact such name and identifying biographical
information and so advise the parties.
 § 6449. Reporting aggregate data to the department. 1. Institutions
shall annually report to the department the following information about
reports of domestic violence, dating violence, stalking and sexual
assault:
 a. The number of such incidents that were reported to the Title IX
Coordinator.
 b. Of those incidents in paragraph a of this subdivision, the number
of reporting individuals who sought the institution's judicial or
conduct process.
 c. Of those reporting individuals in paragraph b of this subdivision,
the number of cases processed through the institution's judicial or
conduct process.
 d. Of those cases in paragraph c of this subdivision, the number of
respondents who were found responsible through the institution's
judicial or conduct process.
 e. Of those cases in paragraph c of this subdivision, the number of
respondents who were found not responsible through the institution's
judicial or conduct process.
 f. A description of the final sanctions imposed by the institution for
each incident for which a respondent was found responsible, as provided
in paragraph d of this subdivision, through the institution's judicial
or conduct process.
 g. The number of cases in the institution's judicial or conduct
process that were closed prior to a final determination after the
respondent withdrew from the institution and declined to complete the
disciplinary process.
 h. The number of cases in the institution's judicial or conduct
process that were closed because the complaint was withdrawn by the
reporting individual prior to a final determination.
 2. The department shall create a reporting mechanism for institutions
to efficiently and uniformly provide the information outlined in
subdivision one of this section.
 3. The department shall not release the information, as provided for
in this section, if it would compromise the confidentiality of reporting
individuals or any other party in the best judgment of the department.
 4. Within one year of the effective date of this article, the
department shall issue regulations in consultation with representatives
from the state university of New York, city university of New York, and
private and independent colleges and universities, and within two years
of the effective date of this article the department shall issue a
report to the governor, the temporary president of the senate, the
speaker of the assembly and the chairs of the higher education
committees in each house regarding the data collected pursuant to this
section.
 ARTICLE 130
 ARTHUR O. EVE OPPORTUNITY FOR HIGHER EDUCATION
Section 6451. Arthur O. Eve opportunity for higher education; non-public
 institutions.
 6452. Arthur O. Eve opportunity for higher education; state
 university of New York and city university of New York.
 6453. Special nursing education program.
 6454. Science and technology entry program.
 6455. Collegiate science and technology entry program.
 6456. Foster youth college success initiative.
 § 6451. Arthur O. Eve opportunity for higher education; non-public
institutions. 1. To advance the cause of educational opportunity in
higher education, the commissioner may contract with non-public
institutions of higher education for the support of special programs for
the screening, testing, counseling, tutoring of, and, assistance to,
residents of the state who are, (1) graduates of an approved high school
or individuals who have attained a New York state high school
equivalency diploma or its equivalent, as determined by the
commissioner, (2) who have potential for the successful completion of a
post secondary program, and (3) are economically and educationally
disadvantaged, as defined by the regents.
 2. To qualify for state assistance through such contracts, an
institution of higher education must be a college or university
incorporated by the regents or by the legislature, or a school of
medicine, dentistry or osteopathy authorized by the regents to confer
the degree of doctor of medicine, doctor of medical science, doctor of
dental surgery or doctor of osteopathy and must maintain one or more
earned degree programs culminating in an associate or higher degree.
 3. Moneys made available to institutions through contracts shall be
spent only for the following purposes:
 a. Special testing, counseling and guidance services in the course of
screening potential enrollees;
 b. Remedial courses, developmental or compensatory courses and summer
classes for such students;
 c. Special tutoring, counseling and guidance services for such
enrolled students;
 d. Any necessary supplemental financial assistance, which may include
the cost of books and necessary maintenance for such enrolled students,
including students without lawful immigration status provided that the
student meets the requirements set forth in subparagraph (ii) of
paragraph a or subparagraph (ii) of paragraph b of subdivision five of
section six hundred sixty-one of this chapter, as applicable; provided,
however, that such supplemental financial assistance shall be furnished
pursuant to criteria promulgated by the commissioner with the approval
of the director of the budget;
 e. Partial reimbursement for tuition for regular academic courses
pursuant to criteria promulgated by the commissioner;
 f. Student travel for academic activities or conferences;
 g. Expenses related to helping students apply for and prepare for
graduate or professional school; and
 h. The hiring of enrolled students participating in an Arthur O. Eve
opportunity for higher education work-study program.
 4. The commissioner shall promulgate regulations requiring the
submission to him by any institution intending to contract with the
state for assistance pursuant to this section of reports in such form
and containing such information as he shall require, concerning, but not
limited to, such matters as a description of the proposed program,
estimated costs, objectives, the extent of the institution's support of
such program and similar programs and the progress of students in such
programs, and the commissioner shall take such factors into account in
determining whether to enter into a contract with such institution and
the terms and conditions thereof.
 5. Contracts made pursuant to this section shall be subject to the
approval of the director of the budget.
 6. The commissioner shall prepare an annual report of the activities
of the institutions which received state funds pursuant to this section
in the preceding fiscal year, concerning, but not limited to, the
effectiveness of each of the programs contracted for, the costs of the
programs and the future plans thereof and shall transmit such report to
the Governor and the legislature on or before the December first next
following the close of such fiscal year.
 § 6452. Arthur O. Eve opportunity for higher education; state
university of New York and city university of New York. 1. To provide
additional educational opportunity at the state university of New York
and the city university of New York, such institutions shall provide
special programs for the screening, testing, counseling, and tutoring
of, and assistance to, residents of the state who are, (1) graduates of
an approved high school or individuals who have attained a New York
state high school equivalency diploma or its equivalent, as determined
by the commissioner, (2) who have potential for the successful
completion of a post secondary program, and (3) are economically and
educationally disadvantaged.
 2. Such universities shall each formulate a general plan for the
organization, development, co-ordination and operation of such a program
within the amounts made available therefor by law. Such a plan shall
include:
 a. Definition of eligibility, provided, however, except for requiring
residence in the state or in the city of New York in the case of those
programs provided by the city university of New York, no such definition
shall include either by its terms or in its application, any criteria or
standard which determines eligibility based in whole or in part upon the
geographical locality in which a student or prospective student resides,
 b. Procedures for the selection of students from among the eligibles,
 c. Description of the contents of such proposed program including
counseling, tutoring and skill development,
 d. Estimated costs,
 e. Objectives including co-ordination with the university's long range
plan,
 f. Extent of other funds and resources to be utilized in support of
the program,
 g. Procedures for the evaluation of student progress, and
 h. Periodic reports.
 3. The general plan shall be transmitted to the board of regents at
such time as the regents shall by rule require. Such plan shall be
reviewed by the regents and shall guide and determine the operation of
such programs at such universities.
 4. a. Moneys made available to such universities pursuant to this
section shall be spent only for the following purposes:
 (i) Special testing, counseling and guidance services in the course of
screening potential students,
 (ii) Remedial courses, developmental and compensatory courses and
summer classes for such students,
 (iii) Special tutoring, counseling and guidance services for enrolled
students,
 (iv) Central services including evaluation and administrative costs,
 (v) Any necessary supplemental financial assistance, which may include
the cost of books and necessary maintenance for such students, including
students without lawful immigration status provided that the student
meets the requirements set forth in subparagraph (ii) of paragraph a or
subparagraph (ii) of paragraph b of subdivision five of section six
hundred sixty-one of this chapter, as applicable; provided, however,
that such supplemental financial assistance shall be furnished pursuant
to criteria promulgated by such universities and approved by the regents
and the director of the budget.
 b. No funds pursuant to this section shall be made available to
support the regular academic programs of any institution participating
in this program, nor shall funds be provided for programs which are
incompatible with the regents plan for the expansion and development of
higher education in the state.
 5. a. The trustees of the state university and board of higher
education in the city of New York shall each furnish to the regents, the
director of the budget, the chairman of the senate finance committee and
the chairman of the assembly ways and means committee, at least
annually, a report in such form, at such time and containing such
information as the regents and the director of the budget may require,
of the operations of such programs. The report shall include:
 (i) A statement of the objectives of the program at the institution,
 (ii) A description of the program,
 (iii) The budgetary expenditures for such program, separately stating
academic credit instructional costs, other instructional costs, tutoring
costs, remediation, counseling, supplemental financial assistance and
central services, including evaluation and administrative costs,
 (iv) The extent of other funds and resources used in support of such
program and their sources,
 (v) The progress of students,
 (vi) The extent and nature of the responsibility exercised over such
program by such trustees and such board,
 (vii) The extent and nature of supervision and control exercised over
such program by the administrative officials of the constituent
institutions in such universities,
 (viii) A certification by such trustees and such board that the
academic committees of the constituent institutions of such universities
and their faculty committees have reviewed and approved the academic
content of the courses offered for academic credit in such program and
the amount of academic credit granted therefor and that the registration
requirements of the regents and the commissioner have been met where
applicable.
 b. The regents shall review such report and forward the same, together
with their comments and recommendations to the governor and the
legislature, on or before December first next following the close of the
state's fiscal year.
 * § 6453. Special nursing education program. To grant greater
opportunity in nursing education, the commissioner may:
 1. Enter into contracts with any institution of higher education
incorporated in this state, voluntary non-profit hospitals incorporated
within this state or public hospitals located within this state for:
 (1) A contract for conducting courses approved by the department to
assist foreign trained nurses to qualify for a license as a registered
professional nurse in this state.
 (2) A contract for conducting refresher courses for residents of this
state who have been licensed as registered professional nurses but who
are not actively engaged in nursing.
 2. Enter into a contract to expand the enrollment of any institution
of higher education incorporated within this state or any voluntary
non-profit hospital or municipal or county hospital incorporated within
this state providing either a regents' approved curriculum leading to a
baccalaureate degree in professional nursing or a regents' registered
program in professional nursing, by paying an agreed sum to the
institution for each additional student enrolled in each year of
instruction above the average enrollment in such year of instruction for
the last five years prior to the year for which the payment is made. The
sum shall not be paid for more than ten additional students per year.
 3. Promulgate regulations necessary for the implementation of these
programs.
 * NB Section set out as 6443. Should read 6453
 § 6454. Science and technology entry program. 1. As used in this
section:
 a. "Council" means the council on professional career opportunity
created pursuant to article forty-four of the executive law;
 b. "Eligible students" shall mean secondary school students who are
either economically disadvantaged or minorities historically
underrepresented in the scientific, technical, health, and
health-related professions as defined by the regents after consultation
with the council; and
 c. "Eligible applicant" shall mean an institution of postsecondary
education or a consortia of such institutions.
 2. The purpose of the science and technology entry programs shall be
to assist eligible students in acquiring the skills, attitudes and
abilities necessary to pursue professional or pre-professional study in
post-secondary degree programs in scientific, technical and
health-related fields.
 3. Grant applications submitted by eligible applicants shall outline a
plan of instruction and curriculum-related activities and services to
advance the purpose of the science and technology entry program. Such
plans may provide for contracting by the eligible applicant with
specified not-for-profit community based educational organizations for
the provision of instruction, activities and services outlined in the
plan. Such plans shall include quantifiable measures to assess the
effectiveness of the instruction, activities and services in promoting
the purposes of the science and technology entry program. Such measures
shall include, but not be limited to:
 a. the persistence rate of participating students in selecting and
completing mathematics and science courses in an academic track in their
subsequent years in high school;
 b. the college placement rate of participating students in
professional or pre-professional programs in scientific, technical, or
health-related fields. Such approved plans may be amended with the
approval of the commissioner.
 4. Eligible applicants receiving grants pursuant to this section shall
provide a program of instruction and curriculum-related activities and
services to advance the purpose of the science and technology entry
program. The curricula of these programs shall, to the extent
practicable, emphasize the concrete aspects of the scientific, technical
or health-related discipline as it relates to a professional career,
through laboratories, relevant work experience opportunities, or similar
activities. In addition to specialized instruction, programs funded
pursuant to this section shall provide participating students with
personal, career and financial aid counseling to ensure that such
students are fully aware of the opportunities and necessary preparations
for professional careers in scientific, technical, or health-related
fields.
 5. a. Grants shall be awarded to eligible applicants based upon
criteria established by the commissioner after consultation with the
council, including, but not limited to, the following:
 (1) an established record of conducting effective collaborative
educational programs with neighboring secondary schools;
 (2) the ability and willingness to cooperate with other postsecondary
institutions in operating a program funded pursuant to this section;
 (3) the capacity to secure or provide additional support in amounts
equal to at least twenty-five percent of the grant sought under this
section through private and other governmental sources and through
in-kind services;
 (4) a location within a school district with an enrollment comprised
of at least twenty percent minority group students or a location near
such a district that is accessible by public transportation.
 b. The commissioner shall select the grant recipients after
consultation with the council. To the fullest extent practicable the
commissioner and the council shall ensure that grants are awarded to
eligible applicants in a diversity of regions of the state.
 6. To be selected to participate in a program funded pursuant to this
section, an eligible student must exhibit the potential for college
level study if provided with special services, as indicated by academic
record, test scores, attendance record, personal references, and other
measures deemed appropriate by the commissioner.
 7. No grant pursuant to this section shall exceed two hundred thousand
dollars to any eligible applicant in a single state fiscal year unless
the eligible applicant is a consortium comprised of two or more
institutions of post-secondary education or unless the eligible
applicant is conducting summer classes as an approved part of its
program.
 8. The commissioner is authorized to require eligible applicants
receiving funds pursuant to this section to report periodically upon:
 a. compliance with the approved plan;
 b. the objectives of the applicant's program;
 c. the curricula and the activities and services offered by the
program;
 d. the sources of support and the expenditures of the program;
 e. the background and progress of students selected to participate in
the program;
 f. the performance of the program in meeting the evaluation standards
established pursuant to this section; and
 g. other matters the commissioner deems appropriate.
 § 6455. Collegiate science and technology entry program. 1. General
requirements. The commissioner shall award grants to degree-granting
institutions in New York or to consortia of such institutions to be used
for the purpose of increasing access by minority or disadvantaged
students to academic programs that have been registered by the
commissioner and that prepare students either for licensure in the
professions or for employment in scientific and technical fields.
 2. Undergraduate programs. (a) (i) Undergraduate science and
technology entry program moneys may be used for tutoring, counseling,
remedial and special summer courses, supplemental financial assistance,
program administration, and other activities which the commissioner may
deem appropriate. To be eligible for undergraduate collegiate science
and technology entry program support, a student must be a resident of
New York, or meet the requirements of subparagraph (ii) of this
paragraph, and must be either economically disadvantaged or from a
minority group historically under represented in the scientific,
technical, health and health-related professions, and must demonstrate
interest in and a potential for a professional career if provided
special services. Eligible students must be in good academic standing,
enrolled full time in an approved, undergraduate level program of study,
as defined by the regents.
 (ii) An applicant who is not a legal resident of New York state, but
who is a United States citizen, a permanent lawful resident, an
individual who is granted U or T non-immigrant status pursuant to the
Victims of Trafficking and Violence Protection Act of 2000, a person
granted temporary protected status pursuant to the Federal Immigration
Act of 1990, an individual of a class of refugees paroled by the
attorney general of the United States under his or her parole authority
pertaining to the admission of noncitizens to the United States, or an
applicant without lawful immigration status, shall be eligible for an
award at the undergraduate level of study provided that the student:
 (1) attended a registered New York state high school for two or more
years, graduated from a registered New York state high school and
applied for attendance at the institution of higher education for the
undergraduate study for which an award is sought within five years of
receiving a New York state high school diploma; or
 (2) attended an approved New York state program for a state high
school equivalency diploma, received a state high school equivalency
diploma and applied for attendance at the institution of higher
education for the undergraduate study for which an award is sought
within five years of receiving a state high school equivalency diploma;
or
 (3) is otherwise eligible for the payment of tuition and fees at a
rate no greater than that imposed for resident students of the state
university of New York, the city university of New York or community
colleges as prescribed in subparagraph eight of paragraph h of
subdivision two of section three hundred fifty-five or paragraph (a) of
subdivision seven of section sixty-two hundred six of this chapter.
 Provided, further, that a student without lawful immigration status
shall also be required to file an affidavit with such institution of
higher education stating that the student has filed an application to
legalize his or her immigration status, or will file such an application
as soon as he or she is eligible to do so.
 (b) Applications for funding shall be submitted by eligible
institutions to the department in accordance with requirements
established by the commissioner. Priority consideration shall be given
to institutions which coordinate their efforts to increase minority
access with similar activities for programs at the secondary level in
accordance with this section. Grants shall be awarded based on criteria
established by the commissioner.
 3. Graduate programs. (a) (i) Graduate science and technology entry
program moneys may be used for recruitment, academic enrichment, career
planning, supplemental financial assistance, review for licensing
examinations, program administration, and other activities which the
commissioner may deem appropriate. To be eligible for graduate
collegiate science and technology entry program support, a student must
be a resident of New York, or meet the requirements of subparagraph (ii)
of this paragraph, and must be either economically disadvantaged or from
a minority group historically underrepresented in the scientific,
technical and health-related professions. Eligible students must be in
good academic standing, enrolled full time in an approved graduate level
program, as defined by the regents.
 (ii) An applicant who is not a legal resident of New York state, but
either is a United States citizen, a permanent lawful resident, an
individual who is granted U or T non-immigrant status pursuant to the
Victims of Trafficking and Violence Protection Act of 2000, a person
granted temporary protected status pursuant to the Federal Immigration
Act of 1990, an individual of a class of refugees paroled by the
attorney general of the United States under his or her parole authority
pertaining to the admission of noncitizens to the United States, or an
applicant without lawful immigration status shall be eligible for an
award at the graduate level of study provided that the student:
 (1) attended a registered approved New York state high school for two
or more years, graduated from a registered New York state high school
and applied for attendance at the institution of higher education for
the graduate study for which an award is sought within ten years of
receiving a New York state high school diploma; or
 (2) attended an approved New York state program for a state high
school equivalency diploma, received a state high school equivalency
diploma and applied for attendance at the institution of higher
education for the graduate study for which an award is sought within ten
years of receiving a state high school equivalency diploma; or
 (3) is otherwise eligible for the payment of tuition and fees at a
rate no greater than that imposed for resident students of the state
university of New York, the city university of New York or community
colleges as prescribed in subparagraph eight of paragraph h of
subdivision two of section three hundred fifty-five or paragraph (a) of
subdivision seven of section sixty-two hundred six of this chapter.
 Provided, further, that a student without lawful immigration status
shall also be required to file an affidavit with such institution of
higher education stating that the student has filed an application to
legalize his or her immigration status, or will file such an application
as soon as he or she is eligible to do so.
 (b) Applications for funding shall be made by eligible institutions in
accordance with requirements established by the commissioner. Grants
shall be awarded based on criteria established by the commissioner.
Priority consideration shall be given to institutions which coordinate
their efforts to increase minority access with similar activities at the
undergraduate level.
 4. Reporting requirements. Institutions participating in the science
and technology entry program shall submit to the commissioner such
reports or other information as he shall require. The commissioner shall
prepare for the board of regents an annual report of the activities of
institutions which receive state funds pursuant to this section
concerning, but not limited to, the effectiveness of the programs, the
numbers of students served, and future plans.
 § 6456. Foster youth college success initiative. 1. Subject to an
appropriation, the commissioner shall allocate the funds available for
the foster youth college success initiative for the purpose of providing
support services to assist youth in foster care to apply for, enroll in,
and succeed in college. Such grants shall be awarded to institutions of
the state university of New York and institutions of the city university
of New York, and the commissioner shall enter into contracts with
degree-granting institutions in New York that are currently funded by
the Arthur O. Eve higher education opportunity program pursuant to
section sixty-four hundred fifty-one of this article for the purpose of
providing additional services and expenses to expand opportunities for
foster youth.
 2. For the purposes of this section, "foster youth" shall mean
students who (i) are an orphan or (ii) are, or have been, either a child
or youth in foster care as such term is defined in section thirty-two
hundred forty-four of this chapter or ward of the court at any time
after their thirteenth birthday.
 3. a. Funds appropriated in the two thousand fifteen--two thousand
sixteen academic year for the purposes of this initiative shall be
allocated by sector as follows: fifty-two percent for institutions in
the state university of New York; thirty percent for institutions in the
city university of New York; and eighteen percent for other
degree-granting institutions in New York with current Arthur O. Eve
higher education opportunity programs.
 b. Funds appropriated in the two thousand sixteen--two thousand
seventeen academic year and thereafter for the purposes of this
initiative shall be allocated by sector based on the percentage of
foster youth identified by each institution that will be served by this
initiative in the following academic year, in applications received by
the commissioner pursuant to subdivision six of this section, provided
however that the award per student for foster youth first served in the
two thousand fifteen--two thousand sixteen academic year shall be no
less than the amount per student awarded for those students in the two
thousand fifteen--two thousand sixteen academic year.
 4. Funds for all programs under this section shall be awarded in equal
amounts per foster youth to each institution that applies for funding
allocated to its sector distribution as provided in subdivision three of
this section and has an application that is approved by the
commissioner; provided, however, funds shall be awarded to a foster
youth based on his or her need as determined by the institution of
higher education where such foster youth is in attendance.
 5. Moneys made available to institutions under this section shall be
spent for the following purposes:
 a. to provide additional services and expenses to expand opportunities
through existing postsecondary opportunity programs at the state
university of New York, the city university of New York, and other
degree-granting higher education institutions for foster youth;
 b. to provide any necessary supplemental financial aid for foster
youth, which may include the cost of tuition and fees, books,
transportation, housing and other expenses as determined by the
commissioner to be necessary for such foster youth to attend college;
 c. summer college preparation programs to help foster youth transition
to college, prepare them to navigate on-campus systems, and provide
preparation in reading, writing, and mathematics for foster youth who
need it;
 d. advisement, tutoring, and academic assistance for foster youth;
 e. to provide supplemental housing and meals, including but not
limited to during intersession and summer breaks, for foster youth; or
 f. medical expenses including, but not limited to, primary care,
behavioral health, vision and dental care which is not otherwise covered
by an eligible student's health plan.
 6. Eligible institutions shall file an application for approval by the
commissioner each year demonstrating a need for such funding, including
how the funding would be used and how many foster youth would be
assisted with such funding. Successful applicants will be funded as
provided in subdivision four of this section.
 7. No funds pursuant to this section shall be made available to
support the regular academic programs of any institution participating
in this program, nor shall funds be provided for programs which are
incompatible with the regents plan for the expansion and development of
higher education in this state.