 TITLE V
 TAXATION AND FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION
Article 73 Apportionment of public moneys (§§ 3601--3650-c).
 Part I--General provisions (§§ 3601-3612).
 Part II--Aidable transportation expense (§§ 3620-3628).
 Part III--Transportation services (§§ 3635-3637).
 Part IV--Special apportionments and grants-in-aid
 (§§ 3640-3642).
 Part V--Comprehensive school bus driver safety training
 program (§§ 3650--3650-c).
 74 Reserve funds (§§ 3651-3652).
 75 Trusts for schools; gospel and school lots (§§ 3701-3713).
 77 Fines, penalties, forfeitures and costs (§§ 3801-3816).
 ARTICLE 73
 APPORTIONMENT OF PUBLIC MONEYS
 PART I
 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 3601. When apportioned and how applied.
 3602. Apportionment of public moneys to school districts
 employing eight or more teachers.
 3602-b. Apportionment of moneys to school districts employing
 fewer than eight teachers.
 3602-c. Apportionment of moneys to school districts for the
 provision of services to pupils attending nonpublic
 schools.
 3602-d. Work-prep education program.
 3602-e. Universal prekindergarten program.
 3602-ee. Statewide universal full-day pre-kindergarten program.
 3602-f. Apportionment of moneys to school districts that result
 from the partitioning of territory and formation of
 new school districts by district superintendents.
 3604. Conditions under which districts are entitled to
 apportionment.
 3606. Nonresident academic attendance; manner of certifying
 and paying apportionment.
 3607. Manner of payment of moneys apportioned.
 3608. Certificate of apportionment by commissioner of
 education.
 3609-a. Moneys apportioned, when and how payable commencing
 July first, two thousand seven.
 3609-b. Moneys apportioned for students with disabilities, when
 and how payable.
 3609-d. Moneys apportioned for board of cooperative educational
 services aidable expenditures when and how payable
 commencing July first, two thousand four.
 3609-e. School tax relief aid, when and how payable commencing
 July first, nineteen hundred ninety-eight.
 3609-f. Moneys apportioned to school districts for lottery
 grants pursuant to subparagraph two-a of paragraph b
 of subdivision four of section ninety-two-c of the
 state finance law, when and how payable commencing
 July first, two thousand seven.
 3609-g. Moneys apportioned to school districts for
 reimbursement of article twenty-three of the tax law
 payments commencing in the 2009-2010 school year.
 3609-h. Moneys apportioned to school districts for commercial
 gaming grants pursuant to subdivision six of section
 ninety-seven-nnnn of the state finance law, when and
 how payable commencing July first, two thousand
 fourteen.
 3610. Apportionment for apprenticeship training.
 3611. Racial and cultural awareness fund.
 3612. Teachers of tomorrow teacher recruitment and retention
 program.
 3613. School district reorganizations and real property tax
 rates.
 § 3601. When apportioned and how applied. The amount annually
appropriated by the legislature for general support for public schools,
net of disallowances, refunds, reimbursements and credits, shall be
apportioned by the commissioner each year prior to the dates of the
respective final payments provided by law and all moneys so apportioned
shall be applied exclusively to school purposes authorized by law.
General state aid claims, on forms prescribed by the commissioner, shall
be submitted to the commissioner by September second of each school
year, except that the audit report required by subdivision three of
section twenty-one hundred sixteen-a of this chapter shall be submitted
to the commissioner by October fifteenth following the close of the
school year audited for all districts other than the city school
districts of the cities of Buffalo, Rochester, Syracuse, Yonkers and New
York and by January first following the close of the school year audited
for such city school districts. No aid shall be paid to a school
district or board of cooperative educational services prior to the
submission of claims as required by the commissioner, except that no aid
certified as payable to a school district by the commissioner of
taxation and finance pursuant to paragraph (c) of subdivision three of
section thirteen hundred six-a of the real property tax law shall be
withheld due to the failure of the school district to submit general
state aid claims required by the commissioner, and except that no aids
shall be withheld due to the failure of a school district to submit the
audit report required by subdivision three of section twenty-one hundred
sixteen-a of this chapter until the thirtieth day following the due date
specified in this section for such report.
 § 3602. Apportionment of public moneys to school districts employing
eight or more teachers. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this
chapter or any other provisions of law, each school district of the
state employing eight or more teachers shall receive its apportionment
of public money payable during the school year commencing July first,
nineteen hundred ninety-three and during subsequent school years
pursuant to the provisions of this section and in lieu of any
apportionments or payments otherwise payable under any other section of
this chapter except any such apportionments or payments that may be
payable to such district for school lunches, for textbooks, school
library materials, computer hardware or computer software, for services
or programs provided by a board of cooperative educational services or
by a county vocational education and extension board for such district,
for the education of Indian children of a reservation under a contract
with the state, by virtue of chapter six hundred thirty-five of the laws
of nineteen hundred sixty-one, for school tax relief aid, or for
experimental or special programs in selected school districts, including
but not limited to special apportionments and grants-in-aid pursuant to
section thirty-six hundred forty-one of this article.
 1. Definitions. As used in this section the following terms shall be
defined as follows:
 a. "Current year" shall mean the school year during which the
apportionment is to be paid pursuant to this section.
 b. "Base year" shall mean the school year immediately preceding the
current year.
 c. "Actual valuation" shall mean the valuation of taxable real
property in a school district obtained by taking the assessed valuation
of taxable real property within such district as it appears upon the
assessment roll of the town, city, village, or county in which such
property is located, for the calendar year two years prior to the
calendar year in which the base year commenced, after revision as
provided by law, plus any assessed valuation that was exempted from
taxation pursuant to the class one reassessment exemption authorized by
section four hundred eighty-five-u of the real property tax law or the
residential revaluation exemption authorized by section four hundred
eighty-five-v of such law as added by chapter five hundred sixty of the
laws of two thousand twenty-one, and dividing it by the state
equalization rate as determined by the commissioner of taxation and
finance, for the assessment roll of such town, city, village, or county
completed during such preceding calendar year. The actual valuation of a
central high school district shall be the sum of such valuations of its
component districts. Such actual valuation shall include any actual
valuation equivalent of payments in lieu of taxes determined pursuant to
section four hundred eighty-five of the real property tax law. "Selected
actual valuation" shall mean the lesser of actual valuation calculated
for aid payable in the current year or the two-year average of the
actual valuation calculated for aid payable in the current year and the
actual valuation calculated for aid payable in the base year.
 d. "Average daily attendance" shall mean the total number of
attendance days of pupils in a public school of a school district in
kindergarten through grade twelve, or equivalent ungraded programs, plus
the total number of instruction days for such pupils receiving homebound
instruction including pupils receiving remote instruction as defined in
the regulations of the commissioner, divided by the number of days the
district school was in session as provided in this section. The
attendance of pupils with disabilities attending under the provisions of
paragraph c of subdivision two of section forty-four hundred one of this
chapter shall be added to average daily attendance.
 (1) Equivalent attendance shall mean the quotient of the total number
of student hours of instruction in programs in a public school of a
school district or a board of cooperative educational services leading
to a high school diploma or a high school equivalency diploma as defined
in regulations of the commissioner for pupils under the age of
twenty-one not on a regular day school register of the district, divided
by one thousand. Average daily attendance shall include the equivalent
attendance of the school district. For the purposes of secondary school
weighting, such equivalent attendance shall be considered as average
daily attendance in grades seven through twelve.
 (2) In computing average daily attendance, school districts may, with
the commissioner's approval, exclude attendance for those days on which
school attendance was adversely affected because of an epidemic or
manmade or natural disaster or act of terrorism. In computing such
attendance, the school district shall: (i) determine the number of
religious holidays which fall on a school day within a school year
according to regulations established by the commissioner, such religious
holidays to be duly recognized as such for purposes of this section by
duly adopted resolution of the board of education; (ii) deduct the
aggregate attendance on such religious holidays from the total aggregate
attendance, by grade level; (iii) deduct such religious holidays from
the total number of days of session, by grade level; and (iv) compute
the average daily attendance for the school year.
 e. Pupils with special educational needs.
 (1) "Percentage of pupils with special educational needs" shall be
based on the following tests: the third and sixth grade reading and math
tests administered in spring of nineteen hundred eighty-five and the
spring of nineteen hundred eighty-six. Such percentage shall be
calculated as follows:
 (i) determine the number of pupils tested who scored below the
statewide reference point as determined by the commissioner on each test
administered pursuant to this subparagraph, plus pupils, other than
pupils with disabilities and English language learner pupils as defined
by the commissioner who are exempt from taking such tests, provided,
however, that a district employing eight or more teachers in such years
but not operating each grade may use the percentage computed pursuant to
this paragraph for the district which in such years enrolled the
greatest number of pupils in such grade from such district;
 (ii) divide the sum of such numbers by the number of such pupils who
took each of such tests, plus pupils, other than pupils with
disabilities and English language learner pupils as defined by the
commissioner who are exempt from taking such tests, provided, however,
that a district which in any of the applicable school years did not
maintain a home school or employed fewer than eight teachers, and which
in the base year employed eight or more teachers, may use the scores in
a later test as designated by the commissioner for the purposes of this
paragraph;
 (iii) express the result as a percentage carried to one decimal place
without rounding; and
 (iv) for the purposes of the computation made pursuant to this
subparagraph, pupils attending campus schools of the state university
shall be included in the numbers of pupils in the district in which they
reside. The percentage of such pupils in component districts shall be
used in the case of central high school districts. The commissioner
shall make adjustments for differences in tests and test administration
in accordance to regulations adopted for such purposes.
 (2) (i) For the computation of total wealth pupil units, "pupils with
special educational needs" shall be computed by multiplying the
percentage of pupils with special educational needs by the district's
adjusted average daily attendance.
 (ii) For the computation of total aidable pupils units pursuant to
subdivision eight of this section for aid payable in the nineteen
hundred ninety-seven--ninety-eight through the two thousand six--two
thousand seven school years, "pupils with special educational needs"
shall be the product of the percentage of pupils with special
educational needs, the district's adjusted average daily attendance for
the year prior to the base year, and the enrollment index.
 (iii) For the computation of total aidable pupils units pursuant to
paragraph e of subdivision two of this section for aid payable in the
two thousand seven--two thousand eight school year and thereafter,
"pupils with special educational needs" shall be the product of the
percentage of pupils with special educational needs, the district's
adjusted average daily attendance for the year prior to the base year,
and the enrollment index.
 (3) "Weighted pupils with special educational needs" shall be computed
by multiplying pupils with special educational needs by twenty-five
percentum, with the result rounded up to the next whole number. For the
purposes of the computation of additional aidable pupil units for
inclusion in total wealth pupil units, the computations made pursuant to
this paragraph shall include only resident pupils.
 f. "Expense per pupil" shall mean approved operating expense for the
year prior to the base year divided by the sum, computed using year
prior to the base year pupil counts, of the total aidable pupil units
plus weighted pupils with disabilities, provided that for the two
thousand six--two thousand seven school year and prior school years,
total aidable pupil units plus weighted pupils with handicapping
conditions shall be used in such computation. Expense per pupil for each
borough in the city school district of the city of New York shall be the
expense per pupil of the entire city school district.
 g. "Summer session pupils" shall mean those pupils attending approved
programs of instruction operated by the district during the months of
July and August in accordance with the regulations promulgated by the
commissioner.
 h. "Adjusted gross income" shall mean the adjusted gross income of a
school district for the calendar year three years prior to the calendar
year in which the current year commences. The income data shall be
computed in accordance with regulations adopted by the commissioner of
taxation and finance based upon personal income tax returns for the
calendar year three years prior to the calendar year in which the
current school year commences, as reported to the commissioner by
September of the base year, including the results of the permanent
computerized statewide school district address match and income
verification system. Commencing with calendar year two thousand
twenty-two, New York state lottery and video lottery gaming individual
prizes in excess of one million dollars that when aggregated exceeds
twenty-five percent of a district's adjusted gross income shall be
excluded from such district's adjusted gross income for the year. The
commissioner of taxation and finance shall determine the amount of this
exclusion based on the annual report of New York state lottery and video
lottery gaming individual prizes in excess of one million dollars
produced by the gaming commission pursuant to paragraph three of
subdivision c of section sixteen hundred four of the tax law. The
adjusted gross income of the city school district of the city of New
York shall be the sum of the adjusted gross income of the boroughs of
the city. The adjusted gross income of a central high school district
shall equal the sum of the adjusted gross income of each of its
component school districts. "Selected adjusted gross income" shall mean
the lesser of adjusted gross income calculated for aid payable in the
current year or the two-year average of the adjusted gross income
calculated for aid payable in the current year and the adjusted gross
income calculated for aid payable in the base year.
 i. "Weighted pupils with disabilities" shall be computed as follows:
 (1) "Pupils with disabilities" shall mean pupils of school age who are
identified as students with disabilities pursuant to article eighty-nine
of this chapter and the regulations of the commissioner and who receive
special education services or attend special education programs which
meet criteria established by the commissioner, operated by a school
district eligible for total foundation aid pursuant to this section or
by a board of cooperative educational services, whether or not the
school district is a component of such board.
 (2) "Declassification pupils" shall mean pupils enrolled in a
full-time regular education program, who were enrolled in a special
education program in the prior year. Services to pupils shall be
provided on a regular basis and may include, but not be limited to
psychological, social work, speech and language services and noncareer
counseling services provided by qualified professional personnel as
defined in regulations of the commissioner. Services for teachers of
such pupils may include the assistance of teacher aides or consultation
with appropriate personnel. When a committee on special education
determines that a pupil no longer needs special education services and
is ready for a full-time regular education program, such committee shall
identify and recommend the appropriate declassification support services
for the first year in the regular education program.
 (3) "Weighted pupils with disabilities" shall mean the attendance, as
defined in the regulations of the commissioner, of pupils with
disabilities who have been determined by a school district committee on
special education to require any of the following types and levels of
programs or services specified in this subparagraph, and who receive
such programs and services from the school district of attendance during
the base year, multiplied by a special services weighting determined as
follows:
 (i) for placement for sixty per centum or more of the school day in a
special class, or home or hospital instruction for a period of more than
sixty days, or special services or programs for more than sixty per
centum of the school day, the special services weighting shall be one
hundred seventy percent;
 (ii) for placement for twenty per centum or more of the school week in
a resource room or special services or programs including related
services required for twenty per centum or more of the school week, or
in the case of pupils in grades seven through twelve or a multi-level
middle school program as defined by the commissioner or in the case of
pupils in grades four through six in an elementary school operating on a
period basis, the equivalent of five periods per week, but not less than
the equivalent of one hundred eighty minutes in a resource room or in
other special services or programs including related services, or for at
least two hours per week of direct or indirect consultant teacher
services, in accordance with regulations of the commissioner adopted for
such purpose, the special services weighting shall be ninety percent.
 (3-a) "Resident weighted pupils with disabilities" shall mean weighted
pupils with disabilities minus the nonresident weighted pupils with
disabilities plus the resident weighted pupils with disabilities to whom
special services or programs are provided by another public school
district.
 (4) "Weighted foundation pupils with disabilities" shall mean the sum
of
 (i) the full-time equivalent enrollment, as defined in the regulations
of the commissioner, of pupils with disabilities who have been
determined by a school district committee on special education to
require any of the following types and levels of programs or services
specified in this subparagraph, and who receive such programs and
services from the school district of attendance, multiplied by a special
services weighting based on an analysis of costs of special education
and general education in successful school districts, provided that the
weighting for the two thousand seven--two thousand eight school year and
thereafter shall be one and forty-one hundredths (1.41):
 (A) placement for sixty per centum or more of the school day in a
special class, or
 (B) home or hospital instruction for a period of more than sixty days,
or
 (C) special services or programs for more than sixty per centum of the
school day, or
 (D) placement for twenty per centum or more of the school week in a
resource room or to require special services or programs including
related services for twenty per centum or more of the school week, or in
the case of pupils in grades seven through twelve or a multi-level
middle school program as defined by the commissioner or in the case of
pupils in grades four through six in an elementary school operating on a
period basis, the equivalent of five periods per week, but not less than
the equivalent of one hundred eighty minutes in a resource room or in
other special services or programs including related services, or
 (E) at least two hours per week of direct or indirect consultant
teacher services, in accordance with regulations of the commissioner
adopted for such purpose, plus
 (ii) the full time equivalent enrollment of declassification pupils
multiplied by a declassification weighting of five-tenths (0.5).
 (5) "Resident weighted supplemental pupils with disabilities" shall
mean weighted supplemental pupils with disabilities minus the
nonresident weighted supplemental pupils with disabilities plus the
resident weighted supplemental pupils with disabilities to whom special
services or programs are provided by another public school district,
where "weighted supplemental pupils with disabilities" shall mean the
attendance, as defined in the regulations of the commissioner, of pupils
with disabilities who have been determined by a school district
committee on special education to require any of the following types and
levels of programs or services specified in this subparagraph, and who
receive such programs and services from the school district of
attendance during the base year, multiplied by a special services
weighting determined as follows:
 (i) for placement for sixty per centum or more of the school day in a
special class, or home or hospital instruction for a period of more than
sixty days, or special services or programs for more than sixty per
centum of the school day, the special services weighting shall be one
hundred sixty-five percent;
 (ii) for placement for twenty per centum or more of the school week in
a resource room or special services or programs including related
services required for twenty per centum or more of the school week, or
in the case of pupils in grades seven through twelve or a multi-level
middle school program as defined by the commissioner or in the case of
pupils in grades four through six in an elementary school operating on a
period basis, the equivalent of five periods per week, but not less than
the equivalent of one hundred eighty minutes in a resource room or in
other special services or programs including related services, or for at
least two hours per week of direct or indirect consultant teacher
services, in accordance with regulations of the commissioner adopted for
such purpose, the special services weighting shall be ninety percent.
 (6) "Integrated settings weighted pupils with disabilities" shall be
the product of the attendance in the year prior to the base year of
pupils who have been determined by a committee on special education to
require special services or programs for sixty per centum or more of the
school day pursuant to clause (i) of subparagraph three of this
paragraph and are provided special services or programs in the general
education setting by qualified personnel, as defined in the regulations
of the commissioner, multiplied by five tenths.
 j. "Total foundation aid base" for the purposes of this section (i)
for aid payable in the two thousand seven--two thousand eight school
year, the total foundation aid base shall equal the total amount a
district was eligible to receive in the base year for
 (1) flex aid in an amount equal to the sum of (A) the amount set forth
for each school district as "FLEX AID" under the heading "2005-06 Base
Year Aids" in the school aid computer listing produced by the
commissioner in support of the executive budget request for the
2006--2007 school year and entitled "BT131-6", and (B) the additional
FLEX aid equivalent as computed pursuant to chapter fifty-eight of the
laws of two thousand six;
 (2) the extraordinary needs equivalent aid apportionment computed
pursuant to chapter fifty-eight of the laws of two thousand six, as
amended by chapter sixty-one of the laws of two thousand six;
 (3) an amount equal to the amount such district received for early
grade class size reduction grants pursuant to or in lieu of subdivision
thirty-seven of this section, provided that such amount computed and
payable as of September one of the school year immediately following the
school year for which such aid is claimed shall be deemed final and not
subject to change;
 (4) the growth aid equivalent apportionment computed pursuant to
chapter fifty-eight of the laws of two thousand six;
 (5) the enrollment adjustment aid apportionment computed pursuant to
chapter fifty-eight of the laws of two thousand six;
 (6) the reorganization incentive operating aid equivalent computed
pursuant to chapter fifty-eight of the laws of two thousand six;
 (7) the tax limitation aid equivalent computed pursuant to chapter
fifty-eight of the laws of two thousand six;
 (8) the high tax aid apportionment computed pursuant to chapter
fifty-eight of the laws of two thousand six, as amended by chapter
sixty-one of the laws of two thousand six;
 (9) the additional limited English proficiency aid equivalent
apportionment computed pursuant to chapter fifty-eight of the laws of
two thousand six, as amended by chapter sixty-one of the laws of two
thousand six;
 (10) the positive difference of the public excess cost aid equivalent
apportionment computed pursuant to chapter fifty-eight of the laws of
two thousand six, minus the amount computed under paragraph five of
subdivision nineteen of this section;
 (11) teacher support payments made in the 2006--2007 school year as
follows: to the city school district of the city of New York, sixty-two
million seven hundred seven thousand dollars; to the Buffalo city school
district, one million, seven hundred forty-one thousand dollars; to the
Rochester city school district, one million, seventy-six thousand
dollars; to the Syracuse city school district, eight hundred nine
thousand dollars; and to the Yonkers city school district, one million,
one hundred forty-seven thousand dollars;
 (12) an amount equal to the amount such district was eligible to
receive pursuant to or in lieu of subdivision thirty-one-a of this
section;
 (13) an amount equal to a share of three million dollars in the same
proportion as such district's share of Fort Drum school district grants
for the 2005--2006 school year, and additional amounts provided to the
Indian River central school district, the Watertown city school district
and the Carthage central school district pursuant to chapter fifty-three
of the laws of two thousand six to account for an increase in student
enrollment as a result of the expansion of Fort Drum;
 (14) payments made in the 2006--2007 school year for magnet school
grants pursuant to or in lieu of subdivision five of section thirty-six
hundred forty-one of this article, as follows: to the Albany city school
district, three million, five hundred fifty thousand dollars; to the
Amsterdam city school district, eight hundred thousand dollars; to the
Beacon city school district, five hundred sixty-six thousand dollars; to
the Buffalo city school district, twenty-one million twenty-five
thousand dollars; to the Freeport union free school district, four
hundred thousand dollars; to the Greenburgh central school district,
three hundred thousand dollars; to the Hudson city school district, four
hundred thousand dollars; to the Middletown city school district, four
hundred thousand dollars; to the Mount Vernon city school district, two
million dollars; to the New Rochelle city school district, one million,
four hundred ten thousand dollars; to the city school district of the
city of New York, forty-eight million, one hundred seventy-five thousand
dollars; to the Newburgh city school district, four million, six hundred
forty-five thousand dollars; to the Niagara Falls city school district,
six hundred thousand dollars; to the Peekskill city school district, two
hundred thousand dollars; to the Port Chester city school district, one
million, one hundred fifty thousand dollars; to the Poughkeepsie city
school district, two million, four hundred seventy-five thousand
dollars; to the Rochester city school district, fifteen million dollars;
to the Schenectady city school district, one million, eight hundred
thousand dollars; to the Syracuse city school district, thirteen million
dollars; to the Utica city school district, two million dollars; to the
White Plains city school district, nine hundred thousand dollars; to the
Yonkers city school district, forty-nine million, five hundred thousand
dollars;
 (15) an amount equal to the amount received by such district in the
2005--2006 school year pursuant to subdivision six of section thirty-six
hundred forty-one of this article;
 (16) an amount equal to the amount received by such district in the
2005--2006 school year pursuant to subdivision seven of section
thirty-six hundred forty-one of this article;
 (17) sound basic education aid equal to the sum of (A) the district's
base year apportionment for sound basic education aid set forth for each
school district as "2005-2006 Sound Basic Education" in the school aid
computer listing produced by the commissioner in support of the
executive budget request for the 2006--2007 school year and entitled
"BT131-6" plus (B) the product of three hundred seventy-five million
dollars ($375,000,000) multiplied by the district's SBE ratio. The "SBE
ratio" shall be equal to the quotient of the district's apportionment
for sound basic education aid set forth for each school district as
"2005-06 Sound Basic Education" in the school aid computer listing
produced by the commissioner in support of the executive budget request
for the 2006--2007 school year and entitled "BT131-6", divided by the
sum of such apportionments set forth for all school districts as
"2005-06 Sound Basic Education" in such school aid computer listing
entitled "BT131-6".
 (18) the net tuition adjustment computed for the 2006--07 school year
pursuant to or in lieu of paragraph g of subdivision two of this
section.
 (ii) For aid payable in the two thousand eight--two thousand nine
school year and thereafter, the total foundation aid base shall equal
the total amount a district was eligible to receive in the base year
pursuant to subdivision four of this section.
 k. "Attendance ratio" shall mean the number computed to four decimals
without rounding when the aggregate days attendance is divided by the
possible aggregate attendance of all pupils in attendance in the
district, as computed for each school district by the commissioner by
June first of the year following the attendance year.
 l. "Average daily membership" shall mean the possible aggregate
attendance of all pupils in attendance in a public school of the school
district in kindergarten through grade twelve, or equivalent ungraded
programs, including possible aggregate attendance for such pupils
receiving homebound instruction, including pupils receiving remote
instruction as defined in the regulations of the commissioner, with the
possible aggregate attendance of such pupils in one-half day
kindergartens multiplied by one-half, divided by the number of days the
district school was in session as provided in this section. The full
time equivalent enrollment of pupils with disabilities attending under
the provisions of paragraph c of subdivision two of section forty-four
hundred one of this chapter shall be added to average daily membership.
Average daily membership shall include the equivalent attendance of the
school district, as computed pursuant to paragraph d of this
subdivision. In any instance where a pupil is a resident of another
state or an Indian pupil is a resident of any portion of a reservation
located wholly or partly within the borders of the state pursuant to
subdivision four of section forty-one hundred one of this chapter or a
pupil is living on federally owned land or property, such pupil's
possible aggregate attendance shall be counted as part of the possible
aggregate attendance of the school district in which such pupil is
enrolled.
 n. (1) "Enrollment" shall mean the unduplicated count of all children
registered to receive educational services in grades kindergarten
through twelve, including children in ungraded programs, as registered
on the date prior to November first that is specified by the
commissioner as the enrollment reporting date for the school district or
nonpublic school, as reported to the commissioner.
 (2) "Public school district enrollment" shall mean the sum of: (1) the
number of children on a regular enrollment register of a public school
district on such date; (2) the number of children eligible to receive
home instruction in the school district on such date; (3) the number of
children for whom equivalent attendance must be computed pursuant to
this subdivision on such date; (4) the number of children with
disabilities who are residents of such district who are registered on
such date to attend programs under the provisions of paragraph c of
subdivision two of section forty-four hundred one of this chapter; (5)
the number of children eligible to receive educational services on such
date but not claimed for aid pursuant to subdivision seven of section
thirty-two hundred two of this chapter; and (6) the number of children
registered on such date to attend programs (i) pursuant to subdivision
two of section three hundred fifty-five of this chapter or (ii) pursuant
to an agreement between the city school district of the city of New York
and Hunter College pursuant to section sixty-two hundred sixteen of this
chapter.
 (3) "Nonpublic school enrollment" shall mean the number of children on
a regular enrollment register of a nonpublic school meeting the
compulsory attendance law, excluding any child counted as part of the
enrollment of a public school district.
 (4) "Resident public school district enrollment" shall be the public
school district enrollment less the public school district enrollment of
nonresident pupils attending public schools in the district, plus the
public school district enrollment of pupils resident in the district but
attending public schools in another district or state plus the public
school district enrollment of pupils resident in the district but
attending full-time a school operated by a board of cooperative
educational services or a county vocational education and extension
board. Indian pupils who are residents of any portion of a reservation
located wholly or partly within the borders of the state pursuant to
subdivision four of section forty-one hundred one of this chapter and
are attending public school, or pupils living on the United States
military reservation at West Point attending public school, shall be
deemed to be resident pupils of the district providing such school, for
purposes of this paragraph. Where a school district has entered into a
contract with the state university pursuant to subdivision two of
section three hundred fifty-five of this chapter under which the school
district makes payments in the nature of tuition for the education of
certain children residing in the district, such children for whom such
tuition payments are made shall be deemed to be resident pupils of such
district for the purposes of this paragraph. No student shall be counted
more than once, except that, in determining the resident public school
district enrollment of a component school district of a central high
school district the resident public school district enrollment of high
school pupils residing in such component district and attending the
central high school shall be included, and in determining the resident
public school district enrollment of a central high school district the
resident public school district enrollment of elementary school pupils
residing in such central high school district and attending a component
district of the central high school district shall be included.
 (5) "Resident nonpublic school district enrollment" shall be the
nonpublic school district enrollment less the nonpublic school district
enrollment of nonresident pupils attending nonpublic schools in the
district, plus the nonpublic school district enrollment of pupils
resident in the district but attending nonpublic schools in another
district of the state.
 (6) "Additional public school enrollment" shall mean resident students
with disabilities placed by public school districts in approved private
schools, the New York state school for the blind at Batavia, or the New
York state school for the deaf at Rome and resident students placed in
schools subject to the provisions of chapter five hundred sixty-three of
the laws of nineteen hundred eighty as amended.
 (7) In determining enrollment pursuant to subparagraphs two, three,
four, five and six of this paragraph for central high school districts
and all school districts located within the boundaries of a central high
school district, for the purposes of any apportionments payable to both
central high school districts and to other school districts located
within the boundaries of such central high school districts pursuant to
this chapter, and for the purposes of computing the poverty count
pursuant to paragraph q of this subdivision and the school district
basic contribution pursuant to subdivision eight of section forty-four
hundred one of this chapter, only those children in the grade levels
maintained by a central high school district shall be included in the
enrollment used to apportion aid to such central high school district
and only those children of the grade levels maintained by a component
school district of a central high school district shall be included in
the public school district enrollment of such component school district.
 o. "English language learner count" shall mean the number of pupils
served in the base year in programs for pupils who are English language
learners approved by the commissioner pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter and in accordance with regulations adopted for such purpose.
 q. "Poverty count" shall mean the sum of the product of the
economically disadvantaged student count multiplied by sixty-five
percent, plus the product of the SAIPE count multiplied by sixty-five
percent, where:
 (i) "Economically disadvantaged student count" shall mean the product
of the public school enrollment of the school district on the date
enrollment was counted in accordance with this subdivision for the base
year multiplied by the three-year average economically disadvantaged
rate; and
 (ii) "SAIPE count" shall mean the product of the public school
enrollment of the school district on the date enrollment was counted in
accordance with this subdivision for the base year multiplied by the
three-year average small area income and poverty estimate rate.
 (iii) "Three-year average small area income and poverty estimate rate"
shall equal the quotient of: (i) the sum of the number of persons aged
five to seventeen within the school district, based on the small area
income and poverty estimates produced by the United States census
bureau, whose families had incomes below the poverty level for the
calendar year prior to the year in which the base year began, plus such
number for the calendar year two years prior to the year in which the
base year began, plus such number for the calendar year three years
prior to the year in which the base year began; divided by (ii) the sum
of the total number of persons aged five to seventeen within the school
district, based on such census bureau estimates, for the year prior to
the year in which the base year began, plus such total number for the
year two years prior to the year in which the base year began, plus such
total number for the year three years prior to the year in which the
base year began, rounded to four decimals.
 (iv) (1) "Economically disadvantaged count" shall be equal to the
unduplicated count of all children registered to receive educational
services in grades kindergarten through twelve, including children in
ungraded programs who participate in, or whose family participates in,
economic assistance programs, such as the free or reduced-price lunch
programs, Social Security Insurance, Supplemental Nutrition Assistance
Program, Foster Care, Refugee Assistance (cash or medical assistance),
Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC), Home Energy Assistance Program (HEAP),
Safety Net Assistance (SNA), Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA), or
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF).
 (2) "Economically disadvantaged rate" shall mean the quotient arrived
at when dividing the economically disadvantaged count by public
enrollment as computed pursuant to subparagraph one of paragraph n of
this subdivision.
 (3) "Three-year average economically disadvantaged rate" shall equal
the quotient of: (i) the sum of the economically disadvantaged count for
the school year prior to the base year, plus such number for the school
year two years prior to the base year, plus such number for the school
year three years prior to the base year; divided by (ii) the sum of
enrollment as computed pursuant to subparagraph one of paragraph n of
this subdivision for the school year prior to the base year, plus such
number for the school year two years prior to the base year, plus such
number for the school year three years prior to the base year, rounded
to four decimals.
 r. "Sparsity count", for districts operating a kindergarten through
grade twelve school program, shall mean the product of (i) the base year
public school enrollment of the district and (ii) the sparsity factor,
which shall mean the quotient, computed to three decimals without
rounding, of the positive remainder of twenty-five minus the enrollment
per square mile divided by fifty and nine tenths, but not less than
zero. Enrollment per square mile shall be the quotient, computed to two
decimals without rounding, of the public school enrollment of the school
district on the date enrollment was counted in accordance with this
subdivision for the base year divided by the square miles of the
district, as determined by the commissioner.
 s. "Extraordinary needs count" shall mean the sum of the product of
the English language learner count multiplied by the ELL weight, plus,
the poverty count and the sparsity count, provided that the 'ELL weight'
shall be five tenths (0.50) for the two thousand twenty-four--two
thousand twenty-five school year and prior, and shall be equal to
fifty-three hundredths (0.53) in the two thousand twenty-five--two
thousand twenty-six school year and thereafter.
 t. The "approved operating expense" for the apportionments to any
school district hereunder shall mean the amount computed as follows: The
apportionment to any school district for operating expense shall be
based upon the total expenditures from its general fund and from its
capital fund and from its risk retention fund for purposes of employee
benefit claims related to salaries paid from the general fund, and for
any city school districts with a population of more than one hundred
twenty-five thousand inhabitants its expenditures from the special aid
fund of grant moneys for improving pupil performance and categorical aid
for special reading programs as provided in the aid to localities budget
during the applicable year as approved by the commissioner, and in
accordance with the classification of expenditures in use by the
commissioner for the reporting by school districts of receipts,
expenditures and other financial data. For the purpose of this paragraph
operating expense shall be defined as total cash expenditures during the
applicable year, but shall exclude: (1) any balances and transfers; (2)
any payments for transportation of pupils to and from school during the
regular school year inclusive of capital outlays and debt service
therefor; (2-a) a portion of any payments for transportation of pupils
to and from district operated summer school programs pursuant to
subdivision six of section thirty-six hundred twenty-two-a of this
article, inclusive of capital outlays and debt service therefor, equal
to the product of such expenditures multiplied by the quotient of the
total apportionment after the proration, if any, required by such
subdivision six of such section divided by the total apportionment prior
to such proration; (3) any payments for capital outlay and debt service
for school building purposes, provided, however, that in the case of a
school district which has entered into a contract with state university
pursuant to paragraph o of subdivision two of section three hundred
fifty-five of this chapter, under which the school district makes
payments to state university on account of capital outlay relating to
certain children residing in such school district, such payments shall
not be so excluded; (4) any payments for cafeteria or school lunch
programs; (5) any proceeds of short term borrowings in the general fund
and any payments from the proceeds of the sale of obligations in the
capital fund; (6) any cash receipts which reduce the cost of an item
when applied against the expenditure therefor, except gifts, donations
and earned interest and any refunds made; (7) any payments made to
boards of cooperative educational services for purposes or programs for
which an apportionment is paid pursuant to other sections of this
chapter, except that payments attributable to eligible pupils with
disabilities and ineligible pupils residing in noncomponent districts
shall be included in operating expense; (8) any tuition payments made to
other school districts inclusive of payments made to a central high
school district by one of its component school districts; (9) any
apportionment or payment received from the state for experimental or
special programs paid under provisions other than those found in this
section and other than any apportionments or payments received from the
state by the city school district of the city of Yonkers for the purpose
of funding an educational improvement program pursuant to a court order
and other than any other state grants in aid identified by the
commissioner for general use as specified by the board of education
pursuant to subdivision two of section seventeen hundred eighteen of
this chapter; (10) any funds received from the federal government except
the federal share of medicaid subject to the provisions of section
thirty-six hundred nine-a of this part and except Impact Aid funds
received pursuant to sections two and six of Public Law eighty-one-eight
hundred seventy-four (PL 81-874) or any law superseding such law in any
such district which received aid pursuant to both such sections;
provided further, however, that there shall be excluded from such
federal funds or other apportionments any payments from such funds
already deducted pursuant to this paragraph; (11) any payments made for
which an apportionment is disallowed pursuant to regulations of the
commissioner; (12) any expenditures made for accounting, tabulation, or
computer equipment, in excess of ten thousand dollars unless such
expenditures shall have been specifically approved by the commissioner;
(13) any rentals received pursuant to the provisions of section four
hundred three-a of this chapter; (14) any rentals or other annual
payments received pursuant to the provisions of section four hundred
three-b of this chapter; (15) any expenditures made for persons
twenty-one years of age or over attending employment preparation
education programs pursuant to subdivision eleven of this section; (16)
any tuition payments made pursuant to a contract under the provisions of
paragraphs e, f, g, h, i and l of subdivision two of section forty-four
hundred one of this chapter or any tuition payments on behalf of pupils
attending a state school under paragraph d of such subdivision; (17) in
any year in which expenditures are made to the New York state teachers'
retirement system or the New York state and local employees' retirement
system for both the prior school year and the current school year, any
expenditures made to such retirement systems and recorded in the school
year prior to the school year in which such obligations are paid; and
(18) any payments to the commissioner of taxation and finance pursuant
to article twenty-three of the tax law.
 u. "Instructional expense" shall mean the sum of all year prior to the
base year expenditures related to the instructional program of the
district, as defined in regulations of the commissioner, including the
cost of fringe benefits paid by such district for the instructional
staff of the district.
 w. "Extraordinary needs percent" shall mean the quotient of the
extraordinary needs count for the base year, calculated pursuant to
paragraph s of this subdivision, divided by the public school district
enrollment for the base year, calculated pursuant to subparagraph two of
paragraph n of this subdivision.
 x. "Enrollment index" shall be computed by dividing the public school
enrollment for the current year by public school enrollment for the base
year, both as defined in paragraph n of this subdivision, with the
result carried to three places without rounding.
 y. "School tax relief aid" shall mean state aid payable to a school
district representing tax savings duly provided by the school district
pursuant to section thirteen hundred six-a of the real property tax law
that is claimed by the school district and certified by the commissioner
of taxation and finance pursuant to subdivision three of section
thirteen hundred six-a of the real property tax law.
 aa. "Total personal income of the state" shall mean the total personal
income of the state of New York as published by the United States
department of commerce or any successor agency from which information is
available, aggregated on a state fiscal year basis. For the two thousand
twelve--two thousand thirteen school year, such personal income shall be
based on the data available most proximate and prior to February first,
two thousand eleven, and for the two thousand thirteen--two thousand
fourteen school year and each school year thereafter, such personal
income shall be based on the data available most proximate and prior to
October thirty-first of the base year. Subsequent revisions of the
published estimated dollar amount for any state fiscal year estimate
employed pursuant to the terms of this section shall not affect the
validity of the determinations made for any state fiscal year.
 bb. "Personal income growth index" shall mean (1) for the two thousand
twelve--two thousand thirteen school year, the average of the quotients
for each year in the period commencing with the two thousand five--two
thousand six state fiscal year and finishing with the two thousand
nine--two thousand ten state fiscal year of the total personal income of
the state for each such year divided by the total personal income of the
state for the immediately preceding state fiscal year, but not less than
one, (2) for the two thousand thirteen--two thousand fourteen through
two thousand nineteen--two thousand twenty school years, the quotient of
the total personal income of the state for the state fiscal year one
year prior to the state fiscal year in which the base year commenced
divided by the total personal income of the state for the immediately
preceding state fiscal year, but not less than one and (3) for the two
thousand twenty--two thousand twenty-one school year and each school
year thereafter, the average of the quotients for each year in the
period commencing with the state fiscal year nine years prior to the
state fiscal year in which the base year began and finishing with the
state fiscal year prior to the state fiscal year in which the base year
began of the total personal income of the state for each such year
divided by the total personal income of the state for the immediately
preceding state fiscal year, but not less than one.
 dd. "Allowable growth amount" shall mean the product of the positive
difference of the personal income growth index minus one, multiplied by
the statewide total of the sum of (1) the apportionments, including the
gap elimination adjustment, due and owing during the base year,
commencing with the base year computed for the two thousand twelve--two
thousand thirteen school year, to school districts and boards of
cooperative educational services from the general support for public
schools as computed based on an electronic data file used to produce the
school aid computer listing produced by the commissioner in support of
the enacted budget for the base year plus (2) the competitive awards
amount for the base year.
 ee. "Competitive awards amount" shall mean, for the two thousand
twelve--two thousand thirteen state fiscal year and thereafter, fifty
million dollars.
 ff. "Preliminary growth amount" shall mean the difference between the
statewide total, excluding the apportionments computed pursuant to
subdivisions four and seventeen of section thirty-six hundred two of the
education law, of the apportionments due and owing during the current
school year, commencing with the two thousand twelve--two thousand
thirteen school year, to school districts and boards of cooperative
educational services from the general support for public schools as
computed based on an electronic data file used to produce the school aid
computer listing produced by the commissioner in support of the enacted
budget for the current year, less the statewide total of such
apportionments, excluding the apportionments computed pursuant to
subdivisions four and seventeen of section thirty-six hundred two of the
education law, due and owing during the base school year to school
districts and boards of cooperative educational services from the
general support for public schools as computed based on an electronic
data file used to produce the school aid computer listing produced by
the commissioner in support of the enacted budget for the current year.
 gg. "Allocable growth amount" shall mean the positive difference, if
any, of the allowable growth amount less the sum of the competitive
awards amount plus the preliminary growth amount.
 hh. "Consumer price index" shall mean the quotient of: (i) the average
of the national consumer price indexes determined by the United States
department of labor for the twelve-month period preceding January first
of the current year minus the average of the national consumer price
indexes determined by the United States department of labor for the
twelve-month period preceding January first of the prior year, divided
by (ii) the average of the national consumer price indexes determined by
the United States department of labor for the twelve-month period
preceding January first of the prior year, with the result expressed as
a decimal to three places.
 ii. (1) "Direct certification count" shall be equal to the number of
children eligible for free meals or free milk based on information
obtained directly from the office of temporary and disability assistance
administering the supplemental nutrition assistance program and the
department of health administering Medicaid and providing data as per
the United States department of agriculture Medicaid demonstration
project.
 (2) "Direct certification enrollment" shall mean enrollment collected
for purposes of the direct certification matching process.
 (3) "Direct certification percent" shall mean the quotient arrived at
when dividing the direct certification count by the direct certification
enrollment.
 (4) "Three-year direct certification percentage" shall mean the
quotient of: (A) the sum of the direct certification count for the base
year, plus such direct certification count computed for the year prior
to the base year, plus such direct certification count computed for the
year two years prior to the base year, divided by (B) the direct
certification enrollment for the base year, plus such direct
certification enrollment computed for the year prior to the base year,
plus such direct certification enrollment computed for the year two
years prior to the base year.
 jj. "Small city school districts" shall mean any school districts that
were designated as small city school districts or central school
districts whose boundaries include a portion of a small city for the
school aid computer listing produced by the commissioner in support of
the enacted budget for the two thousand fourteen--two thousand fifteen
school year and entitled "SA141-5".
 2. Computation of pupil counts and related factors. a. Computation of
resident weighted average daily attendance. For purposes of this section
weighted average daily attendance of a school district for any school
year shall be computed as follows:
 (1) Weighted average daily attendance shall be determined by using the
average daily attendance of public school pupils in a full-day
kindergarten and grades one through six as the basic unit, with the
attendance of such pupils in one-half day kindergartens measured at
one-half of such basic unit and the attendance of such pupils in grades
seven through twelve measured at one and one-quarter of such basic unit.
The sum of all such units of attendance shall be the weighted average
daily attendance.
 (2) In computing such attendance, the school district shall (i)
determine the number of religious holidays which fall on a school day
within a school year according to regulations established by the
commissioner, such religious holidays to be duly recognized as such for
purposes of this section by duly adopted resolution of the board of
education; (ii) deduct the aggregate attendance on such religious
holidays from the total aggregate attendance, by grade level; (iii)
deduct such religious holidays from the total number of days of session,
by grade level; (iv) compute the weighted average daily attendance for
the school year.
 (3) In any instance where a pupil is a resident of another state or an
Indian pupil is a resident of any portion of a reservation located
wholly or partly within the borders of the state pursuant to subdivision
four of section forty-one hundred one of this chapter or a pupil is
living on federally owned land or property, such pupil's attendance
shall be counted as part of the weighted average daily attendance of the
school district in which such pupil is enrolled.
 (4) Resident weighted average daily attendance for purposes of
determining the aid ratio of a school district for any school year shall
be the weighted average daily attendance for the school year immediately
preceding the base year, less the weighted average daily attendance of
nonresident pupils attending public schools in the district for such
school year, plus the weighted average daily attendance of pupils
resident in the district but attending public schools in another
district or state plus the weighted average daily attendance of pupils
resident in the district but attending full-time a school operated by a
board of cooperative educational services or a county vocational
education and extension board for such school year. The attendance of
nonresident pupils attending public school in the district and resident
pupils attending such schools outside of the district shall be
determined by applying to the number of such pupils registered during
the school year in each case the ratio of aggregate days attendance to
the possible aggregate days attendance of all pupils in attendance in
the district. Indian pupils of a reservation attending public school, or
pupils living on the United States military reservation at West Point
attending public school, shall be deemed to be resident pupils of the
district providing such school, for purposes of this paragraph. Where a
school district has entered into a contract with the state university
pursuant to subdivision two of section three hundred fifty-five of this
chapter under which the school district makes payments in the nature of
tuition for the education of certain children residing in the district,
such children for whom such tuition payments are made shall be deemed to
be resident pupils of such district for the purposes of this paragraph.
 (5) In determining the resident weighted average daily attendance of a
component school district of a central high school district for
computing the aid ratio the weighted average daily attendance of high
school pupils residing in such component district and attending the
central high school shall be included. The resident weighted average
daily attendance of a central high school district itself shall be the
sum of the resident weighted average daily attendance of each component
school district computed as provided in the first sentence of this
paragraph.
 (6) Notwithstanding the provisions of subparagraphs four and five of
this paragraph, when a school district shall experience an increase in
resident weighted average daily attendance during the current year
because of the closing in whole, or in part, of a non-public school or a
campus school, or a school previously operated by the United States
government on the United States military reservation at West Point, the
commissioner, in computing any aid ratio of such district, shall permit
the use of such additional resident weighted average daily attendance
for aid ratio purposes during the current year and the next succeeding
year, provided that such additional resident weighted average daily
attendance attributable to such closing, or part thereof, shall be in
excess of one hundred students; provided, however, that such district
which qualifies for an increase in total wealth pupil units pursuant to
paragraph f of this subdivision, shall use the increase in resident
weighted average daily attendance, even if such increase in resident
weighted average daily attendance is less than one hundred.
 b. Computation of adjusted average daily attendance. For purposes of
this section adjusted average daily attendance of a school district for
any school year shall be computed as follows:
 (1) Adjusted average daily attendance shall be determined by using the
average daily attendance of public school pupils in a full-day
kindergarten and grades one through twelve as the basic unit, with the
attendance of such pupils in one-half day kindergartens measured at
one-half of such basic unit. The sum of all such units of attendance
shall be the adjusted average daily attendance.
 (2) In computing such attendance, the school district shall (i)
determine the number of religious holidays which fall on a school day
within a school year according to regulations established by the
commissioner, such religious holidays to be duly recognized as such for
purposes of this section by duly adopted resolution of the board of
education; (ii) deduct the aggregate attendance on such religious
holidays from the total aggregate attendance, by grade level; (iii)
deduct such religious holidays from the total number of days of session,
by grade level; (iv) compute the adjusted average daily attendance for
the school year.
 (3) In any instance where a pupil is a resident of another state or an
Indian pupil is a resident of any portion of a reservation located
wholly or partly within the borders of the state pursuant to subdivision
four of section forty-one hundred one of this chapter or a pupil is
living on federally owned land or property, such pupil's attendance
shall be counted as part of the adjusted average daily attendance of the
school district in which such pupil is enrolled.
 c. Computation of additional aidable pupil units. The additional
aidable pupil units used to compute total aidable pupil units pursuant
to paragraph e of this subdivision shall be the sum of the attendance of
summer session pupils multiplied by twelve per centum and the weighted
pupils with special educational needs. The additional aidable pupil
units used to compute total wealth pupil units pursuant to paragraph f
of this subdivision shall be the sum of the year prior to the base year
resident weighted pupils with special educational needs and resident
weighted pupils with handicapping conditions. Nothing contained in this
paragraph shall be construed to result in the inclusion of the
attendance of summer session pupils in the computation of weighted or
adjusted average daily attendance pursuant to this subdivision.
 d. Secondary school weighting. There shall be added to the total
aidable pupil units computed in paragraph e of this subdivision and the
total wealth pupil units computed in paragraph f of this subdivision, a
number equal to the product of: (1) twenty-five per centum, (2) the
adjusted average daily attendance in grades seven through twelve for the
year prior to the base year, excluding attendance of pupils who receive
a weighting for disabilities, and (3) for total aidable pupil units, the
enrollment index computed pursuant to this section for the base year,
provided, however, that only resident secondary pupils shall be used for
the computation of total wealth pupil units.
 e. Computation of total aidable pupil units. (1) A district's total
aidable pupil units shall be the sum of the district's adjusted average
daily attendance computed pursuant to this section for the year prior to
the base year multiplied by the enrollment index computed pursuant to
this section for the base year plus the additional aidable pupil units
computed for the year prior to the base year under paragraph c of this
subdivision.
 (2) In such computation school districts may, with the commissioner's
approval, exclude attendance for those days on which school attendance
was adversely affected because of an epidemic or because of a religious
holiday as provided in subparagraph two of paragraph b of this
subdivision. For the purposes of computing selected total aidable pupil
units, a district may use either total aidable pupil units for the
current aid year or the average of total aidable pupil units for the
current aid year and the prior aid year, using current aid year
definitions of total aidable pupil units for both years, except that for
aids payable during the nineteen hundred ninety-seven--nineteen hundred
ninety-eight school year the total aidable pupil units for the prior aid
year used in such average shall be calculated using the definition of
total aidable pupil units in effect for aid payable in the base year.
 f. Computation of total wealth pupil units. (1) Total wealth pupil
units will be computed using the adjusted average daily attendance for
the year prior to the base year as computed in this section, plus the
attendance of resident pupils attending public school elsewhere, less
the attendance of nonresident pupils plus the attendance of resident
pupils attending full-time in board of cooperative educational services
(not otherwise specifically included), plus the additional aidable pupil
units as computed pursuant to paragraphs c and d of this subdivision,
excluding summer school pupils, plus the year prior to the base year
resident weighted pupils with disabilities. The attendance of
nonresident pupils attending public school in the district and resident
pupils attending such schools outside of the district shall be
determined by applying to the number of such pupils registered during
the school year in each case the ratio of aggregate days attendance to
the possible aggregate days attendance of all pupils in attendance in
the district. Native American pupils of a reservation attending public
school, or pupils living on the United States military reservation at
West Point attending public school, shall be deemed to be resident
pupils of the district providing such school, for purposes of this
paragraph. Where a school district has entered into a contract with
state university pursuant to subdivision two of section three hundred
fifty-five of this chapter under which the school district makes payment
in the nature of tuition for the education of certain children residing
in the district, such children for whom such tuition payments are made
shall be deemed to be resident pupils of such district for the purposes
of this paragraph.
 (2) In determining the total wealth pupil units of a component school
district of a central high school district for computing aid ratios the
total wealth pupil units of high school pupils residing in such
component district and attending the central high school shall be
included. The total wealth pupil units of a central high school district
itself shall be the sum of the total wealth pupil units of each
component school district.
 (3) Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this paragraph, when a
school district shall experience an increase in total wealth pupil units
during the current year because of the closing in whole, or in part, of
a nonpublic school or a campus school, or a school previously operated
by the United States government on the United States military
reservation at West Point, the commissioner, in computing any aid ratio
of such district, shall permit the use of such additional total wealth
pupil units during the current year and the next succeeding year,
provided that such additional total wealth pupil units attributable to
such closing, or part thereof, shall be in excess of one hundred
students; provided, however, that such district which qualifies for an
increase in resident weighted average daily attendance pursuant to
subparagraph six of paragraph a of this subdivision, shall use the
increase in total wealth pupil units, even if such increase in total
wealth pupil units is less than one hundred.
 g. Computation of total aidable foundation pupil units. Total aidable
foundation pupil units shall be the sum of (1) the district's average
daily membership computed pursuant to this section for the year prior to
the base year multiplied by the enrollment index computed pursuant to
this section for the base year plus (2) the product of the average daily
membership of summer session pupils and twelve percent plus (3) the year
prior to the base year weighted foundation pupils with disabilities. For
the purposes of computing total foundation aid a district may use either
total aidable foundation pupil units for the current aid year or the
average of total foundation aidable pupil units for the current aid year
and the prior aid year, using current aid year definitions of total
aidable foundation pupil units for both years.
 h. Computation of total wealth foundation pupil units. (1) Total
wealth foundation pupil units shall mean the sum of (i) average daily
membership for the year prior to the base year as computed in this
section, plus (ii) the full-time equivalent enrollment of resident
pupils attending public school elsewhere, less the full-time equivalent
enrollment of nonresident pupils, plus (iii) the full-time equivalent
enrollment of resident pupils attending full-time in board of
cooperative educational services (not otherwise specifically included).
Native American pupils of a reservation attending public school, or
pupils living on the United States military reservation at West Point
attending public school, shall be deemed to be resident pupils of the
district providing such school, for purposes of this paragraph. Where a
school district has entered into a contract with state university
pursuant to subdivision two of section three hundred fifty-five of this
chapter under which the school district makes payment in the nature of
tuition for the education of certain children residing in the district,
such children for whom such tuition payments are made shall be deemed to
be resident pupils of such district for the purposes of this paragraph.
 (2) In determining the total wealth foundation pupil units of a
component school district of a central high school district for
computing aid ratios the total wealth foundation pupil units of high
school pupils residing in such component district and attending the
central high school shall be included. The total wealth foundation pupil
units of a central high school district itself shall be the sum of the
total wealth foundation pupil units of each component school district.
 (3) Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this paragraph, when a
school district shall experience an increase in total wealth foundation
pupil units during the current year because of the closing in whole, or
in part, of a nonpublic school or a campus school, or a school
previously operated by the United States government on the United States
military reservation at West Point, the commissioner, in computing any
aid ratio of such district, shall permit the use of such additional
total wealth foundation pupil units during the current year and the next
succeeding year, provided that such additional total wealth foundation
pupil units attributable to such closing, or part thereof, shall be in
excess of one hundred students.
 i. Parent-teacher conferences or workshops. Notwithstanding any other
provision of this section to the contrary, when a school district
operates for a half day session because of a parent-teacher conference
or workshops for teachers, it shall be apportioned with the same amount
of state aid for pupils attending kindergarten as if both morning and
afternoon kindergarten groups were in attendance although only one
kindergarten class attends school. The school district shall provide
that morning and afternoon kindergarten groups shall alternate in
attendance if more than one half day session is scheduled during the
school year.
 3. Computation of aid ratios.
 a. (1) "Pupil wealth ratio" shall mean the number computed to three
decimals without rounding obtained when actual valuation of a school
district divided by the total wealth pupil units is divided by the
statewide average actual valuation per total wealth pupil unit as
computed by the commissioner in accordance with the provisions of this
section. Such statewide average actual valuation per total wealth pupil
unit shall be established each year by the commissioner using the latest
single year actual valuation computed under paragraph c of subdivision
one of this section. Such statewide average shall be transmitted to the
school districts. Such statewide average shall be rounded to the nearest
hundredth and shall include the actual valuation and total wealth pupil
units of all school districts eligible for aid pursuant to this section
except central high school districts. For the purposes of calculating
such statewide average the data for the city school district of the city
of New York shall be citywide data.
 (2) "Pupil wealth ratio for total foundation aid" shall mean the
number computed to three decimals without rounding obtained when the
selected actual valuation of a school district divided by the total
wealth pupil units is divided by the statewide average selected actual
valuation per total wealth pupil unit as computed by the commissioner in
accordance with the provisions of this section. Such statewide average
selected actual valuation per total wealth pupil unit shall be
established each year by the commissioner using the selected actual
valuation computed under paragraph c of subdivision one of this section.
Such statewide average shall be transmitted to the school districts.
Such statewide average shall be rounded to the nearest hundredth and
shall include the selected actual valuation and total wealth pupil units
of all school districts eligible for aid pursuant to this section except
central high school districts. For the purposes of calculating such
statewide average the data for the city school district of the city of
New York shall be citywide data.
 b. (1) "Alternate pupil wealth ratio" shall mean the number computed
to three decimals without rounding obtained when the adjusted gross
income of a school district for the calendar year two years prior to the
calendar year in which the base year began divided by the total wealth
pupil units of such district is divided by the statewide adjusted gross
income per total wealth pupil unit. Such statewide average gross income
per pupil shall be established each year by the commissioner and shall
be transmitted to school districts. Such statewide average shall be
rounded to the nearest hundredth and shall include the adjusted gross
income and total wealth pupil units of all school districts eligible for
aid pursuant to this section except central high school districts. For
the purposes of calculating such statewide average the data for the city
school district of the city of New York shall be citywide data.
 (2) "Alternate pupil wealth ratio for total foundation aid" shall mean
the number computed to three decimals without rounding obtained when the
selected adjusted gross income of a school district for the calendar
year two years prior to the calendar year in which the base year began
divided by the total wealth pupil units of such district is divided by
the statewide selected adjusted gross income per total wealth pupil
unit. Such statewide average selected adjusted gross income per pupil
shall be established each year by the commissioner and shall be
transmitted to school districts. Such statewide average shall be rounded
to the nearest hundredth and shall include the selected adjusted gross
income and total wealth pupil units of all school districts eligible for
aid pursuant to this section except central high school districts. For
the purposes of calculating such statewide average the data for the city
school district of the city of New York shall be citywide data.
 c. (1) "Combined wealth ratio" shall mean the number computed to three
decimals without rounding obtained when fifty per centum of the pupil
wealth ratio is added to fifty per centum of the alternate pupil wealth
ratio.
 (2) "Combined wealth ratio for total foundation aid" shall mean the
number computed to three decimals without rounding obtained when fifty
per centum of the pupil wealth ratio for total foundation aid is added
to fifty per centum of the alternate pupil wealth ratio for total
foundation aid.
 d. "Income wealth index" shall mean the number computed to three
decimals without rounding obtained when the adjusted gross income of a
school district for the calendar year two years prior to the calendar
year in which the base year began divided by the total wealth foundation
pupil units of such district is divided by the statewide adjusted gross
income per total wealth foundation pupil units. Such statewide average
gross income per pupil shall be established each year by the
commissioner and shall be transmitted to school districts. For the
purposes of this paragraph, the income data shall be computed in
accordance with paragraph h of subdivision one of this section. Such
statewide average shall be rounded to the nearest hundredth and shall
include the adjusted gross income and total wealth foundation pupil
units of all school districts eligible for aid pursuant to this section
except central high school districts. For the purposes of calculating
such statewide average the data for the city school district of the city
of New York shall be citywide data. The adjusted gross income of a
central high school district shall equal the sum of the adjusted gross
income of each of its component school districts.
 e. Building aid ratios. The aid ratio to be used in determining
building aid apportionments to any school district pursuant to this
section shall be computed in the following manner:
 (1) The actual valuation of such district shall be divided by its
resident weighted average daily attendance as computed pursuant to this
section to determine its actual valuation per resident pupil.
 (2) The commissioner shall determine the state average actual
valuation per pupil in resident weighted average daily attendance for
the preceding school year using the latest single year actual valuation
computed under paragraph c of subdivision one of this section. The
commissioner shall transmit such state average to the school districts.
Such statewide average shall be rounded to the nearest hundredth and
shall include the actual valuation and resident weighted average daily
attendance of all school districts eligible for aid pursuant to this
section except central high school districts. For the purposes of
calculating such statewide average the data for the city school district
of the city of New York shall be citywide data.
 (3) The resident weighted average daily attendance wealth ratio shall
mean the actual valuation per resident pupil of the school district
divided by such state average actual valuation per pupil, carried to
three decimal places without rounding.
 (4) The building aid ratio shall be computed by subtracting from one
the product obtained by multiplying the resident weighted average daily
attendance wealth ratio by fifty-one percent. Such aid ratio shall be
expressed as a decimal carried to three places without rounding, but
shall not be less than zero.
 (5) The additional building aid ratio for low income wealth school
districts shall be the product obtained by multiplying the state sharing
ratio by one and two hundred sixty-three thousandths (1.263).
 f. The board of cooperative educational services aid ratio shall equal
the greater of: (1) an amount equal to one minus the quotient expressed
as a decimal to three places without rounding of eight mills divided by
the tax rate of the local district computed upon the actual valuation of
taxable property, as determined pursuant to subdivision one of this
section, expressed in mills to the nearest tenth as determined by the
commissioner, provided, however, that where services are provided to a
school district which is included within a central high school district
or to a central high school district, such amount shall equal one minus
the quotient expressed as a decimal to three places without rounding of
three mills divided by the tax rates, expressed in mills to the nearest
tenth, of such districts, as determined by the commissioner or (2) an
amount computed by subtracting from one the product obtained by
multiplying the resident weighted average daily attendance wealth ratio
by fifty-one percent. Such aid ratio shall be expressed as a decimal
carried to three places without rounding but shall not be less than
thirty-six percent and shall not be greater than ninety percent.
 g. Computation of the state sharing ratio. The state sharing ratio
shall be the higher of:
 (1) a value computed by subtracting from one and thirty-seven
hundredths the product obtained by multiplying the combined wealth ratio
by one and twenty-three hundredths; or
 (2) a value computed by subtracting from one the product obtained by
multiplying the combined wealth ratio by sixty-four hundredths, provided
however, that for the purpose of computing the state sharing ratio for
total foundation aid, the tier two value shall be computed by
subtracting from one the product obtained when multiplying the combined
wealth ratio by six hundred sixteen thousandths (0.616) and such values
shall be computed using the combined wealth ratio for total foundation
aid in place of the combined wealth ratio; or
 (3) a value computed by subtracting from eighty hundredths the product
obtained by multiplying the combined wealth ratio by thirty-nine
hundredths; or
 (4) a value computed by subtracting from fifty-one hundredths the
product obtained by multiplying the combined wealth ratio by twenty-two
hundredths, provided, however, that for the purpose of computing the
state sharing ratio for total foundation aid, the tier four value shall
be computed by subtracting from fifty-one hundredths the product
obtained by multiplying the combined wealth ratio by one hundred
seventy-three thousandths and such values shall be computed using the
combined wealth ratio for total foundation aid in place of the combined
wealth ratio, and, for high need school districts, as determined
pursuant to clause (c) of subparagraph two of paragraph c of subdivision
six of this section for the school aid computer listing produced by the
commissioner in support of the enacted budget for the two thousand
seven--two thousand eight school year and entitled "SA0708", such values
shall be multiplied by one hundred five percent.
 Such result shall be expressed as a decimal carried to three places
without rounding, but shall not be greater than ninety hundredths nor
less than zero, provided, however, that for the purpose of computing the
state sharing ratio for total foundation aid in the two thousand
twenty-four--two thousand twenty-five school year, such result shall not
be greater than ninety-one hundredths (0.91), and that for the purpose
of computing the state sharing ratio for total foundation aid in the two
thousand twenty-five--two thousand twenty-six school year and
thereafter, such result shall not be greater than ninety-three
hundredths (0.93).
 4. Total foundation aid.
 In addition to any other apportionment pursuant to this chapter, a
school district, other than a special act school district as defined in
subdivision eight of section four thousand one of this chapter, shall be
eligible for total foundation aid equal to the product of total aidable
foundation pupil units multiplied by the district's selected foundation
aid, which shall be the greater of five hundred dollars ($500) or
foundation formula aid. Total aidable foundation pupil units shall be
calculated pursuant to paragraph g of subdivision two of this section.
For the purposes of calculating aid pursuant to this subdivision, aid
for the city school district of the city of New York shall be calculated
on a citywide basis.
 a. Foundation formula aid. Foundation formula aid shall equal the
remainder when the expected minimum local contribution is subtracted
from the product of the foundation amount, the regional cost index, and
the pupil need index, or: (foundation amount x regional cost index x
pupil need index)- expected minimum local contribution.
 (1) The foundation amount shall reflect the average per pupil cost of
general education instruction in successful school districts, as
determined by a statistical analysis of the costs of special education
and general education in successful school districts, provided that the
foundation amount shall be adjusted annually to reflect the percentage
increase in the consumer price index as defined by paragraph hh of
subdivision one of this section, provided that for the two thousand
twenty-four--two thousand twenty-five school year, the percentage
increase in the consumer price index shall be deemed to be two and
eight-tenths percent (0.028).
 (2) The regional cost index shall reflect an analysis of labor market
costs based on median salaries in professional occupations that require
similar credentials to those of positions in the education field, but
not including those occupations in the education field, provided that
the regional cost indices for the two thousand seven--two thousand eight
school year and thereafter shall be as follows:
 Labor Force Region Index
 Capital District 1.124
 Southern Tier 1.045
 Western New York 1.091
 Hudson Valley 1.314
 Long Island/NYC 1.425
 Finger Lakes 1.141
 Central New York 1.103
 Mohawk Valley 1.000
 North Country 1.000
 Provided that in the two thousand twenty-five--two thousand twenty-six
school year and thereafter, the regional cost index for Westchester
county shall be 1.351.
 (3) The pupil need index shall equal the sum of one plus the
extraordinary needs percent, provided, however, that the pupil need
index shall not be less than one nor more than two. The extraordinary
needs percent shall be calculated pursuant to paragraph w of subdivision
one of this section.
 (4) The expected minimum local contribution shall equal the lesser of
(i) the product of (A) the quotient arrived at when the selected actual
valuation is divided by total wealth foundation pupil units, multiplied
by (B) the product of the local tax factor, multiplied by the income
wealth index, or (ii) the product of (A) the product of the foundation
amount, the regional cost index, and the pupil need index, multiplied by
(B) the positive difference, if any, of one minus the state sharing
ratio for total foundation aid. The local tax factor shall be
established by May first of each year by determining the product,
computed to four decimal places without rounding, of ninety percent
multiplied by the quotient of the sum of the statewide average tax rate
as computed by the commissioner for the current year in accordance with
the provisions of paragraph e of subdivision one of section thirty-six
hundred nine-e of this part plus the statewide average tax rate computed
by the commissioner for the base year in accordance with such provisions
plus the statewide average tax rate computed by the commissioner for the
year prior to the base year in accordance with such provisions, divided
by three. The income wealth index shall be calculated pursuant to
paragraph d of subdivision three of this section, provided, however,
that for the purposes of computing the expected minimum local
contribution the income wealth index shall not be less than sixty-five
percent (0.65) and shall not be more than two hundred percent (2.0). The
selected actual valuation shall be calculated pursuant to paragraph c of
subdivision one of this section. Total wealth foundation pupil units
shall be calculated pursuant to paragraph h of subdivision two of this
section.
 (5) For the purposes of this subdivision, "total foundation aid" shall
be equal to the product of the total aidable foundation pupil units
multiplied by the district's selected foundation aid.
 b. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, for the
two thousand seven--two thousand eight school year and thereafter, the
additional amount payable to each school district pursuant to this
subdivision in the current year as total foundation aid, after deducting
the total foundation aid base, shall be deemed a state grant in aid
identified by the commissioner for general use for purposes of section
seventeen hundred eighteen of this chapter.
 c. Public excess cost aid setaside. Each school district shall set
aside from its total foundation aid computed for the current year
pursuant to this subdivision an amount equal to the product of: (i) the
difference between the amount the school district was eligible to
receive in the two thousand six--two thousand seven school year pursuant
to or in lieu of paragraph six of subdivision nineteen of this section
as such paragraph existed on June thirtieth, two thousand seven, minus
the amount such district was eligible to receive pursuant to or in lieu
of paragraph five of subdivision nineteen of this section as such
paragraph existed on June thirtieth, two thousand seven, in such school
year, and (ii) the sum of one and the percentage increase in the
consumer price index for the current year over such consumer price index
for the two thousand six--two thousand seven school year, as defined by
paragraph hh of subdivision one of this section, provided that the
percentage increase in the consumer price index for the two thousand
twenty-four--two thousand twenty-five school year over such consumer
price index for the two thousand six--two thousand seven school year
shall be deemed to be fifty-four and one-tenth percent (0.541).
Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the public
excess cost aid setaside shall be paid pursuant to section thirty-six
hundred nine-b of this part.
 d. For the two thousand fourteen--two thousand fifteen through two
thousand twenty-eight--two thousand twenty-nine school years a city
school district of a city having a population of one million or more may
use amounts apportioned pursuant to this subdivision for afterschool
programs.
 e. Community schools aid set-aside. Each school district shall set
aside from its total foundation aid computed for the current year
pursuant to this subdivision an amount equal to the sum of (i) the
amount, if any, set forth for such district as "COMMUNITY SCHL AID
(BT1617)" in the data file produced by the commissioner in support of
the enacted budget for the two thousand sixteen--two thousand seventeen
school year and entitled "SA161-7", (ii) the amount, if any, set forth
for such district as "COMMUNITY SCHL INCR" in the data file produced by
the commissioner in support of the executive budget request for the two
thousand seventeen--two thousand eighteen school year and entitled
"BT171-8", (iii) the amount, if any, set forth for such district as
"COMMUNITY SCHOOLS INCREASE" in the data file produced by the
commissioner in support of the executive budget for the two thousand
eighteen--two thousand nineteen school year and entitled "BT181-9", and
(iv) the amount, if any, set forth for such district as "19-20 COMMUNITY
SCHOOLS INCR" in the data file produced by the commissioner in support
of the executive budget for the two thousand nineteen--two thousand
twenty school year and entitled "BT192-0". Each school district shall
use such "COMMUNITY SCHL AID (BT1617)" amount to support the
transformation of school buildings into community hubs to deliver
co-located or school-linked academic, health, mental health, nutrition,
counseling, legal and/or other services to students and their families,
including but not limited to providing a community school site
coordinator, or to support other costs incurred to maximize students'
academic achievement. Each school district shall use such "COMMUNITY
SCHL INCR" amount to support the transformation of school buildings into
community hubs to deliver co-located or school linked academic, health,
mental health services and personnel, after-school programming, dual
language programs, nutrition, counseling, legal and/or other services to
students and their families, including but not limited to providing a
community school site coordinator and programs for English language
learners, or to support other costs incurred to maximize students'
academic achievement, provided however that a school district whose
"COMMUNITY SCHL INCR" amount exceeds one million dollars ($1,000,000)
shall use an amount equal to the greater of one hundred fifty thousand
dollars ($150,000) or ten percent of such "COMMUNITY SCHL INCR" amount
to support such transformation at schools with extraordinary high levels
of student need as identified by the commissioner, subject to the
approval of the director of the budget. Each school district shall use
such "COMMUNITY SCHOOLS INCREASE" to support the transformation of
school buildings into community hubs to deliver co-located or school
linked academic, health, mental health services and personnel,
after-school programming, dual language programs, nutrition, counseling,
legal and/or other services to students and their families, including
but not limited to providing a community school site coordinator and
programs for English language learners, or to support other costs
incurred to maximize students' academic achievement. Each school
district shall use such "19-20 COMMUNITY SCHOOLS INCR" to support the
transformation of school buildings into community hubs to deliver
co-located or school linked academic, health, mental health services and
personnel, after-school programming, dual language programs, nutrition,
trauma informed support, counseling, legal and/or other services to
students and their families, including but not limited to providing a
community school site coordinator and programs for English language
learners, or to support other costs incurred to maximize students'
academic achievement.
 f. Foundation aid payable in the two thousand twenty-five--two
thousand twenty-six school year. Notwithstanding any provision of law to
the contrary, foundation aid payable in the two thousand
twenty-five--two thousand twenty-six school year shall equal the greater
of total foundation aid or the product of one and two hundredths (1.02)
multiplied by the foundation aid base.
 5. Public high cost excess cost aid. A school district having a pupil
with a disability of school age for whom the cost, as approved by the
commissioner, of appropriate special services or programs exceeds the
lesser of ten thousand dollars or four times the expense per pupil
without limits shall be entitled to an additional apportionment for each
such child computed by multiplying the district's excess cost aid ratio
by the amount by which such cost exceeds three times the district's
expense per pupil without limits.
 a. For the purpose of this subdivision:
 (1) Expense per pupil for the purposes of this subdivision shall be
not less than two thousand dollars and not more than the greater of
seven thousand one hundred ten dollars or the statewide average of such
expense per pupil. Such statewide average expense per pupil shall be
computed and rounded to the nearest fifty dollars by the commissioner
using the expense and pupils as estimated by school districts or as
determined by the commissioner for use in determining the expense per
pupil of the district pursuant to paragraph f of subdivision one of this
section for all districts eligible for aid pursuant to this section. For
the purposes of calculating such statewide expense per pupil, the data
for the city school district of the city of New York shall be city-wide
data.
 (2) The excess cost aid ratio shall be computed by subtracting from
one the product obtained by multiplying fifty-one per centum by the
combined wealth ratio. This aid ratio shall be expressed as a decimal
carried to three places without rounding, but not less than twenty-five
percent.
 b. Notwithstanding section thirty-six hundred nine-a of this part, the
apportionment provided for in this subdivision shall be paid pursuant to
section thirty-six hundred nine-b of this part.
 5-a. Supplemental public excess cost aid. For the two thousand
seven--two thousand eight school year, a school district having a pupil
with a disability of school age shall be entitled to an additional
apportionment computed as follows:
 a. Total excess cost amount per pupil shall equal the product of the
expense per pupil computed pursuant to subparagraph one of paragraph a
of subdivision five of this section and the excess cost aid ratio, which
shall be computed pursuant to subparagraph two of paragraph a of
subdivision five of this section.
 b. Basic excess cost amount shall equal the product of the total
excess cost amount per pupil and the resident weighted supplemental
pupils with disabilities computed pursuant to subparagraph five of
paragraph i of subdivision one of this section.
 c. Integrated settings excess cost amount shall equal the product of
the total excess cost amount per pupil and the integrated settings
weighted pupils with disabilities computed pursuant to subparagraph six
of paragraph i of subdivision one of this section.
 d. Declassification support services amount. (1) Declassification
support services shall mean services for teachers and pupils in the
first year that a pupil moves from a special education program to a
full-time regular education program. Services to pupils shall be
provided on a regular basis and may include, but not be limited to
psychological, social work, speech and language services and noncareer
counseling services provided by qualified professional personnel as
defined in regulations of the commissioner. Services for teachers of
such pupils may include the assistance of teacher aides or consultation
with appropriate personnel. When a committee on special education
determines that a pupil no longer needs special education services and
is ready for a full-time regular education program, such committee shall
identify and recommend the appropriate declassification support services
for the first year in the regular education program.
 (2) The declassification support services amount shall be equal to
fifty percent of the total excess cost amount per pupil multiplied by
the number of such pupils in the base year.
 (3) Declassification support services shall not be eligible for an
apportionment pursuant to section nineteen hundred fifty of this
chapter.
 (4) The commissioner shall adopt regulations to implement the
provisions of this paragraph.
 e. Total supplemental public excess cost amount shall be equal to the
sum of the basic excess cost aid amount, the integrated settings excess
cost amount, the declassification support services amount and the public
high cost excess cost aid computed pursuant to subdivision five of this
section for the current year.
 f. The supplemental public excess cost aid base shall equal for the
two thousand seven--two thousand eight school year, the amount the
school district was eligible to receive in the two thousand six--two
thousand seven school year pursuant to or in lieu of paragraph six of
former subdivision nineteen of this section.
 g. Supplemental public excess cost aid shall equal the product of
ninety-one hundredths and the positive difference, if any, of:
 (1) the difference of the total supplemental excess cost amount minus
the supplemental public excess cost aid base, minus (2) the positive
difference of the district's total foundation aid minus the product of
one hundred three percent and the total foundation aid base.
 h. Notwithstanding section thirty-six hundred nine-a of this part, the
apportionment provided for in this subdivision shall be paid pursuant to
section thirty-six hundred nine-b of this part.
 For the two thousand eight--two thousand nine school year, each school
district shall be entitled to an apportionment equal to the product of
fifteen percent and the additional apportionment computed pursuant to
this subdivision for the two thousand seven--two thousand eight school
year. For the two thousand nine--two thousand ten school year and
thereafter each school district shall be entitled to an apportionment
equal to the amount set forth for such school district as "SUPPLEMENTAL
PUB EXCESS COST" under the heading "2008-09 BASE YEAR AIDS" in the
school aid computer listing produced by the commissioner in support of
the budget for the two thousand nine--two thousand ten school year and
entitled "SA0910".
 6. Apportionment for capital outlays and debt service for school
building purposes. Any apportionment to a school district pursuant to
this subdivision shall be based upon base year approved expenditures for
capital outlays incurred prior to July first, two thousand one from its
general fund, capital fund or reserved funds and current year approved
expenditures for debt service, including debt service for refunding bond
issues eligible for an apportionment pursuant to paragraph g of this
subdivision and lease or other annual payments to the New York city
educational construction fund created by article ten of this chapter or
the city of Yonkers educational construction fund created by article
ten-B of this chapter which have been pledged to secure the payment of
bonds, notes or other obligations issued by the fund to finance the
construction, acquisition, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement
of the school portion of combined occupancy structures, or for lease or
other annual payments to the New York state urban development
corporation created by chapter one hundred seventy-four of the laws of
nineteen hundred sixty-eight, pursuant to agreement between such school
district and such corporation relating to the construction, acquisition,
reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of any school building, or
for annual payments to the dormitory authority pursuant to any lease,
sublease or other agreement relating to the financing, refinancing,
acquisition, design, construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
improvement, furnishing and equipping of, or otherwise provide for
school district capital facilities or school district capital equipment
made under the provisions of section sixteen hundred eighty of the
public authorities law, or for annual payments pursuant to any lease,
sublease or other agreement relating to the financing, refinancing,
acquisition, design, construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
improvement, furnishing and equipping of, or otherwise providing for
educational facilities of a city school district under the provisions of
section sixteen of chapter six hundred five of the laws of two thousand,
or for payments, pursuant to any assignment authorized by section
twenty-seven hundred ninety-nine-tt of the public authorities law, of
debt service in furtherance of funding the five-year educational
facilities capital plan of the city of New York school district or
related debt service costs and expenses as set forth in such section,
for annual payments pursuant to any lease, sublease or other agreement
relating to the financing, refinancing, design, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, improvement, furnishing and equipping of, or otherwise
providing for projects authorized pursuant to the city of Syracuse and
the board of education of the city school district of the city of
Syracuse cooperative school reconstruction act, for annual payments
pursuant to any lease, sublease or other agreement relating to the
financing, refinancing, design, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
improvement, furnishing and equipping of, or otherwise providing for
projects authorized pursuant to the city of Rochester and the board of
education of the city school district of the city of Rochester school
facilities modernization program act, for annual payments pursuant to
any lease, sublease or other agreement relating to the financing,
refinancing, design, construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
improvement, furnishing and equipping of, or otherwise providing for
projects authorized pursuant to the Yonkers city school district
facilities modernization program act, or for lease, lease-purchase or
other annual payments to another school district or person, partnership
or corporation pursuant to an agreement made under the provisions of
section four hundred three-b, subdivision eight of section twenty-five
hundred three, or subdivision six of section twenty-five hundred
fifty-four of this chapter, provided that the apportionment for such
lease or other annual payments under the provisions of section four
hundred three-b, subdivision eight of section twenty-five hundred three,
or subdivision six of section twenty-five hundred fifty-four of this
chapter, other than payments under a lease-purchase agreement or an
equivalent agreement, shall be based upon approved expenditures in the
current year. Approved expenditures for capital outlays from a school
district's general fund, capital fund or reserved funds that are
incurred on or after July first, two thousand two, and are not aidable
pursuant to subdivision six-f of this section, shall be aidable as debt
service under an assumed amortization established pursuant to paragraphs
e and j of this subdivision. In any such case approved expenditures
shall be only for new construction, reconstruction, purchase of existing
structures, for site purchase and improvement, for new garages, for
original equipment, furnishings, machinery, or apparatus, and for
professional fees and other costs incidental to such construction or
reconstruction, or purchase of existing structures. In the case of a
lease or lease-purchase agreement entered pursuant to section four
hundred three-b, subdivision eight of section twenty-five hundred three
or subdivision six of section twenty-five hundred fifty-four of this
chapter, approved expenditures for the lease or other annual payments
shall not include the costs of heat, electricity, water or other
utilities or the costs of operation or maintenance of the leased
facility. An apportionment shall be available pursuant to this
subdivision for construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation or
improvement in a building, or portion thereof, being leased by a school
district only if the lease is for a term of at least ten years
subsequent to the date of the general construction contract for such
construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement. Each school
district shall prepare a five year capital facilities plan, pursuant to
regulations developed by the commissioner for such purpose, provided
that in the case of a city school district in a city having a population
of one million inhabitants or more, such facilities plan shall comply
with the provisions of section twenty-five hundred ninety-p of this
chapter and this subdivision. Such plan shall include, but not be
limited to, a building inventory, and estimated expense of facility
needs, for new construction, additions, alterations, reconstruction,
major repairs, energy consumption and maintenance by school building, as
appropriate. Such plan shall consider the incorporation of design
principles and strategies, pursuant to guidance issued by the
commissioner, as part of a comprehensive approach to provide a safe,
secure and healthy school environment. Such five year plan shall include
a priority ranking of projects and shall be amended if necessary to
reflect subsequent on-site evaluations of facilities conducted by state
supported contractors.
 a. For capital outlays for such purposes first incurred on or after
July first, nineteen hundred sixty-one and debt service for such
purposes first incurred on or after July first, nineteen hundred
sixty-two, the actual approved expenditures less the amount of civil
defense aid received pursuant to the provisions of section thirty-five
of chapter seven hundred eighty-four of the laws of nineteen hundred
fifty-one as amended shall be allowed for purposes of apportionment
under this subdivision but not in excess of the following schedule of
cost allowances:
 (1) For new construction and the purchase of existing structures, the
cost allowances shall be based upon the rated capacity of the building
or addition and a basic per pupil allowance of up to six thousand three
hundred seventy-five dollars adjusted monthly by a statewide index
reflecting changes in the cost of labor and materials since July first,
nineteen hundred ninety-two, established by the commissioner of labor,
modified by an annual county or multi-county labor market composite wage
rate, established by the commissioner of labor in consultation with the
commissioner, for July first of the base year, commencing July first,
nineteen hundred ninety-seven for general construction contracts awarded
on or after July first, nineteen hundred ninety-eight, indexed to the
median of such county or multi-county rates, but not less than one.
Such base allowance shall apply to a building or an addition housing
grades prekindergarten through six and shall be adjusted for a building
or an addition housing grades seven through nine by a factor of one and
four-tenths, for a building or an addition housing grades seven through
twelve by a factor of one and five-tenths, for a building or addition
housing special education programs by a factor of two, except that where
such building or addition is connected to, or such space is located
within, a public school facility housing programs for nondisabled
pupils, as approved by the commissioner, a factor of three shall be
used. Rated capacity of a building or an addition shall be determined by
the commissioner based on space standards and other requirements for
building construction specified by the commissioner. Such assigned
capacity ratings shall include, in addition to those spaces used for the
instruction of pupils, those spaces which are used for elementary and
secondary school libraries, cafeterias, prekindergarten instructional
rooms, teachers' conference rooms, gymnasiums and auditoriums. For new
construction projects approved on or after July first, two thousand, by
the voters of the school district or by the board of education of a city
school district in a city with more than one hundred twenty-five
thousand inhabitants, and/or the chancellor in a city school district in
a city having a population of one million or more, such rated capacity
for new buildings and additions constructed to replace existing
buildings that, in the judgment of the commissioner, have not been
adequately maintained and have not reached their projected useful life
shall be reduced by the commissioner by an amount proportional to the
remaining unused portion of the useful life of the existing buildings,
provided however that the commissioner may waive such requirement upon a
finding that replacement of the existing building is necessary to
protect the health and safety of students or staff, that reconstruction
and modernization of the existing building would not adequately address
such health and safety problems, and that the need to replace the
building was not caused by failure to adequately maintain the building.
If the commissioner of labor resets the statewide index reflecting
changes in the costs of labor and materials since July first, nineteen
hundred ninety-two, the commissioner shall adopt regulations to
supersede the basic per pupil allowance of up to six thousand three
hundred seventy-five dollars to the imputed allowance in effect at that
time.
 (2) Where a school district has expenditures for site purchase,
grading or improvement of the site, original furnishings, equipment,
machinery or apparatus, or professional fees, or other incidental costs,
the cost allowances for new construction and the purchase of existing
structures may be increased by the actual expenditures for such purposes
but by not more than the product of the applicable cost allowance
established pursuant to subparagraph one of this paragraph and twenty
per centum for school buildings or additions housing grades
prekindergarten through six and by not more than the product of such
cost allowance and twenty-five per centum for school buildings or
additions housing grades seven through twelve and by not more than the
product of such cost allowance and twenty-five per centum for school
buildings or additions housing special education programs as approved by
the commissioner.
 (3) Cost allowances for reconstructing or modernizing structures shall
not exceed one hundred per centum of the cost allowances for the
equivalent new construction over the projected useful life of the
building, to be determined in accordance with the regulations of the
commissioner. Reconstruction projects shall reasonably meet the criteria
established for new construction, including but not limited to energy,
fire, personal safety and space per pupil standards.
 (4) The commissioner shall promulgate regulations prescribing the
methodology for establishing a multi-year cost allowance for the purpose
of computation of building aid to school districts and a procedure for
school districts to appeal the determination that a building has not
been adequately maintained, as required by subparagraphs one and three
of this paragraph. Such methodology shall include the development of a
building replacement cost allowance schedule for the replacement of
major building systems of a building over its projected useful life and
the construction of new buildings and additions for projects that have
been approved on or after July first, two thousand by the voters of the
school district or by the board of education of a city school district
in a city with more than one hundred twenty-five thousand inhabitants,
and/or the chancellor in a city school district in a city having a
population of one million or more. For purposes of this subdivision,
"major building systems" shall mean the electrical, plumbing, heating,
ventilation and air conditioning systems, and the roof and other major
structural elements of a school building.
 (5) For costs relating to the construction, acquisition,
reconstruction or leases of any school building project conducted by or
on behalf of a city school district in a city having a population of one
million inhabitants or more, where a general construction contract has
been awarded or a purchase or lease agreement was executed on or after
July first, two thousand four, the cost allowance for such project shall
include: (a) construction and incidental costs where such costs are
associated with multistory construction necessitated by substandard site
sizes, site security costs, difficulties with delivery of construction
supplies, increased fire resistence and fire suppression costs, and (b)
site acquisition, environmental remediation and building demolition
costs, provided, however, that costs which are eligible for an
apportionment pursuant to this subparagraph on or before July first, two
thousand six shall be deemed to be debt service for the two thousand
five--two thousand six school year on new bonds and capital notes
aidable in July following the current year pursuant to clause (b) of
subparagraph one of paragraph f of this subdivision.
 On or before January first, two thousand nine, the commissioner shall
report to the director of the budget, the chair of the senate finance
committee and the chair of the assembly ways and means committee on the
projects which received funding pursuant to the provisions of this
subparagraph, and the overall implementation of this subparagraph.
 (6) Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, for
the purpose of computation of building aid for reconstruction or
modernizing of no more than eight projects pursuant to chapter five
hundred thirty-three of the laws of two thousand fourteen, multi-year
cost allowances for each project shall be established and utilized two
times in the first five-year period. Subsequent multi-year cost
allowances shall be established no sooner than ten years after
establishment of the first maximum cost allowance authorized pursuant to
this subparagraph.
 (7) Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, for
the purpose of computation of building aid for three new construction
projects and for the equipping of such projects authorized pursuant to
chapter three hundred fifty-five of the laws of two thousand sixteen,
multi-year cost allowances for each project shall be established and
utilized two times in the first five-year period. Subsequent multi-year
cost allowances shall be established no sooner than ten years after
establishment of the first maximum cost allowance authorized pursuant to
this subparagraph.
 (8) Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, for
the purpose of computation of building aid for the renovation and
equipping of the Syracuse Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts and
Mathematics high school authorized for operation by the Syracuse city
school district the building aid units assigned to this project shall
reflect a building aid enrollment of one thousand students and
multi-year cost allowances for the project shall be established and
utilized two times in the first five-year period. Subsequent multi-year
cost allowances shall be established no sooner than ten years after
establishment of the first maximum cost allowance authorized pursuant to
this subparagraph.
 (9) Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, for
the purpose of computation of building aid for reconstruction or
modernizing of no more than six projects pursuant to chapter four
hundred sixteen of the laws of two thousand seven, as amended, enacting
the third phase of the city of Rochester school facilities modernization
program act, multi-year cost allowances for each project shall be
established and utilized two times in the first five-year period.
Subsequent multi-year cost allowances shall be established no sooner
than ten years after establishment of the first maximum cost allowance
authorized pursuant to this subparagraph.
 (10) Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, for
the purpose of computation of building aid for the renovation and
equipping of the Leonardo da Vinci high school authorized for operation
by the city school district of the city of Buffalo the building aid
units assigned to this project shall reflect a building aid enrollment
of four hundred twenty students.
 (11) Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, for
the purpose of computation of building aid for reconstruction or
modernizing of the STEM at Blodgett middle school, the Delaware Primary
school, the Syracuse Latin school, the Lincoln middle school, the
Roberts Pre-k-8 school, the Seymour Dual Language Academy and the
Webster elementary school pursuant to a chapter of the laws of two
thousand twenty-one enacting the third phase of the city of Syracuse
cooperative school reconstruction act, multi-year cost allowances for
each project shall be established and utilized two times in the first
five-year period. Subsequent multi-year cost allowances shall be
established no sooner than ten years after establishment of the first
maximum cost allowance authorized pursuant to this subparagraph.
 (12) Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, for
the purpose of computation of building aid for construction,
reconstruction or modernizing of no more than one project by the
Binghamton city school district, multi-year cost allowances for the
project shall be established and utilized two times in the first
five-year period. Subsequent multi-year cost allowances shall be
established no sooner than ten years after establishment of the first
maximum cost allowance authorized pursuant to this subparagraph.
 b. (1) The apportionment for school building purposes to any district
shall be determined by adding the amount of its current year approved
expenditures for lease or other annual payments under the provisions of
section four hundred three-b, subdivision eight of section twenty-five
hundred three, or subdivision six of section twenty-five hundred
fifty-four of this chapter, other than payments under a lease-purchase
agreement or an equivalent agreement, plus the amount of its current
year approved expenditures under an assumed amortization for capital
outlays for school building purposes from its general fund, capital fund
or from a reserve fund to the amount of its current year approved
expenditures for debt service for such purposes and multiplying the sum
by its aid ratio. Expenditures made for computer equipment, including
original purchase and installation of hardware, conduit, wiring, and
powering of hardware installations in computer classrooms, or for
building or campuswide local area network systems and in-building
elements of other wide area networks, including the original purchase
and installation of conduit, wiring, and powering of hardware
installations, may be included in approved expenditures for building aid
pursuant to this paragraph on the approval of the commissioner
regardless of any minimum cost requirement that may be applied to other
approved expenditures pursuant to this section. Such equipment expenses
claimed for aid under this subdivision shall not be claimed for aid
under any other provisions of this chapter. Provided further that any
lead remediation expense required pursuant to section eleven hundred ten
of the public health law, where such expense is reimbursable from
another state or federal source, shall not be an approved expenditure
for purposes of this subdivision.
 (2) Additional apportionment for certain school building projects.
(i) Eligibility. All school building projects (a) approved by the voters
of the school district or (b) approved by the board of education of a
city school district in a city with more than one hundred twenty-five
thousand inhabitants, and/or the chancellor in a city school district in
a city having a population of one million or more or (c) in the case of
a construction emergency project, approved by the board of education of
any school district or by the chancellor in a city school district in a
city having a population of one million or more, for projects approved
on or after July first, nineteen hundred ninety-eight, shall be eligible
for an additional apportionment pursuant to this subparagraph to the
extent that expenditures for such projects are otherwise aidable
pursuant to this subdivision, provided that where such projects are
leases, such projects would only be aidable pursuant to this subdivision
following the approval of the voters of the school district if entered
into pursuant to section four hundred three-b of the education law, and
provided that for all such projects so approved on or after July first,
two thousand, expenditures directly related to swimming pools shall not
be eligible for such additional apportionment, and further provided that
for the purposes of this subdivision a construction emergency project
shall mean a school construction project approved on or after July
first, two thousand, to remediate emergency situations which arise in
public school buildings and threaten the health and/or safety of
building occupants, as a result of the unanticipated discovery of
asbestos or other hazardous substances during construction work on a
school or significant damage caused by a fire, snow storm, ice storm,
excessive rain, high wind, flood or similar catastrophic event which
results in the necessity for immediate repair.
 (ii) Apportionment. The apportionment pursuant to this subparagraph
shall equal the product of such eligible approved expenses determined in
accordance with the provisions of clause (i) of this subparagraph and
this section and the incentive decimal computed for use in the year in
which the project was approved. The incentive decimal shall equal the
positive remainder resulting when the district's building aid ratio
selected pursuant to paragraph c of this subdivision is subtracted from
the enhanced building aid ratio. The enhanced building aid ratio shall
equal the sum of the building aid ratio selected for use in the current
year pursuant to paragraph c of this subdivision and one-tenth, computed
to three decimals without rounding, but not more than (a) ninety-eight
hundredths for a high need school district, as defined pursuant to
regulations of the commissioner, for all school building projects
approved by the voters of the school district or by the board of
education of a city school district in a city with more than one hundred
twenty-five thousand inhabitants, and/or the chancellor in a city school
district in a city having a population of one million or more, on or
after July first, two thousand five, or (b) ninety-five hundredths for
any other school building project or school district, nor less than
one-tenth.
 c. (1) For aid payable in the school year nineteen hundred
ninety-three--ninety-four and earlier, any school district may compute
aid under the provisions of this subdivision, or under subdivision six
of section thirty-six hundred one-a of this article, using the building
aid ratio computed for use in the current year or the aid ratio computed
for use in any year commencing with the nineteen hundred
eighty-one--eighty-two school year as computed by the commissioner based
on data on file with the education department as of July first, nineteen
hundred ninety-six, and; provided that, school districts who are
eligible for aid under paragraph f of subdivision fourteen of this
section may compute aid under the provisions of this subdivision using
the aid ratio so computed for the reorganized district or the highest of
the aid ratios so computed for any of the individual school districts
which existed prior to the date of the reorganized school district.
 (2) (a) For aid payable in the school years nineteen hundred
ninety-four--ninety-five and thereafter for all school building projects
approved by the voters of the school district or by the board of
education of a city school district in a city with more than one hundred
twenty-five thousand inhabitants, and/or the chancellor in a city school
district in a city having a population of one million or more, before
July first, two thousand, any school district may compute aid under the
provisions of this subdivision using the building aid ratio computed for
use in the current year or the aid ratio computed for use in any year
commencing with the nineteen hundred eighty-one--eighty-two school year
as such earlier aid ratios are computed by the commissioner based on
data on file with the education department on or before July first of
the third school year following the school year in which aid is first
payable; provided that, school districts who are eligible for aid under
paragraph f of subdivision fourteen of this section may compute aid
under the provisions of this subdivision using the aid ratio so computed
for the reorganized district or the highest of the aid ratios so
computed for any of the individual school districts which existed prior
to the date of the reorganized school district.
 (b) For aid payable in the school years two thousand--two thousand one
and thereafter for all school building projects approved by the voters
of the school district or by the board of education of a city school
district in a city with more than one hundred twenty-five thousand
inhabitants, and/or the chancellor in a city school district in a city
having a population of one million or more, on or after July first, two
thousand, any school district shall compute aid under the provisions of
this subdivision using the sum of the high-need supplemental building
aid ratio, if any, computed pursuant to clause (c) of this subparagraph
and the greater of (i) the building aid ratio computed for use in the
current year; or (ii) a building aid ratio equal to the difference of
the aid ratio that was used or that would have been used to compute an
apportionment pursuant to this subdivision in the nineteen hundred
ninety-nine--two thousand school year as such aid ratio is computed by
the commissioner based on data on file with the department on or before
July first of the third school year following the school year in which
aid is first payable, less one-tenth; or (iii) for all such school
building projects approved by the voters of the school district or by
the board of education of a city school district in a city with more
than one hundred twenty-five thousand inhabitants, and/or the chancellor
in a city school district in a city having a population of one million
or more, on or after July first, two thousand and on or before June
thirtieth, two thousand four, for any school district for which the
pupil wealth ratio is greater than two and five-tenths in the school
year in which such school building project was approved by the voters of
the school district or by the board of education of a city school
district in a city with more than one hundred twenty-five thousand
inhabitants, and/or the chancellor in a city school district in a city
having a population of one million or more and for which the alternate
pupil wealth ratio is less than eighty-five hundredths in such school
year, and for all such school building projects approved by the voters
of the school district or by the board of education of a city school
district in a city with more than one hundred twenty-five thousand
inhabitants, and/or the chancellor in a city school district in a city
having a population of one million or more, on or after July first, two
thousand five and on or before June thirtieth, two thousand eight, for
any school district for which the pupil wealth ratio was greater than
two and five-tenths in the two thousand--two thousand one school year
and for which the alternate pupil wealth ratio was less than eighty-five
hundredths in the two thousand--two thousand one school year, the
additional building aid ratio; provided that, school districts who are
eligible for aid under paragraph f of subdivision fourteen of this
section may compute aid under the provisions of this subdivision using
the difference of the highest of the aid ratios so computed for the
reorganized district or the highest of the aid ratios so computed for
any of the individual school districts which existed prior to the date
of the reorganized school district less one-tenth.
 (c) For aid payable in the school years two thousand five--two
thousand six and thereafter for all school building projects approved by
the voters of the school district or by the board of education of a city
school district in a city with more than one hundred twenty-five
thousand inhabitants, and/or the chancellor in city school district in a
city having a population of one million or more, on or after July first,
two thousand five, high need school districts, as defined pursuant to
regulations of the commissioner, may compute aid under the provisions of
this subdivision using the high-need supplemental building aid ratio,
which shall be the lesser of (A) the product, computed to three decimals
without rounding, of the greater of the building aid ratios computed
pursuant to subclauses i, ii and iii of clause (b) of this subparagraph
multiplied by five percent, or (B) the positive remainder of
ninety-eight one-hundredths less the greater of the building aid ratios
computed pursuant to subclauses i, ii and iii of clause (b) of this
subparagraph.
 d. Additional apportionment of building aid for structural inspection
of school buildings. In addition to the foregoing apportionments made to
a school district under the provisions of this subdivision, the
commissioner is hereby authorized to apportion to any school district an
amount in accordance with this subdivision for structural inspections of
school buildings conducted pursuant to sections four hundred nine-d and
four hundred nine-e of this chapter and the regulations of the
commissioner implementing such sections. The amount of such
apportionment shall equal the product of the building aid ratio defined
pursuant to paragraph c of this subdivision and the actual approved
expenses incurred by the district in the base year for each school
building so inspected by a licensed architect or licensed professional
engineer, provided that the amount of such apportionment shall not
exceed the structural inspection aid ceiling. For inspections conducted
in the nineteen hundred ninety-two--ninety-three school year, the
structural inspection aid ceiling shall be ten thousand dollars. For
inspections conducted in the nineteen hundred ninety-three--ninety-four
school year and thereafter, the inspection aid ceiling shall be ten
thousand dollars plus an amount computed by the commissioner in
accordance with regulations adopted for such purpose, on the basis of an
index number reflecting changes in the costs of labor and materials from
July first, nineteen hundred ninety-three.
 e. (1) Apportionments payable for the nineteen hundred
ninety-three--ninety-four through the two thousand one--two thousand two
school years to the city school district of the city of New York. (a)
For the purposes of calculating the apportionment payable to the city
school district of the city of New York pursuant to this subdivision for
the nineteen hundred ninety-three--ninety-four through the two thousand
one--two thousand two school years, current year approved expenditures
for debt service shall mean expenditures for debt service that would be
incurred during the current year based on an assumed amortization for a
period of thirty years of the total approved costs relating to the
construction, acquisition, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement
of any school building, and based on an assumed rate of annual interest
applied to such amortization, both to be established by the commissioner
pursuant to this subparagraph.
 (b) The commissioner shall establish an assumed amortization for a
period of thirty years commencing with the date of the award of a
general contract by the school construction authority of the city of New
York, or by another body or official designated by law, relating to the
construction, acquisition, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement
of any school building within the city school district of the city of
New York. Such assumed amortization shall provide for equal monthly
payments of principal and interest based on an interest rate established
by the commissioner for such purpose for the school year during which
such general contract is awarded. Such estimated average interest rate
and such actual average interest rate shall be expressed as a decimal to
five places rounded to the nearest eighth of one-one hundredth.
 (c) By the first day of September of the current year the comptroller
of the city of New York shall provide to the commissioner an analysis,
as prescribed by the commissioner, of the actual average interest rate
applied to all capital debt incurred by the city of New York and the New
York city transitional finance authority for school purposes during the
base year and of the estimated average interest rate applied to all
capital debt to be incurred by the city of New York and the New York
city transitional finance authority for school purposes during the
current year. Upon approval by the commissioner such actual average
interest rate shall be established as the interest rate applicable to
the base year for the purposes of this subparagraph and subparagraph two
of this paragraph, and such estimated average interest rate shall be
tentatively established as the interest rate applicable to the current
year, except that all apportionments of aid payable during the current
year based on such estimated average interest rate shall be recalculated
in the following year and adjusted as appropriate based on the
appropriate actual average interest rate then established by the
commissioner.
 (d) By the first day of November, nineteen hundred ninety-six the
chancellor of the city school district of the city of New York shall
provide to the commissioner an analysis of any outstanding debt of the
city of New York which had originally been incurred by such city or its
subdivisions for capital projects related to school buildings of the
city school district of the city of New York for which general
construction contracts were awarded prior to July first, nineteen
hundred eighty-eight. Such analysis shall include the total principal
amount borrowed, the total capital expenditures included in such
principal for capital projects related to school buildings of the city
school district of the city of New York for which general construction
contracts were awarded prior to July first, nineteen hundred
eighty-eight, the ratio of such capital expenditures to such total
principal expressed as a decimal to five places without rounding and the
annual principal and interest payment scheduled for each year remaining
in the amortization of such principal as of July first, nineteen hundred
ninety-six for all such borrowings reported to the department on the "SA
121 Form Building Expenses Worksheet, 1995-96 State Aid" bearing a run
date of July tenth, nineteen hundred ninety-five which list shall
constitute the maximum principal outstanding and eligible for aid
pursuant to the provisions of this paragraph. Notwithstanding any other
provision of this subdivision, for aids payable in the nineteen hundred
ninety-six--ninety-seven school year and thereafter, the approved debt
service included in such principal and interest payments for the
purposes of calculating an apportionment pursuant to this subdivision
shall equal the product of: (i) five tenths; (ii) the principal and
interest payments scheduled for the current year as reported in such
analysis; and (iii) the ratio of such capital expenditures to such total
principal as reported in such analysis.
 (2) Apportionments payable for the two thousand two--two thousand
three school year and thereafter to the city school district of the city
of New York.
 (a) For the purposes of calculating the apportionment payable to the
city school district of the city of New York pursuant to this
subdivision for the two thousand two--two thousand three school year and
thereafter, current year approved expenditures for debt service shall
mean expenditures for debt service, including expenditures for any
lease-purchase or other annual payments under a lease-purchase agreement
or the equivalent that are eligible for aid under the opening paragraph
of this subdivision, that would be incurred during the current year
based on:
 (i) an assumed amortization to be established by the commissioner
pursuant to this subparagraph for a period of thirty years of the total
approved costs relating to the construction, acquisition,
reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of any school building for
which a general construction contract was awarded on or after the first
day of July, two thousand two, and
 (ii) an assumed amortization to be established by the commissioner
pursuant to this subparagraph of any assumed unpaid principal, or the
equivalent amount in the case of a lease-purchase agreement or its
equivalent, remaining as of the first day of July, two thousand two
pursuant to subparagraph one of this paragraph. Each such amortization
shall be based on an assumed rate of annual interest applied to such
amortization to be established by the commissioner pursuant to this
subparagraph and pursuant to clause (c) of subparagraph one of this
paragraph.
 (b)(i) For approved costs relating to the construction, acquisition,
reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of any school building for
which a general construction contract was awarded on or after the first
day of July, two thousand two, the commissioner shall establish an
assumed amortization for a period of thirty years commencing on the date
of receipt by the commissioner of a certification by the district that
such general construction contract has been awarded by the school
construction authority of the city of New York, or by another body or
official designated by law, relating to the construction, acquisition,
reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of any school building
within the city school district of the city of New York. Such assumed
amortization shall provide for equal semiannual payments of principal
and interest based on an interest rate established by the commissioner
for such purpose for the school year during which such certification was
received. Such estimated average interest rate and such actual average
interest rate shall be expressed as a decimal to five places rounded to
the nearest eighth of one-one hundredth.
 (ii) For any assumed unpaid principal or the equivalent amount in the
case of a lease-purchase agreement or its equivalent, remaining as of
the first day of July, two thousand two pursuant to subparagraph one of
this paragraph, the commissioner shall establish a new assumed
amortization commencing on such date for the unexpired term of the
original assumed amortization as of such date. Such assumed amortization
shall provide for equal semiannual payments of principal and interest
based on the interest rate applied to the original amortization as
established by the commissioner pursuant to subparagraph one of this
paragraph. Provided, however, that, notwithstanding any provision of law
to the contrary, for aid payable in the two thousand nine--two thousand
ten school year and thereafter, the total apportionment for such current
year approved expenditures for debt service shall not exceed the
estimated apportionment as computed based on the estimated current year
approved expenditures for debt service on file with the commissioner as
of the date upon which an electronic data file was created for the
purposes of compliance with paragraph b of subdivision twenty-one of
section three hundred five of this chapter on November fifteenth of the
base year, and the positive remainder, if any, of such apportionment
less such estimated apportionment shall not be an apportionment payable
in the current year, but shall be deemed to be an apportionment payable
for debt service on new bonds and capital notes aidable in July
following the current year as defined in clause (b) of subparagraph one
of paragraph f of this subdivision. Such estimate shall be done in
consultation with the commissioner.
 (3) Apportionments payable to a school district other than the city
school district of the city of New York for any debt service related to
projects approved by the commissioner on or after the later of the first
day of December, two thousand one or thirty days after the date upon
which this subparagraph shall have become a law or for any debt service
related to projects approved by the commissioner prior to such date
where a bond, capital note or bond anticipation note is first issued on
or after such date to fund such project or for lease-purchase or other
annual payments under a lease-purchase agreement or an equivalent
agreement entered into on or after such date that are eligible for aid
under the opening paragraph of this subdivision.
 (a) For the purposes of calculating the apportionments payable to a
school district other than the city school district of the city of New
York pursuant to this subdivision for any debt service related to
projects approved by the commissioner on or after the later of the first
day of December, two thousand one or thirty days after the date upon
which this subparagraph shall have become a law, or for any debt service
related to projects approved by the commissioner prior to such date
where a bond, capital note or bond anticipation note is first issued on
or after such date to fund such project or for lease-purchase or other
annual payments under a lease-purchase agreement or an equivalent
agreement entered into on or after the later of the first day of
December, two thousand one or thirty days after the date upon which this
subparagraph shall have become a law that are eligible for aid under the
opening paragraph of this subdivision, current year approved
expenditures for debt service shall mean debt service or lease-purchase
or other annual payments under a lease-purchase agreement or an
equivalent agreement that would be incurred during the current year
based on an assumed amortization to be established by the commissioner
pursuant to this subparagraph of the approved project costs to be
financed related to any such approved project, for a period of:
 (i) thirty years if the project is for the construction or acquisition
of a new school building,
 (ii) twenty years if the project is for the construction of an
addition to a school building or for the reconstruction, rehabilitation
or improvement of a school building for which a period of probable
usefulness of twenty or more years is assigned pursuant to the local
finance law, and
 (iii) fifteen years if the project is for the reconstruction,
rehabilitation or improvement of a school building for which a period of
probable usefulness of less than twenty years is assigned pursuant to
the local finance law.
 Provided, however, that, notwithstanding any provision of law to the
contrary, for aid payable in the two thousand three--two thousand four
school year, for any project which is eligible for an apportionment
pursuant to this subparagraph, but which did not yet have a
certification that a general construction contract had been awarded for
such project by the district on file with the commissioner as of
February fifteenth, two thousand three, such debt service or
lease-purchase or other annual payments under a lease-purchase agreement
or an equivalent agreement that would be incurred during the current
year based on an assumed amortization to be established by the
commissioner pursuant to this subparagraph of the approved project costs
to be financed shall not be current year approved expenditures for debt
service, but shall be deemed to be debt service on new bonds and capital
notes aidable in July following the current year pursuant to clause (b)
of subparagraph one of paragraph f of this subdivision.
 Provided, however, that, notwithstanding any provision of law to the
contrary, for aid payable in the two thousand four--two thousand five
school year, for any project which is eligible for an apportionment
pursuant to this subparagraph, but which did not yet have a
certification that a general construction contract had been awarded for
such project by or on behalf of the district on file with the
commissioner as of February fifteenth of the base year, such debt
service or lease-purchase or other annual payments under a
lease-purchase agreement or an equivalent agreement that would be
incurred during the current year based on an assumed amortization to be
established by the commissioner pursuant to this subparagraph of the
approved project costs to be financed shall not be current year approved
expenditures for debt service, but shall be deemed to be debt service on
new bonds and capital notes aidable in July following the current year
pursuant to clause (b) of subparagraph one of paragraph f of this
subdivision.
 Provided, however, that, notwithstanding any provision of law to the
contrary, for aid payable in the two thousand seven--two thousand eight
school year and thereafter, for any project which is eligible for an
apportionment pursuant to this subparagraph, but which did not yet have
a certification that a general construction contract had been awarded
for such project by or on behalf of the district on file with the
commissioner as of the date upon which an electronic data file was
created for the purposes of compliance with paragraph b of subdivision
twenty-one of section three hundred five of this chapter on November
fifteenth of the base year, such debt service or lease-purchase or other
annual payments under a lease-purchase agreement or an equivalent
agreement that would be incurred during the current year based on an
assumed amortization to be established by the commissioner pursuant to
this subparagraph of the approved project costs to be financed shall not
be current year approved expenditures for debt service, but shall be
deemed to be debt service on new bonds and capital notes aidable in July
following the current year pursuant to clause (b) of subparagraph one of
paragraph f of this subdivision.
 (b) Such assumed amortization for a project approved by the
commissioner on or after the later of the first day of December, two
thousand one or thirty days after the date upon which this subdivision
shall have become a law and prior to the first day of July, two thousand
eleven or for any debt service related to projects approved by the
commissioner prior to such date where a bond, capital note or bond
anticipation note is first issued on or after the first day of December,
two thousand one to fund such projects, shall commence: (i) eighteen
months after such approval or (ii) on the date of receipt by the
commissioner of a certification by the district that a general
construction contract has been awarded for such project by the district,
whichever is later, and such assumed amortization for a project approved
by the commissioner on or after the first day of July, two thousand
eleven shall commence: (iii) eighteen months after such approval or (iv)
on the date of receipt by the commissioner of both the final certificate
of substantial completion of the project issued by the architect or
engineer and the final cost report for such project, whichever is later
or (v) upon the effective date of a waiver based on a finding by the
commissioner, pursuant to a process set forth by the commissioner, that
the district is unable to submit a final certificate of substantial
completion for the project and/or complete the final cost report because
of circumstances beyond the control of the district, which shall include
but shall not be limited to the inability of the district to complete a
complex project within eighteen months. Such assumed amortization shall
provide for equal semiannual payments of principal and interest based on
an interest rate established pursuant to subparagraph five of this
paragraph for such purpose for the school year during which such
certification is received. The first installment of obligations issued
by the school district in support of such projects may mature not later
than the dates established pursuant to sections 21.00 and 22.10 of the
local finance law.
 (c) Definitions. For purposes of this paragraph and subdivision
thirty-nine of section sixteen hundred eighty of the public authorities
law:
 (i) "the state share of a school construction project" shall mean the
product of: (A) the difference of the total approved cost of such
project less the approved cost of such project to be funded pursuant to
subdivision six-f of this section and subdivisions ten and twelve of
section thirty-six hundred forty-one of this article, multiplied by (B)
the building aid ratio applicable to such project pursuant to paragraph
c of this subdivision;
 (ii) "the local share of a school construction project" shall mean the
difference of the total approved cost of such project, less the sum of:
(A) the approved cost of such project to be funded through subdivision
six-f of this section and subdivisions ten and twelve of section
thirty-six hundred forty-one of this article, and (B) the state share of
such school construction project;
 (iii) "refinancing costs attributable to refinancing the state share
of a school construction project for purposes of retroactive
amortization" shall mean the sum of: (A) that portion of the approved
fees and other charges of refinancing, as defined in subparagraph one of
paragraph h of this subdivision, which are determined by the
commissioner to be reasonable in accordance with guidelines approved by
the director of the budget, and which are fixed charges that will not
vary by the amount of principal and additional principal to be refunded
and (B) the product of: (1) the total amount of such approved fees and
other charges of refinancing which are not fixed charges and which are
determined by the commissioner to be reasonable in accordance with
guidelines approved by the director of the budget, and (2) the
percentage of the principal of the refunding bond that is attributable
to refinancing of the state share of a school construction project
pursuant to subparagraph four of this paragraph, less (C) the amount of
such approved costs included in the principal of a refunding bond issued
by the school district or by the dormitory authority of the state of New
York to refund obligations of the school district subject to
subparagraph four of this paragraph which is necessary to provide for
the payment of the principal, redemption premiums, and interest due on
the refunded obligations of the school district to their stated
maturities or if such bonds are to be called, to the call date.
Provided, however, that such expenditures shall be incurred for
refunding bonds issued on or before July first, two thousand five and
that such expenditures result from the refunding of outstanding
obligations subject to an assumed amortization pursuant to this
subparagraph for facilities which were eligible for building aid, and
for which the annual aid apportionment payable in the two thousand
two--two thousand three and/or two thousand three--two thousand four
school years for approved expenditures for debt service are subsequently
reduced as a result of the application of assumed amortization to unpaid
principal outstanding as of July first, two thousand two, and further
provided that the gross dollar savings over the life of the obligation
shall be less than the approved fees and other charges of refinancing as
defined in subparagraph one of paragraph h of this subdivision, but only
to the extent that such amounts are not otherwise eligible for aid
pursuant to this subdivision;
 (iv) "additional principal attributable to the refunding of bonds"
shall mean the amount of approved expenses included in the principal of
a refunding bond issued by the school district, or issued by the
dormitory authority of the state of New York to refund obligations of
the school district subject to subparagraph four of this paragraph,
which is necessary to provide for the payment of the principal,
redemption premiums, and interest due on the refunded obligations of the
school district to their stated maturities or if such bonds are to be
called, to the call date; and
 (v) "additional principal attributable to the refunding of bonds to
refinance the state share of a school construction project for purposes
of retroactive amortization" shall mean the percentage of the additional
principal attributable to the refunding of bonds that is necessary to
refinance the state share of a school construction project pursuant to
subparagraph four of this paragraph.
 (4) Apportionments payable for the two thousand two--two thousand
three school year and thereafter to a school district other than the
city school district of the city of New York or a school district
constituted pursuant to chapter five hundred sixty-six of the laws of
nineteen hundred sixty-seven as amended, for any debt service still
outstanding as of the first day of July, two thousand two that has not
been subject to an assumed amortization pursuant to subparagraph three
of this paragraph or for lease-purchase or other annual payments under a
lease-purchase agreement or an equivalent agreement having an unexpired
term on such date.
 (a) For the purposes of calculating the apportionments payable to a
school district other than the city school district of the city of New
York pursuant to this subdivision for the two thousand two--two thousand
three school year and thereafter for any debt service still outstanding
as of the first day of July, two thousand two that has not been subject
to an assumed amortization pursuant to subparagraph three of this
paragraph or for lease-purchase or other annual payments under a
lease-purchase agreement or an equivalent agreement having an unexpired
term on such date, current year approved expenditures for debt service
shall mean debt service or lease-purchase or other annual payments under
a lease-purchase agreement or an equivalent agreement that would be
incurred during the current year based on an assumed amortization to be
established by the commissioner pursuant to this subparagraph of the sum
of
 (i) any assumed or actual unpaid principal, or the equivalent amount
in the case of a lease-purchase agreement or its equivalent, remaining
as of the first day of July, two thousand two pursuant to an existing
amortization or any unpaid principal of a bond anticipation note as of
the first day of July, two thousand two, plus
 (ii) the approved expenditures for the refunding of bonds that are
otherwise eligible for an apportionment pursuant to this subdivision, as
such expenditures are defined in subparagraph two of paragraph g of this
subdivision, provided that such refunding bonds are issued on or before
July first, two thousand five, less the sum of the refinancing costs
attributable to refinancing the state share of a school construction
project for purposes of retroactive amortization plus the additional
principal attributable to the refunding of bonds, as such terms are
defined in subclauses (iii) and (iv) of clause (c) of subparagraph three
of this paragraph, for a period equal to the greater of:
 (i) the remaining maximum useful life of the project, or projects
associated with such obligation, as determined by the commissioner based
on data submitted by the school district, or
 (ii) the remaining term of the bond, bond anticipation note, or
lease-purchase agreement.
 (b) Such assumed amortization of any assumed or actual unpaid
principal, or the equivalent amount in the case of a lease-purchase
agreement or its equivalent, remaining as of the first day of July, two
thousand two for a project that has not been subject to an assumed
amortization pursuant to subparagraph three of this paragraph, shall
commence on the first day of July, two thousand two, and shall provide
for equal semiannual payments of principal and interest based on an
interest rate established by the commissioner for such purpose for the
two thousand two--two thousand three school year.
 (c) Any school district eligible for an apportionment pursuant to this
subparagraph shall be eligible for an additional apportionment equal to
the sum of the refinancing costs attributable to refinancing the state
share of a school construction project for purposes of retroactive
amortization plus the additional principal attributable to the refunding
of bonds to refinance the state share of a school construction project
for purposes of retroactive amortization, as such terms are defined in
subclauses (iii) and (v) of clause (c) of subparagraph three of this
paragraph.
 (d) Any school district that issues debt after July first, two
thousand two for the funding of the approved costs of projects eligible
for an apportionment pursuant to this subparagraph shall be eligible for
an additional apportionment calculated pursuant to the provisions of
this subdivision, where the assumed amortization shall be based upon
such approved costs and the remaining useful life shall be the remaining
period over which the apportionments calculated pursuant to clause (a)
of this subparagraph are to be paid.
 (5) (a) Calculation of interest rates for the city school districts of
the cities of Buffalo, Rochester, Syracuse and Yonkers. (i) By the first
day of September of the current year, or by the date prescribed by the
commissioner for the two thousand one--two thousand two school year, the
chief fiscal officer of each of the cities of Buffalo, Rochester,
Syracuse and Yonkers shall provide to the commissioner an analysis, as
prescribed by the commissioner, of the actual average interest rate
applied to all capital debt incurred by such city related to school
construction purposes during the base year not including debt issued by
the dormitory authority for the benefit of any school district and of
the estimated average interest rate applied to all capital debt to be
incurred by such city related to school construction purposes during the
current year not including debt issued by the dormitory authority for
the benefit of any school district. Such interest rates shall be
expressed as a decimal to five places rounded to the nearest eighth of
one-one hundredth. Except as otherwise provided in items (ii), (iii) and
(iv) of this clause, the interest rate of such city applicable to the
base year for the purposes of this subparagraph shall be the actual
average interest rate of such city in the base year, and the estimated
average interest rate shall be tentatively established as the interest
rate of such city applicable to the current year, except that all
apportionments of aid payable during the current year based on such
estimated average interest rate shall be recalculated in the following
year and adjusted as appropriate based on the appropriate actual average
interest rate then established pursuant to this clause provided,
however, that in any year in which such city has not incurred debt
related to serial bonds or sinking fund bonds as defined in sections
21.00 and 22.10, respectively, of the local finance law, issued for
school construction purposes, the assumed interest rate calculated
pursuant to clause (b) of this subparagraph shall be tentatively
established as the interest rate of such city applicable to the projects
approved by the commissioner in such year, except that all
apportionments of aid payable based on such interest rate for each such
project shall be recalculated following the submission of a final cost
report for such project and adjusted as appropriate based on the
appropriate actual average interest rate applicable to the debt issued
to fund such project, and provided further that where such city has
entered into an agreement with the dormitory authority of the state of
New York to finance debt related to school construction that is subject
to subparagraph four of this paragraph or has entered into an agreement
with the dormitory authority of the state of New York for the purpose of
financing a school construction project that is subject to subparagraph
three of this paragraph, the interest rate applicable to the obligations
issued by the dormitory authority of the state of New York for such
purpose shall be the interest rate established for such city applicable
to such debt.
 (ii) Notwithstanding the provisions of item (i) of this clause, where
such city has entered into an agreement with the state of New York
municipal bond bank agency pursuant to subdivision one of section
twenty-four hundred thirty-five-a of the public authorities law and
subdivision (b) of section sixteen of chapter six hundred five of the
laws of two thousand, or an agreement with the Erie county industrial
development agency for projects described in subdivision (b) of section
sixteen of such chapter six hundred five, to finance school renovation,
rehabilitation or reconstruction that is subject to subparagraph three
of this paragraph, the lesser of: (A) the interest rate actually
applicable to each series of obligations originally issued to finance
each phase of project costs approved by the commissioner, by the state
of New York municipal bond bank agency or by the Erie county industrial
development agency for such purpose (without regard to any refunding of
such obligations); or (B) the interest rate that would have been
applicable to each series of obligations originally issued to finance
each phase of project costs approved by the commissioner, by the state
of New York municipal bond bank agency (without regard to any refunding
of such obligations) if the project had been financed through such
agency, as certified to the commissioner by the executive director of
the state of New York municipal bond bank agency, shall be the interest
rate established for such city applicable for purposes of calculating
the assumed amortization for such approved project costs pursuant to
clause (b) of subparagraph three of this paragraph.
 For projects approved by the commissioner in any school year in which
capital debt is incurred by either the state of New York municipal bond
bank agency or the Erie county industrial development agency to refund
debt related to school renovation, rehabilitation or reconstruction of
or on behalf of the school district, where such school renovation,
rehabilitation or reconstruction qualifies for apportionment pursuant to
subparagraph three of this paragraph, by the first day of September of
the current year, the chief fiscal officer of such city shall provide to
the commissioner an analysis, as prescribed by the commissioner, of the
actual average interest rate applied to all capital debt incurred to
finance or refund debt related to school renovation, rehabilitation or
reconstruction that qualifies for apportionment pursuant to subparagraph
three of this paragraph by either the state of New York municipal bond
bank agency or the Erie county industrial development agency during the
base year and of the estimated average interest rate applied to all
capital debt incurred to finance or refund debt related to school
renovation, rehabilitation or reconstruction that is subject to
subparagraph three of this paragraph by either the state of New York
municipal bond bank agency or the Erie county industrial development
agency during the current year. Such interest rates shall be expressed
as a decimal to five places rounded to the nearest eighth of one-one
hundredth. The interest rate established for such city applicable to
projects first approved in such year shall be tentatively established as
the interest rate computed pursuant to this clause for the current year,
except that all apportionments of aid payable during the current year
based on such estimated average interest rate shall be recalculated in
the following year and adjusted as appropriate based on the appropriate
actual average interest rate then established pursuant to this clause
and shall be the interest rate established for such city applicable for
purposes of calculating the assumed amortization for project costs
approved during the current year pursuant to clause (b) of subparagraph
three of this paragraph.
 (iii) Notwithstanding the provisions of item (i) of this clause, where
such city has entered into an agreement with the state of New York
municipal bond bank agency pursuant to subdivision one of section
twenty-four hundred thirty-five-a of the public authorities law and
subdivision (a) of section fourteen of the city of Syracuse and the
board of education of the city school district of the city of Syracuse
cooperative school reconstruction act, or an agreement with the city of
Syracuse industrial development agency for projects authorized pursuant
to the city of Syracuse and the board of education of the city school
district of the city of Syracuse cooperative school reconstruction act,
to finance school rehabilitation or reconstruction that is subject to
subparagraph three of this paragraph, the lesser of: (A) the net
interest cost as defined by the commissioner, applicable to each series
of obligations originally issued by the state of New York municipal bond
bank agency or the city of Syracuse industrial development agency for
such purpose, without regard to any refunding of such obligations; or
(B) such net interest cost, as defined by the commissioner that would
have been applicable to each series of obligations originally issued to
finance each phase of project costs approved by the commissioner, by the
state of New York municipal bond bank agency, without regard to any
refunding of such obligations, if the project had been financed through
such agency, as certified to the commissioner by the executive director
of the state of New York municipal bond bank agency, shall be the
interest rate established for such city applicable for purposes of
calculating the assumed amortization for such approved project costs
pursuant to clause (b) of subparagraph three of this paragraph.
 For projects approved by the commissioner in any school year in which
capital debt is incurred by either the state of New York municipal bond
bank agency or the city of Syracuse industrial development agency to
refund debt related to school renovation, rehabilitation or
reconstruction of or on behalf of the school district, where such school
renovation, rehabilitation or reconstruction qualifies for apportionment
pursuant to subparagraph three of this paragraph, by the first day of
September of the current year, the chief fiscal officer of such city
shall provide to the commissioner an analysis, as prescribed by the
commissioner, of the actual average interest rate applied to all capital
debt incurred to finance or refund debt related to school renovation,
rehabilitation or reconstruction that qualifies for apportionment
pursuant to subparagraph three of this paragraph by either the state of
New York municipal bond bank agency or the city of Syracuse industrial
development agency during the base year and of the estimated average
interest rate applied to all capital debt incurred to finance or refund
debt related to school renovation, rehabilitation or reconstruction that
is subject to subparagraph three of this paragraph by either the state
of New York municipal bond bank agency or the city of Syracuse
industrial development agency during the current year. Such interest
rates shall be expressed as a decimal to five places rounded to the
nearest eighth of one-one hundredth. The interest rate established for
such city applicable to projects first approved in such year shall be
tentatively established as the interest rate computed pursuant to this
clause for the current year, except that all apportionments of aid
payable during the current year based on such estimated average interest
rate shall be recalculated in the following year and adjusted as
appropriate based on the appropriate actual average interest rate then
established pursuant to this clause and shall be the interest rate
established for such city applicable for purposes of calculating the
assumed amortization for project costs approved during the current year
pursuant to clause (b) of subparagraph three of this paragraph.
 (iv) Notwithstanding the provisions of item (i) of this clause, where
such city or city school district has entered into an agreement with the
county of Monroe industrial development agency or the dormitory
authority of the state of New York, for projects authorized pursuant to
the city of Rochester and the board of education of the city school
district of the city of Rochester school facilities modernization
program act, to finance school rehabilitation or reconstruction that is
subject to subparagraph three of this paragraph, the lesser of: (A) the
net interest cost, as defined by the commissioner, applicable to each
series of bonds or bond anticipation notes issued by the county of
Monroe industrial development agency or the dormitory authority of the
state of New York for such purpose, without regard to any refunding of
such obligations; or (B) such net interest cost, as defined by the
commissioner, that would have been applicable to each series of
obligations originally issued to finance each phase of project costs
approved by the commissioner, by the Monroe industrial development
agency or the dormitory authority of the state of New York, without
regard to any refunding of such obligations, if the project had been
financed through such agency or the dormitory authority of the state of
New York, as certified to the commissioner by the executive director of
the Monroe industrial development agency or the executive director of
the dormitory authority of the state of New York, shall be the interest
rate established for such city applicable for purposes of calculating
the assumed amortization for such approved project costs pursuant to
clause (b) of subparagraph three of this paragraph. For projects
approved by the commissioner in any school year in which capital debt is
incurred by either the dormitory authority of the state of New York or
the Monroe industrial development agency to refund debt related to
school renovation, rehabilitation or reconstruction of or on behalf of
the school district, where such school renovation, rehabilitation or
reconstruction qualifies for apportionment pursuant to subparagraph
three of this paragraph, by the first day of September of the current
year, the chief fiscal officer of such city shall provide to the
commissioner an analysis, as prescribed by the commissioner, of the
actual average interest rate applied to all capital debt incurred to
finance or refund debt related to school renovation, rehabilitation or
reconstruction that qualifies for apportionment pursuant to subparagraph
three of this paragraph by either the dormitory authority of the state
of New York or the city of Monroe industrial development agency during
the base year and of the estimated average interest rate applied to all
capital debt incurred to finance or refund debt related to school
renovation, rehabilitation or reconstruction that is subject to
subparagraph three of this paragraph by either the dormitory authority
of the state of New York or the Monroe industrial development agency
during the current year. Such interest rates shall be expressed as a
decimal to five places rounded to the nearest eighth of one-one
hundredth. The interest rate established for such city applicable to
projects first approved in such year shall be tentatively established as
the interest rate computed pursuant to this clause for the current year,
except that all apportionments of aid payable during the current year
based on such estimated average interest rate shall be recalculated in
the following year and adjusted as appropriate based on the appropriate
actual average interest rate then established pursuant to this clause
and shall be the interest rate established for such city applicable for
purposes of calculating the assumed amortization for project costs
approved during the current year pursuant to clause (b) of subparagraph
three of this paragraph.
 (v) Notwithstanding the provisions of item (i) of this clause, where
such city or city school district has entered into an agreement with the
state of New York municipal bond bank agency pursuant to subdivision one
of section twenty four hundred thirty-five-a of the public authorities
law and section sixteen of the Yonkers city school district joint
schools construction and modernization act, or an agreement with the
city of Yonkers industrial development agency for projects authorized
pursuant to the Yonkers city school district joint schools construction
and modernization act, to finance debt related to school rehabilitation
or reconstruction of school buildings or construction of new school
buildings that is subject to subparagraph three of this paragraph, the
lesser of: (A) the net interest cost, as defined by the commissioner,
applicable to the obligations issued by the state of New York municipal
bond bank agency or the city of Yonkers industrial development agency
for such purpose; or (B) such net interest cost, as defined by the
commissioner, that would have been applicable to bonds issued by the
state of New York municipal bond bank agency if the project had been
authorized to be financed and had been financed through such entity, as
certified to the commissioner by the executive director of the state of
New York municipal bond bank agency, shall be the interest rate
established for such city applicable to such debt.
 (b) Calculation of interest rates for school districts other than the
city school districts of the cities of Buffalo, Rochester, Syracuse,
Yonkers and New York. By the first day of September of the current year,
or by the date prescribed by the commissioner for the two thousand
one--two thousand two school year, each school district, other than the
city school districts of the cities of Buffalo, Rochester, Syracuse,
Yonkers and New York, shall provide to the commissioner in a format
prescribed by the commissioner such information as the commissioner
shall require for all capital debt incurred by such school district
during the preceding school year relating to the construction,
acquisition, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of any school
building, not including debt issued by the dormitory authority. Based on
such reported amortizations and a methodology prescribed by the
commissioner in regulations, the commissioner shall compute an assumed
interest rate that shall equal the average of the interest rates applied
to all such debt issued during the preceding school year. The assumed
interest rate shall be tentatively established as the interest rate of
each such school district applicable to the current year for the
purposes of this subparagraph and shall be expressed as a decimal to
five places rounded to the nearest eighth of one-one hundredth except
that all apportionments of aid payable during the current year based on
such assumed interest rate shall be recalculated in the following year
and adjusted as appropriate based on the appropriate assumed interest
rate then established pursuant to this clause, provided, however, that
where such school district has entered into an agreement with the
dormitory authority of the state of New York to refinance debt issued by
such school district that is subject to subparagraph four of this
paragraph or has entered into an agreement with the dormitory authority
of the state of New York for the purpose of financing a school
construction project that is subject to subparagraph three of this
paragraph, the interest rate applicable to the obligations issued by the
dormitory authority of the state of New York for such purpose shall be
the interest rate established for each such school district applicable
to such debt.
 (c) At the end of each ten year segment of an assumed amortization
established pursuant to subparagraphs two, three and four of this
paragraph, or in the two thousand seventeen--two thousand eighteen
school year in the case of assumed amortizations whose ten year segment
ends prior to such school year, the commissioner shall revise the
remaining scheduled semiannual payments of the outstanding principal and
interest of such assumed amortization, other than the outstanding
principal and interest of refunding bonds where the district can
demonstrate to the commissioner that it is precluded by state or federal
law, rule or regulation from refinancing such outstanding principal and
interest, based on the interest rates applicable for the current year if
the difference of the interest rate upon which the existing assumed
amortization is based minus such interest rate applicable for the
current year is equal to or greater than one quarter of one-one
hundredth. Provided however, in the case of assumed amortization whose
ten year segment ended prior to the two thousand seventeen--two thousand
eighteen school year the next ten year segment shall be deemed to
commence with the two thousand seventeen--two thousand eighteen school
year. The department shall notify school districts of projects subject
to the provisions of this clause by no later than December first next
preceding the school year in which the assumed amortization is scheduled
to be revised pursuant to this clause.
 (d) Notwithstanding any other law, rule or regulation to the contrary,
any interest rate calculated under this subdivision shall take into
account any federal subsidy payments made or to be made to the
applicable school district or an issuer on behalf of the school district
under the terms of a federally authorized debt instrument which have the
effect of reducing the actual interest costs incurred by the school
district or an issuer on behalf of the school district over the life of
such capital debt, irrespective of any federal government right of
set-off.
 (6) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this paragraph, where a
school district can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the commissioner
extenuating circumstances that a waiver is warranted for an existing
amortization or an existing lease-purchase agreement or equivalent
agreement as of the first day of July, two thousand two, the
commissioner may consult with the dormitory authority of the state of
New York and may grant a waiver consistent with guidelines developed in
consultation with the director of the division of the budget and shared
with the chairs of the senate finance committee and the assembly ways
and means committee, to make adjustments, including, but not limited to:
(i) the period of assumed amortization to equal the period of the
existing amortization, (ii) the interest rate applied to such
amortization to equal the actual average interest rate applied to the
existing amortization, and/or (iii) the annual assumed payments of debt
service to equal the aidable payments of debt service under the existing
amortization and provided further that where a school district can
demonstrate to the commissioner that it is precluded by state or federal
law, rule or regulation from refinancing such outstanding principal and
interest, clause (iii) of this subparagraph shall apply.
 (7) For aid payable in the two thousand two--two thousand three school
year, school districts shall provide, on or before the fifteenth day of
January, two thousand two, such data as the commissioner shall deem
necessary to estimate the apportionment payable under assumed
amortization pursuant to subparagraph four of this paragraph, in such
form as the commissioner shall determine. Such data shall be provided
for each project for which the district will make a debt service payment
that is aidable pursuant to this subdivision in the current school year
and for each project for which such district expects to make a debt
service payment that will be aidable pursuant to this subdivision in the
following school year.
 (8) Notwithstanding any other provision of the law to the contrary,
where, during the period of assumed amortization relating to a project
for the construction, acquisition, reconstruction, rehabilitation or
improvement of a school building, the school building is sold or
ownership is otherwise transferred to an entity other than the school
district or city and such transfer results in the building no longer
being operated by the school district as a public elementary or
secondary school that is not independent or autonomous, the district
shall, within sixty days of the transfer of ownership, notify the
commissioner of such sale or transfer, and shall provide such additional
information about the sale or transfer as the commissioner may require,
in a form prescribed by the commissioner, and the commissioner shall
re-compute the building aid, if any, payable for such project pursuant
to this subparagraph, except to the extent such re-computation would
conflict with the provisions of section twenty-seven hundred
ninety-nine-tt of the public authorities law. The commissioner shall
deduct the revenues received by the school district or city as a result
of such sale or transfer from the approved total project cost and, based
on such adjusted project cost, establish a new assumed amortization for
the remaining useful life of the project under the applicable provisions
of this paragraph.
 f. (1) As used in this subdivision and in section thirty-six hundred
nine-a of this article the following terms shall be defined as follows:
 (a) "Debt service on bond anticipation notes aidable in July following
the current year" shall mean current year debt service expenditures for
bond anticipation notes issued in the current school year.
 (b) "Debt service on new bonds and capital notes aidable in July
following the current year" shall mean current year debt service
expenditures for bonds and/or capital notes issued in the current school
year.
 (2) Notwithstanding any inconsistent provisions of this subdivision,
the amount of current year approved expenditure for debt service for
bond anticipation notes and for bonds and capital notes issued during
the current year for school building purposes pursuant to paragraph b of
this subdivision shall not be greater than the estimate of such
expenditures as reported to the commissioner by the school district on
or before November fifteenth of the current year. For aid payable in the
nineteen hundred ninety-six--ninety-seven school year and thereafter,
any excess of actual expenditures for such debt service for bond
anticipation notes and such bonds or capital notes incurred in the base
year, within the limitations imposed pursuant to paragraph i of this
subdivision, over such estimate of base year expenditures as reported to
the commissioner by the school district on or before November fifteenth
of the base year shall be considered approved expenditures for lease or
other annual payments under the provisions of section four hundred
three-b, subdivision eight of section twenty-five hundred three, or
subdivision six of section twenty-five hundred fifty-four of this
chapter, other than payments under a lease-purchase agreement or an
equivalent agreement, for school building purposes.
 (3) (a) For the purposes of this subparagraph the following terms
shall be defined as follows:
 (i) "First issue date" shall mean the date on which the school
district issued an initial obligation in the form of a bond anticipation
note, a bond or a capital note for the purpose of financing one or more
approved building projects for which a combined annual claim of aidable
debt service as defined in regulations of the commissioner, is submitted
to the commissioner.
 (ii) "First contract date" shall mean the date by which: (A) the
school district certifies to the commissioner that construction
activities related to the erection, construction, reconstruction or
alteration of a school building have commenced, or that the purchase of
a school building has been made under one or more of the approved
building projects included in a combined annual claim of aidable debt
service; and (B) that one or more payments for such construction
activities or purchase, including incidental costs have been made by the
school district in a total amount equal to or greater than ten percent
of the principal value upon which the combined annual claim of aidable
debt service is based. Such certification shall be in a form and of a
content as prescribed by the commissioner.
 (iii) "Principal value" shall mean the sum of the original principal
amounts of all obligations issued by the school district for the purpose
of financing one or more approved building projects for which a combined
annual claim of aidable debt service is submitted to the commissioner,
less any such principal that has been refinanced.
 (iv) "Approved project cost" shall mean the sum of approved project
costs of all approved building projects for which a combined annual
claim of aidable debt service is submitted to the commissioner.
 (v) "Final redemption date" shall mean the date by which the school
district will have repaid all principal borrowed for the purpose of
financing one or more approved building projects for which a combined
annual claim of aidable debt service is submitted to the commissioner.
 (b) For aids payable in the two thousand--two thousand one school
year, and thereafter, notwithstanding any inconsistent provisions of
this subdivision, except for any project to which paragraph e of this
subdivision applies, the amount of approved expenditures incurred during
the current school year for debt service for bond anticipation notes,
bonds and capital notes having a related first issue date on or after
July first, two thousand shall equal the product of the actual
expenditures incurred during the current school year for debt service
for each such bond anticipation note, bond or capital note, less any
accrued interest or premiums received by the district, and the
applicable bond percent.
 (c) The applicable bond percent shall equal: (i) the quotient of the
approved project cost for contracts awarded on or before June thirtieth
of the current school year divided by the principal value, or (ii) if
the first issue date is more than ninety days prior to the first
contract date, the product of: (A) one minus the quotient of the number
of days elapsed between the first issue date and the first contract date
divided by the number of days elapsed between the first issue date and
the final redemption date and (B) the quotient of the approved project
cost for contracts awarded on or before June thirtieth of the current
school year divided by the principal value, provided that, if upon
review of documentation submitted by a school district the commissioner
determines that the debt was issued by a city having a population of one
hundred twenty-five thousand or more, as part of a mixed borrowing
including both school purposes and other municipal purposes or, that a
school district, due to circumstances beyond its control, issued bond
anticipation notes, bonds or capital notes more than ninety days prior
to the first contract date, the commissioner may compute the applicable
bond percent pursuant to item (i) of this clause. The applicable bond
percent shall be expressed as a decimal to five places without rounding.
 g. Eligibility criteria for aid for refunding of bonds. (1) To be
eligible for any apportionment of aid pursuant to this subdivision for
approved expenditures for the refunding of bonds to refinance school
construction, reconstruction or purchase of existing structures or for
expenditures incidental to such refunding of bonds the following
requirements shall be met:
 (i) the refunding shall be in accordance with section 90.10 of the
local finance law;
 (ii) the bonds to be refunded shall have been issued exclusively to
finance school construction, reconstruction or purchase of existing
structures;
 (iii) the issuance of refunding bonds shall result in a net present
value savings to both the school district and the state, provided,
however, that the gross dollar savings over the life of the bond shall
exceed the approved fees and other charges of refinancing as defined in
subparagraph one of paragraph h of this subdivision, except in the case
of the refunding of bonds with unpaid principal outstanding as of the
first day of July, two thousand two subject to assumed amortization
pursuant to subparagraph four of paragraph e of this subdivision, for
facilities eligible for building aid, and for which the annual aid
apportionment payable in the two thousand two--two thousand three and
two thousand three--two thousand four school years for approved
expenditures for debt service are subsequently reduced as a result of
the application of assumed amortization to such unpaid principal; and
 (iv) for any refunding of bonds for which a refunding bond resolution
is approved after April first, nineteen hundred ninety-four, the board
of education or trustees shall certify that the intention of the school
district to accept proposals for the refunding of bonds has been
announced in at least one regular public meeting of such board and that
all such proposals received have been discussed in a second public
meeting of the board held no sooner than fourteen days after such
announcement.
 (2) For the purposes of subparagraph three of this paragraph, approved
expenditures for the refunding of bonds shall mean any amount included
in the principal of the refunding bond issue of a school district, or of
the dormitory authority of the state of New York to refund obligations
of a school district for purposes of subparagraph four of paragraph e of
this subdivision, that represents the unmatured interest on the bonds to
be refunded to and including either the date or dates such bonds were to
mature or the date or dates set for redemption prior to their
maturities, plus the redemption premiums, if any, payable on the bonds
to be refunded on the redemption date or dates, plus the approved fees
and other charges of refinancing as defined in subparagraph one of
paragraph h of this subdivision.
 (3) Approved expenditures for the refunding of bonds as defined in
subparagraph two of this paragraph shall be excluded from the
calculation of any ratio of allowable expense to principal that may be
used to determine approved debt service expense.
 h. Additional apportionment of building aid for approved fees and
other charges and expenses related to the issuance of refinancing bonds.
(1) For the purposes of this subdivision approved fees and other charges
of refinancing shall include the costs and expenses incidental to the
issuance of refunding bonds by a school district, or by the dormitory
authority of the state of New York to refund obligations of a school
district for purposes of subparagraph four of paragraph e of this
subdivision, which are eligible for an apportionment pursuant to
paragraph g of this subdivision, the costs of the development of the
refunding financial plan and of executing and performing the terms and
conditions of the escrow contract and all fees and charges of the escrow
holders.
 (2) Notwithstanding any inconsistent provisions of this subdivision,
school districts shall also be eligible for an apportionment pursuant to
this subdivision in an amount equal to the product of the aid ratio used
for building aid in the current year as defined in paragraph c of this
subdivision and the base year approved fees and other charges of
refinancing as defined in subparagraph one of this paragraph, but only
to the extent such costs and expenses are not paid from the proceeds of
the refunding bonds and are not otherwise eligible for aid pursuant to
this subdivision, provided however, that in the case of the refunding of
bonds subject to an assumed amortization pursuant to subparagraph four
of paragraph e of this subdivision for facilities which were eligible
for building aid, provided that such refunding bonds are issued on or
before the first day of July, two thousand five and for which the annual
aid apportionment payable in the two thousand two--two thousand three
and/or two thousand three--two thousand four school years for approved
expenditures for debt service are subsequently reduced as a result of
the application of assumed amortization to unpaid principal outstanding
as of July first, two thousand two, and further provided that the gross
dollar savings over the life of the bond shall be less than the approved
fees and other charges of refinancing as defined in subparagraph one of
this paragraph, such apportionment shall be equal to such base year
approved fees and other charges of refinancing, but only to the extent
such costs and expenses are not paid from the proceeds of the refunding
bonds and are not otherwise eligible for aid pursuant to this
subdivision.
 i. Approved expenditures for debt service. (1) Bond anticipation
notes. Except as otherwise provided in subparagraph four of this
paragraph, for purposes of the apportionment payable pursuant to this
subdivision in the nineteen hundred ninety-six--ninety-seven school year
and thereafter to a school district other than to the city school
district of the city of New York, except for any project to which
paragraph e of this subdivision applies, approved expenditures for debt
service on bond anticipation notes relating to the construction,
acquisition, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of any school
building, including but not limited to the balance of principal
outstanding as of July first, nineteen hundred ninety-six which was
funded during the nineteen hundred ninety-five--ninety-six school year
from proceeds of the sale of bond anticipation notes by a school
district, shall mean actual approved expenditures for principal and
interest related to the financing of a school construction project
through bond anticipation notes; except that:
 (i) such expenditures shall not include expenditures for principal on
such notes during the first twenty-three months following the original
issuance of such notes; and
 (ii) such expenditures shall not include expenditures for principal or
interest on bond anticipation notes issued or reissued after the
issuance of a certificate of substantial completion for such project, or
expenditures for principal made during the school year in excess of the
minimum principal payment required under the local finance law.
 (2) Bonds and capital notes. (i) For purposes of the apportionment
payable pursuant to this subdivision in the nineteen hundred
ninety-six--ninety-seven school year and thereafter to a school district
other than to the city school district of the city of New York, approved
expenditures for debt service on bonds, capital notes and any other
long-term local obligations relating to the construction, acquisition,
reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of any school building,
shall mean actual approved expenditures for principal and interest
related to the financing of a school construction project through such
local obligations except as provided pursuant to clause (ii) of this
subparagraph or subparagraph four of this paragraph or paragraph e of
this subdivision; provided that, to be eligible for aid on debt service
pursuant to this subdivision, such bonds, capital notes or other local
obligations issued on or after August first, nineteen hundred
ninety-six, or, in the case of a small city school district, on or after
November fifteenth, nineteen hundred ninety-six, shall provide for
substantially level debt service or principal as defined in paragraph d
of section 21.00 of the local finance law; and
 (A) be amortized for a period of not less than fifteen years,
including any period of amortization on related bond anticipation notes,
in the case of local obligations issued to finance new construction and
the purchase of existing structures; or
 (B) be amortized for a period of not less than ten years, including
any period of amortization on related bond anticipation notes, in the
case of local obligations issued to finance the reconstruction,
rehabilitation or improvement of existing school buildings.
 (ii) Notwithstanding any inconsistent provisions of this clause, any
actual principal or interest expenditures related to the issuance of a
local obligation to finance new construction for a term of less than
fifteen years or reconstruction for a term of less than ten years, as
specified in clause (i) of this subparagraph, shall not be used in the
calculation of the apportionment payable pursuant to this subdivision,
provided, however, that aidable approved expenditures for debt service
shall be calculated pursuant to the provisions of this clause, as
follows:
 (A) for new construction and the purchase of existing structures,
current year approved expenditures for debt service shall mean
expenditures for principal and interest expense that would be incurred
during the current year based on an assumed amortization for a period of
fifteen years, or the actual term of the obligation issued by the school
district, whichever is greater, of any outstanding principal and/or
principal payments not previously aided at the time of issue of the
obligation that represents costs approved by the commissioner including
any period of amortization on related bond anticipation notes. Such
assumed amortization shall commence with the date of the award of a
general contract by the school district for such new construction or
purchase, the date the district was placed on assumed amortization by
the commissioner, or the date upon which the district selected an
assumed amortization pursuant to subparagraph four of this paragraph,
whichever shall last occur, and shall be based on an assumed rate of
annual interest applied to such amortization, as determined by the
commissioner pursuant to subparagraph three of this paragraph for the
month in which a general contract is awarded for such project; and
 (B) for reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of existing
school buildings, current year approved expenditures for debt service
shall mean expenditures for principal and interest expense that would be
incurred during the current year based on an assumed amortization for a
period of ten years, or the actual term of the obligation issued by the
school district, whichever is greater, of any outstanding principal
and/or principal payments not previously aided that represents costs
approved by the commissioner including any period of amortization on
related bond anticipation notes. Such assumed amortization shall
commence with the date of the award of a general contract by the school
district for such new construction or purchase, the date the district
was placed on actual amortization by the commissioner, or the date upon
which the district selected an assumed amortization pursuant to
subparagraph four of this paragraph, whichever shall last occur, and
shall be based on an assumed rate of annual interest applied to such
amortization, as determined by the commissioner pursuant to subparagraph
three of this paragraph for the month in which a general contract is
awarded for such project.
 (3) By the fifteenth day of each month, beginning on August fifteenth,
nineteen hundred ninety-six, the commissioner shall determine the
prevailing interest rate for the preceding month based on a nationally
recognized and accepted index of municipal bond yields reported for such
preceding month, in accordance with a methodology prescribed by the
commissioner and approved by the director of the budget.
 (4) Notwithstanding any other provision of this paragraph to the
contrary, in the case of projects eligible for an apportionment pursuant
to subparagraph one of this paragraph during the nineteen hundred
ninety-six--ninety-seven school year, and projects of small city school
districts whether or not eligible for such an apportionment during such
school year, for the purpose of the apportionment payable pursuant to
this subdivision or subdivision six-b of this section during the
nineteen hundred ninety-six--ninety-seven school year and thereafter to
a school district other than to the city school district of the city of
New York, for the construction, acquisition, reconstruction,
rehabilitation or improvement of a school building, such school district
shall have the option of selecting to receive aid based on actual
expenditures pursuant to subparagraph one or clause (i) of subparagraph
two of this paragraph; or based on an assumed amortization pursuant to
clause (ii) of subparagraph two of such paragraph. Such selection shall
be made on or before the time of submission of a project to the
commissioner for final approval or November fifteenth, nineteen hundred
ninety-seven, whichever shall occur later. Provided, however, any such
school district selecting to receive aid based on actual expenditures
pursuant to subparagraph one or clause (i) of subparagraph two of this
paragraph, but not meeting all requirements of such provisions, shall
have their aid for debt service computed under an assumed amortization
pursuant to clause (ii) of subparagraph two of this paragraph, and
provided further that any adjustments resulting from a required
computation under clause (ii) of subparagraph two of this paragraph
shall apply to the next payment due for such project.
 (5) Notwithstanding any inconsistent provisions of this paragraph, for
the purpose of calculating an apportionment pursuant to this
subdivision:
 (i) current approved expenditures for debt service for energy
performance contracts authorized pursuant to section 9-103 of the energy
law shall mean approved debt service incurred by a school district under
such contract during the current school year related to the financing of
such construction, acquisition, reconstruction, rehabilitation or
improvement of any school building, provided that as a condition of
eligibility for aid:
 A. The amortization period shall not exceed the term of the energy
performance contract.
 B. Any state building aid attributable to such project shall be
excluded in determining the cost savings under the energy performance
contract.
 C. The energy performance contractor shall guarantee recovery of
contract costs from energy savings realized by the school district
during the term of the energy performance contract, which shall not
exceed eighteen years.
 (ii) notwithstanding any inconsistent provisions of this paragraph,
for aid payable in the two thousand two--two thousand three school year
and thereafter, approved expenditures for debt service for energy
performance contracts shall be based on assumed amortization where
required by paragraph e of this subdivision.
 (iii) current year approved expenditures for debt service for the
purchase of computer equipment shall mean expenditures for principal and
interest expense incurred by a school district during the current year
for financing of the purchase of computer equipment eligible for aid
pursuant to paragraph b of this subdivision, provided that the payment
of aid shall be based on an assumed period of amortization which shall
equal the period of probable usefulness applicable to the acquisition of
such equipment under section 11.00 of the local finance law and on an
assumed rate of annual interest determined pursuant to subparagraph
three of this paragraph for the month in which the purchase contract was
executed; and
 (iv) current year approved expenditures for debt service for any other
expenditures that are aidable pursuant to this subdivision and involve
an object or purpose for which the period of probable usefulness under
section 11.00 of the local finance law is less than ten years shall mean
expenditures for principal and interest expense incurred by a school
district during the current year for the contracting of indebtedness for
such object or purpose, provided that the payment of aid shall be based
on an assumed period of amortization equal to such period of probable
usefulness and on an assumed rate of annual interest determined pursuant
to subparagraph three of this paragraph for the month in which the
financing agreement was executed.
 j. Assumed amortization for capital outlays. For aid payable in the
two thousand three--two thousand four school year and thereafter, the
apportionment to a school district for approved expenditures for capital
outlays from its general fund, capital fund or reserved funds pursuant
to this subdivision shall be based upon an assumed amortization
established pursuant to the applicable provisions of subparagraph two,
three, or four of paragraph e of this subdivision, as modified by this
paragraph, whether or not the school district issues debt for such
expenditures. Notwithstanding any provisions of subparagraph two, three,
or four of paragraph e of this subdivision to the contrary:
 (1) For approved expenditures for capital outlay incurred by the city
school district of the city of New York on or after July first, two
thousand two that are related to projects for which a general
construction contract was first awarded by the school construction
authority of the city of New York, or by another body or official
designated by law, prior to the first day of July, two thousand two,
such amortization shall commence (i) eighteen months after January
first, two thousand three; or (ii) on the date of receipt by the
commissioner of a certification by the district that a general
construction contract has been awarded for such project, whichever is
later; and the quotient, calculated to the nearest whole dollar without
rounding, of (A) the positive remainder of the approved expenditures of
such project to be funded through capital outlay less the total amount
of approved expenditures for capital outlay incurred before July first,
two thousand two, divided by (B) the positive remainder, computed to the
nearest year without rounding, of the new term of the assumed
amortization established pursuant to item (ii) of clause (b) of
subparagraph two of paragraph e of this subdivision as of July first,
two thousand three, less twelve months shall be deemed to be the current
year approved expenditures for debt service for the purposes of such
paragraph.
 (2) Approved expenditures for capital outlay incurred by the city
school district of the city of New York that are related to projects for
which a general construction contract was first awarded on or after the
first day of July, two thousand two, shall be deemed approved
expenditures for debt service included in the assumed amortization for
the project pursuant to subparagraph two of paragraph e of this
subdivision.
 (3) For approved expenditures for capital outlay incurred by a school
district other than the city school district of the city of New York on
or after July first, two thousand two that are related to projects
approved by the commissioner prior to the first day of July, two
thousand two, such amortization shall commence: (i) eighteen months
after January first, two thousand three; or (ii) on the date of receipt
by the commissioner of a certification by the district that a general
construction contract has been first awarded for such project by the
district, whichever is later, and the quotient, calculated to the
nearest whole dollar without rounding, of (A) the positive remainder of
the approved cost of such project to be funded through capital outlay
less the total amount of approved expenditures for capital outlay
incurred before July first, two thousand two, divided by (B) the
positive remainder, computed to the nearest year without rounding, of
the remaining maximum useful life of the project as determined by the
commissioner pursuant to item (i) of clause (a) of subparagraph four of
paragraph e of this subdivision as of July first, two thousand one, less
twelve months, shall be deemed to be the current year approved
expenditures for debt service for the purposes of such paragraph.
 (4) Approved expenditures for capital outlay incurred by a school
district other than the city school district of the city of New York
that are related to projects approved by the commissioner on or after
the first day of July, two thousand two, shall be deemed approved
expenditures for debt service included in an assumed amortization for
the project pursuant to subparagraph three of paragraph e of this
subdivision.
 k. Final cost report penalties. (1) All acts done and proceedings
heretofore had and taken, or caused to be had and taken, by school
districts and by all its officers or agents relating to or in connection
with final building cost reports required to be filed with the
commissioner for approved building projects for which a certificate of
substantial completion was issued on or after April first, nineteen
hundred ninety-five, and where a final cost report was not submitted by
June thirtieth of the school year in which the certificate of
substantial completion of the project was issued by the architect or
engineer, or six months after issuance of such certificate, whichever
was later, and all acts incidental thereto are hereby legalized,
validated, ratified and confirmed, notwithstanding any failure to comply
with the approval and filing provisions of the education law or any
other law or any other statutory authority, rule or regulation, in
relation to any omission, error, defect, irregularity or illegality in
such proceedings had and taken.
 (2) The commissioner is hereby directed to consider the approved costs
of the aforementioned projects as valid and proper obligations of such
school districts and shall not recover on or after July first, two
thousand thirteen any penalty arising from the late filing of a final
cost report, provided that any amounts already so recovered on or after
July first, two thousand thirteen shall be deemed a payment of moneys
due for prior years pursuant to paragraph c of subdivision five of
section thirty-six hundred four of this part and shall be paid to the
appropriate district pursuant to such provision, provided that:
 (a) such school district submitted the late or missing final building
cost report to the commissioner;
 (b) such cost report is approved by the commissioner;
 (c) all state funds expended by the school district, as documented in
such cost report, were properly expended for such building project in
accordance with the terms and conditions for such project as approved by
the commissioner; and
 (d) the failure to submit such report in a timely manner was an
inadvertent administrative or ministerial oversight by the school
district, and there is no evidence of any fraudulent or other improper
intent by such district.
 6-a. Additional apportionments of building aid for school districts
educating pupils residing on Indian reservations. In addition to the
apportionments made to a school district under the provisions of
subdivision six of this section, the commissioner is hereby authorized
to apportion to any school district, which the commissioner deems to be
providing educational services for a significant number of pupils
residing on an Indian reservation, an amount calculated by the
commissioner to represent the actual per pupil cost within the cost
allowance assigned to Indian pupils as the contribution of the state on
behalf of pupils residing on an Indian reservation. Such apportionment
shall be payable after approval by the commissioner of final plans for a
construction project approved by the commissioner for such purpose. Any
such apportionment shall be made upon such terms and conditions as the
commissioner shall approve.
 6-b. Building aid for joint facilities. a. Two or more school
districts eligible for operating aid pursuant to this section, other
than a city school district in a city with one hundred twenty-five
thousand inhabitants or more, that enter into an agreement in accordance
with section one hundred nineteen-o of the general municipal law and
this subdivision, may receive building aid pursuant to this subdivision
for approved expenditures for the construction or reconstruction of one
or more single site joint facilities. To be eligible for such aid, the
general contracts for the project shall have been awarded on or after
July first, nineteen hundred ninety-three, and the project and joint
agreement shall have been approved by the commissioner. For
participating school districts in which the school budget is subject to
voter approval, the joint agreement shall be subject to voter approval.
 b. To be eligible for building aid for the joint facility, the joint
agreement shall designate the board of education of the school district
in which such single site joint facility will be located as the lead
district, provided that where such facility will occupy adjoining sites
in more than one participating district any district in which a part of
the facility is situated may be designated as the lead district.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the lead district shall be
authorized to contract indebtedness for the purpose of the joint project
pursuant to the local finance law as if the entire project was conducted
solely by the lead district. The joint agreement shall designate the
district or districts that will operate, maintain and/or manage the
joint facility. The lead district shall serve as fiscal agent for all
participating districts for the purpose of claiming and receiving
building aid pursuant to subdivision six of this section. The joint
agreement shall include a lease agreement between the lead district and
all other participating districts whereby all parties agree to lease the
facility for a term not less than the period within which all bonds or
notes issued to finance the project will mature. Participating districts
shall not be eligible for an apportionment pursuant to any provision of
this chapter for any lease expense incurred for the joint facility and
such expense shall not be included in the approved operating expense of
any such district, provided, however, that nothing shall prohibit the
inclusion of a district's share of the net administrative, operation and
maintenance costs of the joint project in the district's approved
operating expense. The joint agreement shall provide for a credit of the
state aid received by the lead district for the joint project against
the expenses of such project and shall provide a method of allocating
the net cost of the joint facility to the participating districts,
distributing (i) the gross cost based on each district's share of the
use of the facility, and (ii) the state aid based on each district's aid
ratio and use-share of the aidable expense.
 c. Upon approval of the joint agreement, the lead district shall be
eligible for an apportionment pursuant to subdivision six of this
section as if the joint project was conducted solely by such lead
district; provided, however, that the building aid ratio used in
computing such aid shall be the sum of the product for each of the
participating districts of the district's building aid ratio selected
pursuant to paragraph c of subdivision six of this section for aid
payable in the current year multiplied by the district's share of the
use of the facility.
 d. Where the lead district reorganizes with some or all other
districts participating in the joint agreement subsequent to approval of
the joint agreement, such reorganized district shall be eligible for
reorganization incentive aid pursuant to subparagraph one of paragraph c
as modified by paragraph i, both of subdivision fourteen of this section
for expenditures for any debt service for indebtedness outstanding after
the effective date of such reorganization that were incurred for the
financing of construction of the joint facility so long as such facility
continues to be used by such reorganized district, as if the joint
facility had been constructed by the reorganized district subsequent to
reorganization.
 e. Notwithstanding the provisions of section thirty-six hundred nine-a
of this article, aid for joint projects shall be paid in accordance with
a schedule established by the commissioner and approved by the director
of the budget.
 6-c. a. Building aid for metal detectors, and safety devices for
electrically operated partitions, room dividers and doors. In addition
to the apportionments payable to a school district pursuant to
subdivision six of this section, the commissioner is hereby authorized
to apportion to any school district additional building aid pursuant to
this subdivision for its approved expenditures in the base year for the
purchase of stationary metal detectors, security cameras, safety devices
for electrically operated partitions and room dividers required pursuant
to section four hundred nine-f of this chapter, or other security
devices approved by the commissioner that increase the safety of
students and school personnel, provided, however, that funds apportioned
to school districts pursuant to this section shall not supplant funds
for existing district expenditures or for existing contractual
obligations of the district for stationary metal detectors, security
cameras, partition and room divider safety devices, or security devices.
Portable or hand held metal detectors shall not be eligible for aid
pursuant to this subdivision. Such additional aid shall equal the
product of the building aid ratio computed for use in the current year
pursuant to paragraph c of subdivision six of this section and the
actual approved expenditures incurred in the base year pursuant to this
subdivision, provided that the limitations on cost allowances prescribed
by paragraph a of subdivision six of this section shall not apply. The
commissioner shall annually prescribe a special cost allowance for metal
detectors, and security cameras, and the approved expenditures shall not
exceed such cost allowance. The commissioner shall annually prescribe a
special cost allowance for partition and room divider safety devices,
and the approved expenditures shall not exceed such cost allowance.
 b. For projects approved by the commissioner authorized to receive
additional building aid pursuant to this subdivision for the purchase of
stationary metal detectors, security cameras or other security devices
approved by the commissioner that increase the safety of students and
school personnel, provided that for purposes of this paragraph such
other security devices shall be limited to electronic security systems
and hardened doors, and provided that for projects approved by the
commissioner on or after the first day of July two thousand thirteen
such additional aid shall equal the product of (i) the building aid
ratio computed for use in the current year pursuant to paragraph c of
subdivision six of this section plus ten percentage points, except that
in no case shall this amount exceed one hundred percent, and (ii) the
actual approved expenditures incurred in the base year pursuant to this
subdivision, provided that the limitations on cost allowances prescribed
by paragraph a of subdivision six of this section shall not apply, and
provided further that any projects aided under this paragraph must be
included in a district's school safety plan. The commissioner shall
annually prescribe a special cost allowance for metal detectors, and
security cameras, and the approved expenditures shall not exceed such
cost allowance.
 6-e. Additional apportionment of building aid for building condition
surveys of school buildings. In addition to the apportionments payable
to a school district pursuant to subdivision six of this section, the
commissioner is hereby authorized to apportion to any school district
additional building aid in accordance with this subdivision for its
approved expenses in the base year for building condition surveys of
school buildings that are conducted pursuant to this subdivision and
subdivision four of section thirty-six hundred forty-one of this
article. The amount of such apportionment shall equal the product of the
building aid ratio defined pursuant to paragraph c of subdivision six of
this section and the actual approved expenses incurred by the district
in the base year for each school building so inspected, provided that
the amount of such apportionment shall not exceed the building condition
survey aid ceiling. For surveys conducted in the nineteen hundred
ninety-eight--ninety-nine school year, the building condition aid
ceiling shall be twenty cents gross per square foot of floor area. For
surveys conducted in the nineteen hundred ninety-nine--two thousand
school year and thereafter, the inspection aid ceiling shall be twenty
cents gross per square foot of floor area, plus an amount computed by
the commissioner in accordance with regulations adopted for such
purpose, on the basis of an index number reflecting changes in the costs
of labor and materials from July first, nineteen hundred ninety-eight.
 6-f. Additional apportionment of building aid for certain projects. a.
In addition to the apportionment payable to a school district pursuant
to subdivision six of this section, the commissioner is hereby
authorized to apportion to any school district additional building aid
in the amount equal to the product of its approved expenditures in the
base year for capital outlays from the district's general fund, capital
fund or reserved funds that are incurred on or after July first, two
thousand two for an eligible school construction project as defined in
paragraph b of this subdivision, and the district's applicable building
aid ratio as defined pursuant to paragraph c of subdivision six of this
section. Approved expenditures for capital outlays for eligible school
construction projects that are eligible for an apportionment pursuant to
this subdivision shall not be eligible for aid pursuant to subdivision
six of this section.
 b. For the purposes of this subdivision, an "eligible school
construction project" shall mean a school construction project that is
entirely funded from capital outlays and:
 (1) has a total project cost of one hundred thousand dollars or less;
provided however, that for any district, no more than one project shall
be eligible pursuant to this subparagraph for an apportionment within
the same school year; and/or
 (2) is a construction emergency project to remediate emergency
situations which arise in public school buildings and threaten the
health and/or safety of building occupants, as a result of the
unanticipated discovery of asbestos or other hazardous substances during
construction work on a school or significant damage caused by a fire,
snow storm, ice storm, excessive rain, high winds, flood or a similar
catastrophic event which results in the necessity for immediate repair.
 6-g. Charter schools facilities aid. a. The city school district of
the city of New York, upon documenting that it has incurred total
aggregate expenses of forty million dollars or more pursuant to
subparagraph five of paragraph (e) of subdivision three of section
twenty-eight hundred fifty-three of this chapter, shall be eligible for
an apportionment pursuant to this subdivision for its annual approved
expenditures for the lease of space for charter schools incurred in the
base year in accordance with paragraph (e) of subdivision three of
section twenty-eight hundred fifty-three of this chapter.
 b. The apportionment shall equal the product of (1) the sum of:
 for aid payable for expenses incurred pursuant to subparagraph five of
paragraph (e) of subdivision three of section twenty-eight hundred
fifty-three of this chapter where the charter school prevails on appeal,
the annual approved expenses incurred by the city school district
pursuant to such subparagraph five multiplied by
 (2) six-tenths.
 c. For purposes of this subdivision, the approved expenses
attributable to a lease by a charter school of a privately owned site
shall be the lesser of the actual rent paid under the lease or the
maximum cost allowance established by the commissioner for leases
aidable under subdivision six of this section.
 d. Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, amounts
apportioned pursuant to this subdivision shall not be included in: (1)
the allowable growth amount computed pursuant to paragraph dd of
subdivision one of this section, (2) the preliminary growth amount
computed pursuant to paragraph ff of subdivision one of this section,
and (3) the allocable growth amount computed pursuant to paragraph gg of
subdivision one of this section, and shall not be considered, and shall
not be available for interchange with, general support for public
schools.
 6-h. Building aid for testing and filtering of potable water systems
for lead contamination. In addition to the apportionments payable to a
school district pursuant to subdivision six of this section, the
commissioner is hereby authorized to apportion to any school district
additional building aid pursuant to this subdivision for its approved
expenditures, otherwise ineligible for building aid, in the base year
for the testing of potable water systems required pursuant to section
eleven hundred ten of the public health law, provided that such expenses
for testing of potable water systems are not reimbursable from another
state or federal source. The commissioner is also authorized to
apportion to any school district additional building aid pursuant to
this subdivision for its approved expenditures, otherwise ineligible for
building aid, in the base year for the installation of filters and/or
other effective remedial measures for immediate remediation in cases
where a finding of lead contamination is made pursuant to such section
and verified by confirmatory sampling, provided that the cost of
installation of such filters and/or other effective remedial measures
shall be deemed an approved expenditure only if (i) such installation
and/or other effective remedial measures have been approved or reviewed
by a professional with expertise in the field of water quality and
remediation and (ii) such cost is incurred prior to July first, two
thousand nineteen. Such aid shall equal the product of the building aid
ratio defined pursuant to paragraph c of subdivision six of this section
and the actual approved expenditures incurred in the base year pursuant
to this subdivision. Commencing in the two thousand nineteen--two
thousand twenty school year and every year thereafter, additional
building aid pursuant to this subdivision shall include approved
expenses for testing of potable water systems for lead contamination
pursuant to section eleven hundred ten of the public health law,
provided that such expenses for testing of potable water systems are not
reimbursable from another state or federal source.
 6-i. Building aid and the New York state energy research and
development authority P-12 schools: clean green schools initiative. 1.
For aid payable in the school years two thousand twenty-two--two
thousand twenty-three and thereafter, notwithstanding any provision of
law to the contrary, the apportionment to any district under subdivision
six, six-a, six-b, six-c, six-e, six-f, or six-h of this section for
capital outlays for school building projects for energy efficiency shall
not exclude grants authorized pursuant to the New York state energy
research and development authority P-12 schools: clean green schools
initiative from aidable expenditures, provided that the sum of
apportionments for these projects calculated pursuant to subdivision
six, six-a, six-b, six-c, six-e, six-f, or six-h of this section and
such grants shall not exceed the actual project expenditures.
 2. The New York state energy research and development authority shall
provide a list of energy efficiency grants awarded to each school
district to the commissioner no later than one month prior to the end of
each calendar year and each school year. This list shall include the
capital construction project or projects funded by the grants, the award
amounts of each individual project grant, the district receiving such
grants, the schools receiving such grants, the date on which the grant
was received, and any other information necessary for the calculation of
aid pursuant to subdivision six, six-a, six-b, six-c, six-e, six-f, or
six-h of this section.
 7. Apportionment for pupil transportation. a. In addition to the
foregoing apportionment, there shall be apportioned to any school
district for pupil transportation, the lesser of ninety per centum or
the state share of its approved transportation expense for the base
year. The state share shall equal the sum of the transportation sparsity
adjustment and the transportation aid ratio, but not less than six and
one-half percent. The transportation aid ratio shall equal the greater
of (i) the product of one and two hundred sixty-three thousandths
multiplied by the state sharing ratio, (ii) an aid ratio computed by
subtracting from one and one hundredth the product computed to three
decimals without rounding obtained by multiplying the resident weighted
average daily attendance wealth ratio by forty-six percent, where such
aid ratio shall be expressed as a decimal carried to three places
without rounding or (iii) excluding cities with a population of more
than one million, an aid ratio computed by subtracting from one and one
hundredth the product computed to three decimal places without rounding
obtained by multiplying the number computed to three decimals without
rounding obtained when the quotient of actual valuation of a school
district, as defined in paragraph c of subdivision one of this section,
divided by the sum of the resident public school district enrollment,
the resident nonpublic school district enrollment and the additional
public school enrollment of the school district for the year prior to
the base year is divided by the statewide average actual valuation per
the sum of such total resident public school district enrollment,
nonpublic school district enrollment and additional public school
enrollment of all school districts eligible for an apportionment
pursuant to this section except central high school districts as
computed by the commissioner using the latest single year actual
valuation computed under paragraph c of subdivision one of this section,
by forty-six percent, where such ratio shall be expressed as a decimal
carried to three decimal places without rounding. The computation of
such statewide average shall include the actual valuation of all school
districts eligible for an apportionment pursuant to this section except
central high school districts. The transportation sparsity adjustment
shall equal the quotient of: the positive remainder of twenty-one minus
the district's public school enrollment for the year prior to the base
year per square mile, divided by three hundred seventeen and
eighty-eight hundredths. Approved transportation expense shall be the
sum of the approved transportation operating expense and the approved
transportation capital, debt service and lease expense of the district.
Approved transportation expense shall not be aidable pursuant to section
nineteen hundred fifty of this chapter.
 b. (1) For the purposes of this apportionment, approved transportation
operating expense shall be the actual expenditure incurred by a school
district and approved by the commissioner (i) for those items of
transportation operating expense allowable under subdivision one of
section thirty-six hundred twenty-three-a of this article for regular
aidable transportation of pupils as such terms are defined in sections
thirty-six hundred twenty-one and thirty-six hundred twenty-two-a of
this article, and (ii) for those items of transportation operating
expense allowable under subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred
twenty-three-a of this article for the transportation required or
authorized pursuant to article eighty-nine of this chapter, and (iii)
for providing monitors on school buses for students with disabilities,
and (iv) for transportation operating expenses allowable under section
thirty-six hundred twenty-three-a of this article for the transportation
of homeless children authorized by paragraph c of subdivision four of
section thirty-two hundred nine of this chapter, provided that the total
approved cost of such transportation shall not exceed the amount of the
total cost of the most cost-effective mode of transportation.
 (2) Notwithstanding any inconsistent provisions of this article, in
computing the apportionment payable to a school district in a city with
a population in excess of one million inhabitants pursuant to this
subdivision, approved transportation expense for public service
transportation shall not include any expenditures to the New York City
Metropolitan Transportation Authority for public service transportation
nor shall such expense be included in approved operating expense.
 c. For the purposes of computing this apportionment for the two
thousand five--two thousand six school year and thereafter, approved
transportation capital, debt service, and lease expense shall be the
amount computed based upon an assumed amortization determined pursuant
to paragraph e of this subdivision for an expenditure incurred by a
school district and approved by the commissioner for those items of
transportation capital, debt service and lease expense allowable under
subdivision two of section thirty-six hundred twenty-three-a of this
article for: (i) the regular aidable transportation of pupils, as such
terms are defined in sections thirty-six hundred twenty-one and
thirty-six hundred twenty-two-a of this article, (ii) the transportation
of children with disabilities pursuant to article eighty-nine of this
chapter, and (iii) the transportation of homeless children pursuant to
paragraph c of subdivision four of section thirty-two hundred nine of
this chapter, provided that the total approved cost of such
transportation shall not exceed the amount of the total cost of the most
cost-effective mode of transportation. Approvable expenses for the
purchase of school buses shall be limited to the actual purchase price,
or the expense as if the bus were purchased under state contract,
whichever is less. If the commissioner determines that no comparable bus
was available under state contract at the time of purchase, the
approvable expenses shall be the actual purchase price or the state wide
median price of such bus in the most recent base year in which such
median price was established with an allowable year to year CPI increase
as defined in subdivision fourteen of section three hundred five of this
chapter; whichever is less. Such median shall be computed by the
commissioner for the purposes of this subdivision.
 d. In determining approved transportation operating expense for
district-owned transportation and approved transportation capital, debt
service and lease expense pursuant to paragraphs b, c and e of this
subdivision and part two of this article, the commissioner shall make a
deduction from the total transportation expense for the transportation
of nonallowable pupils, and for that portion of the total annual mileage
of district-owned school buses that is not aidable because it is not
included in the total annual allowable mileage as defined in section
thirty-six hundred twenty-one of this article, provided that such
calculations shall be made pursuant to regulations of the commissioner,
and further provided that such regulations shall provide for an
exclusion of pupil miles for transportation provided on a
space-available basis to pupils attending an approved universal
prekindergarten program pursuant to section thirty-six hundred two-e of
this article that does not result in additional transportation costs.
 e. In determining approved transportation capital, debt service and
lease expense for aid payable in the two thousand five--two thousand six
school year and thereafter, the commissioner, after applying the
provisions of paragraph c of this subdivision to such expense, shall
establish an assumed amortization pursuant to this paragraph to
determine the approved capital, debt service and lease expense of the
school district that is aidable in the current year, whether or not the
school district issues debt for such expenditures, subject to any
deduction pursuant to paragraph d of this subdivision. Such assumed
amortization shall be for a period of five years, and for the two
thousand twenty-two--two thousand twenty-three school year and
thereafter such assumed amortization for zero-emission school buses as
defined in section thirty-six hundred thirty-eight of this article and
related costs pursuant to paragraph f of subdivision two of section
thirty-six hundred twenty-three-a of this article shall be for a period
of eight years, and shall commence twelve months after the school
district enters into a purchase contract or lease of the school bus,
charging station, hydrogen fueling station, or equipment, or a general
contract for the construction, reconstruction, lease or purchase of a
transportation storage facility or site in an amount less than ten
thousand dollars. Such assumed amortization shall provide for equal
semiannual payments of principal and interest based on an assumed
interest rate established by the commissioner pursuant to this
paragraph. By the first day of September of the current year commencing
with the two thousand five--two thousand six school year, each school
district shall provide to the commissioner in a format prescribed by the
commissioner such information as the commissioner shall require for all
capital debt incurred by such school district during the preceding
school year for expenses allowable pursuant to subdivision two of
section thirty-six hundred twenty-three-a of this article. Based on such
reported amortizations and a methodology prescribed by the commissioner
in regulations, the commissioner shall compute an assumed interest rate
that shall equal the average of the interest rates applied to all such
debt issued during the preceding school year. The assumed interest rate
shall be the interest rate of each such school district applicable to
the current year for the purposes of this paragraph and shall be
expressed as a decimal to five places rounded to the nearest eighth of
one-one hundredth.
 8. a. Program approval requirements. Any school district receiving an
additional apportionment pursuant to subdivision ten of this section for
pupils in career education programs or a payment in lieu of such
apportionment or having a public excess cost aid setaside pursuant to
subdivision four of this section shall use the total funds attributable
to such pupils for locally administered programs for such pupils in
accordance with regulations issued by the commissioner. Such regulations
shall provide for the use of such funds in the manner determined by the
commissioner to be the most educationally advantageous for such pupils.
The commissioner shall require the submission of such reports as are
necessary to assure accountability for the use of such funds. A district
which spends any part of its total annual apportionment attributable to
such pupils in an unauthorized manner in the base year shall have its
current year apportionment reduced by the amount of such unauthorized
expenditures in the base year.
 b. District plans of service. Any school district receiving an
additional apportionment pursuant to subdivision ten of this section for
pupils in career education programs or a payment in lieu of such
apportionment or having a public excess cost aid setaside pursuant to
subdivision four of this section shall keep on file and make available
for public inspection and review by the commissioner an acceptable plan
of service describing the student outcomes expected from implementation
of the proposed plan, provided that such plan may be incorporated into a
school district's district-wide comprehensive plan. The plan of service
of a school district receiving an additional apportionment pursuant to
this section for pupils with disabilities shall also describe how such
district intends to ensure that all instructional materials to be used
in the schools of such district will be made available in a usable
alternative format for each student with a disability and for each
student who is a qualified individual with a disability, at the same
time as such instructional materials are available to non-disabled
students, provided that such plan may incorporate by reference the
alternative format plans developed pursuant to subdivision twenty-nine-a
of section sixteen hundred four, subdivision four-a of section seventeen
hundred nine, subdivision seven-a of section twenty-five hundred three
or subdivision seven-a of section twenty-five hundred fifty-four of this
chapter. Such plans shall be in a form prescribed by the commissioner,
and except as heretofore provided, shall have the content prescribed by
the commissioner. The commissioner may, from time to time, require
amendments of such plans as deemed to be necessary and appropriate to
further the educational welfare of the pupils involved.
 9. Aid for conversion to full day kindergarten. School districts may
make available full day kindergarten programs for all children wishing
to attend such programs.
 a. For aid payable in the two thousand seven--two thousand eight
school year and thereafter, school districts which provided any half-day
kindergarten programs or had no kindergarten programs in the nineteen
hundred ninety-six--ninety-seven school year and in the base year, and
which have not received an apportionment pursuant to this paragraph in
any prior school year, shall be eligible for aid equal to the product of
the district's selected foundation aid calculated pursuant to
subdivision four of this section multiplied by the positive difference
resulting when the full day kindergarten enrollment of children
attending programs in the district in the base year is subtracted from
such enrollment in the current year.
 b. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph a of this subdivision,
school districts that have received an apportionment pursuant to this
subdivision in a prior school year shall be eligible for an
apportionment where the department grants a waiver upon cause
satisfactory to the department, including but not limited to,
satisfactory demonstration of significant economic hardship that would
impact the school district's ability to provide full day kindergarten
for all children wishing to attend such programs. No school district may
be granted such a waiver more than once.
 c. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph a of this subdivision,
school districts receiving an apportionment pursuant to paragraph a of
this subdivision in the two thousand eighteen--two thousand nineteen or
two thousand nineteen--two thousand twenty school year shall be eligible
for (A) an apportionment in the following school year equal to the
product of sixty-five percent multiplied by the aid received by the
district pursuant to paragraph a of this subdivision in the prior school
year, and (B) an apportionment in the school year after the following
year equal to the product of thirty-five percent multiplied by the aid
received by the district pursuant to paragraph a of this subdivision in
the year preceding the prior year.
 10. Special services aid for large city school districts and other
school districts which were not components of a board of cooperative
educational services in the base year. a. The city school districts of
those cities having populations in excess of one hundred twenty-five
thousand and any other school district which was not a component of a
board of cooperative educational services in the base year shall be
entitled to an apportionment under the provisions of this section.
 b. (1) Aid for career education. There shall be apportioned to such
city school districts and other school districts which were not
components of a board of cooperative educational services in the base
year for pupils in selected grades in attendance in career education
programs as such programs are defined by the commissioner, subject for
the purposes of this paragraph to the approval of the director of the
budget, an amount for each such pupil to be computed by multiplying the
career education aid ratio by three thousand nine hundred dollars for
aid payable in the two thousand twenty-four--two thousand twenty-five
school year and prior and four thousand one hundred dollars thereafter.
Such aid will be payable for weighted pupils attending career education
programs operated by the school district and for weighted pupils for
whom such school district contracts with boards of cooperative
educational services to attend career education programs operated by a
board of cooperative educational services. Weighted pupils for the
purposes of this paragraph shall mean the sum of the attendance of
students in selected grades in career education sequences in trade,
industrial, technical, agricultural or health programs plus the product
of sixteen hundredths multiplied by the attendance of students in
selected grades in career education sequences in business and marketing
as defined by the commissioner in regulations. The career education aid
ratio shall be computed by subtracting from one the product obtained by
multiplying fifty-nine percent by the combined wealth ratio. This aid
ratio shall be expressed as a decimal carried to three places without
rounding, but not less than thirty-six percent. For purposes of this
subparagraph, "selected grades" shall be grades ten through twelve for
aid payable in the two thousand twenty-four--two thousand twenty-five
school year and prior, and shall be grades nine through twelve for aid
payable in the two thousand twenty-five--two thousand twenty-six school
year and thereafter.
 (2) Any school district that receives aid pursuant to this paragraph
shall be required to use such amount to support career education
programs in the current year.
 (3) A board of education which spends less than its local funds as
defined by regulations of the commissioner for career education in the
base year during the current year shall have its apportionment under
this subdivision reduced in an amount equal to such deficiency in the
current or a succeeding school year, provided however that the
commissioner may waive such reduction upon determination that overall
expenditures per pupil in support of career education programs were
continued at a level equal to or greater than the level of such overall
expenditures per pupil in the preceding school year.
 c. Computer administration aid for large city school districts and any
other school district which was not a component of a board of
cooperative educational services in the base year. The city school
districts of those cities having populations in excess of one hundred
twenty-five thousand inhabitants and any other school district which was
not a component of a board of cooperative educational services in the
base year shall be eligible for an apportionment in accordance with the
provisions of this subdivision. Such districts shall be entitled to an
additional apportionment computed by multiplying the lesser of (1)
expenses for approved computer services in the base year or (2) the
maximum allowable expense equal to the product of sixty-two dollars and
thirty cents and the enrollment of pupils attending the public schools
of such district in the base year, by the computer expenses aid ratio.
The computer expenses aid ratio shall be computed by subtracting from
one the product obtained by multiplying fifty-one per centum by the
combined wealth ratio. This aid ratio shall be expressed as a decimal
carried to three places without rounding, but shall not be less than
thirty per centum. Expenses for approved computer services in the base
year up to the maximum allowable expense shall not be used to claim aid
pursuant to any other provisions of this section.
 d. Aid for academic improvement. There shall be apportioned to such
city school districts and other school districts which were not
components of a board of cooperative educational services in the base
year, an amount per pupil for each pupil eligible for aid pursuant to
paragraph b of this subdivision to be computed by multiplying the career
education aid ratio computed pursuant to such paragraph b of this
subdivision by the sum of (1) one hundred dollars plus (2) the quotient
of one thousand dollars divided by the lesser of one or the combined
wealth ratio. Aid for academic improvement shall be unrestricted general
aid available to support any academic programs of the school district.
 e. Career education data collection. Beginning in the two thousand
seventeen--two thousand eighteen school year the commissioner shall
collect data from school districts receiving aid under this subdivision
on the number of students in the base year that are in grade nine and
enrolled in career education courses in trade/industrial education,
technical education, agricultural education, health occupations
education, business and marketing education, family and consumer science
education, and technology education programs in a manner prescribed by
the commissioner.
 11. Employment Preparation Education Programs. a. School districts and
boards of cooperative educational services (BOCES) providing approved
programs shall be eligible for aid in accordance with the provisions of
this subdivision for the attendance of persons twenty-one years of age
or over who have not received a high school diploma or a high school
equivalency diploma recognized by New York State who attend employment
preparation education programs provided by such school districts or
BOCES, which programs lead to a high school diploma or high school
equivalency diploma as defined in regulations of the commissioner, even
if such persons attend regular day school classes with permission of the
board of education; provided that such programs are provided in
accordance with a plan of service approved by the commissioner in
accordance with the provisions of paragraph f of this subdivision. Such
programs may operate between July first and June thirtieth of a school
year. Whenever a person enrolls in a program approved pursuant to this
subdivision offered by a BOCES or in a school district other than their
district of residence, the program provider shall send a notice of such
enrollment to the persons district of residence, and shall issue a new
notice if such person moves from one district to another. In the event
that the cost of a program approved and provided in accordance with the
provisions of this subdivision exceeds all sources of funds, other than
tax levy revenues, which are available to defray such expenses, the
school district or BOCES providing such program shall determine an
excess cost per contact hour provided during the base year, and then
shall determine the local share of such excess costs for each school
district whose residents were served by such program by multiplying such
base year hours by the excess cost per contact hour, and such local
share shall be a charge against each such district, payable within
forty-five days. Notwithstanding the provisions of section nineteen
hundred fifty of this chapter, a BOCES shall be authorized to provide a
program pursuant to this subdivision in the same manner as a school
district.
 a-1. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph a of this
subdivision, for aid payable in the school years two thousand--two
thousand one through two thousand nine--two thousand ten, and two
thousand eleven--two thousand twelve through two thousand
twenty-five--two thousand twenty-six, the commissioner may set aside an
amount not to exceed two million five hundred thousand dollars from the
funds appropriated for purposes of this subdivision for the purpose of
serving persons twenty-one years of age or older who have not been
enrolled in any school for the preceding school year, including persons
who have received a high school diploma or high school equivalency
diploma but fail to demonstrate basic educational competencies as
defined in regulation by the commissioner, when measured by accepted
standardized tests, and who shall be eligible to attend employment
preparation education programs operated pursuant to this subdivision.
 b. Employment preparation education hours. For the purpose of
computing an apportionment under the provisions of this subdivision, the
employment preparation education hours shall be the total hours of
instruction given by a teacher to all students enrolled in such approved
programs between July first and June thirtieth of the current year. For
nontraditional modes of instruction, the commissioner may establish
methods of determining contact hours of instruction to be counted for
state aid purposes in accordance with regulations adopted for such
purpose.
 c. Employment preparation education aid ceiling. The employment
preparation education aid ceiling for the purposes of this subdivision
shall be the statewide average expense per pupil, as computed pursuant
to subdivision five of this section for aid payable in the current year,
divided by one thousand. Such result shall be computed to two decimals
without rounding.
 d. Employment preparation education aid ratio. The employment
preparation education aid ratio for the purposes of this subdivision
shall be determined by subtracting from one the product of the pupil
wealth ratio and forty per centum. The aid ratio shall be expressed as a
decimal to three places without rounding but shall not be less than
forty per centum. In the case of a BOCES, such aid ratio shall be
determined by computing a pupil wealth ratio for the BOCES using the
aggregate actual valuation and total wealth pupil units for all
component districts of such BOCES, but shall not be less than the
greater of forty per centum or the product of eighty-five per centum and
the highest such aid ratio determined for a component school district of
such BOCES.
 e. Employment preparation education apportionment. In addition to any
other aid payable under this section, the apportionment pursuant to this
subdivision shall be the product obtained when the employment
preparation education hours are multiplied by the aid per contact hour
which shall equal the product of the employment preparation program aid
ceiling and the employment preparation education aid ratio computed to
two decimals, rounded, as calculated based on data on file with the
commissioner on May fifteenth of the base year. Notwithstanding the
provisions of section thirty-six hundred nine-a of this part, the
payment of such apportionment shall be based upon reports required by
the commissioner for the periods ending December thirty-first, and June
thirtieth of each school year; payments for the first reporting period
shall be made after April first, based on claims on file by March first,
provided that the total of all such payments shall not exceed
twenty-five percent of the amount for such school year, with the
approved amount of such claims reduced on a pro rata basis if necessary;
the remainder of any payments due for the first period plus any payments
due for the rest of the school year shall be paid after October first,
based on claims on file by September fifteenth, provided that the total
of such payments shall not exceed the total amount of ninety-six million
dollars ($96,000,000) for such school year, with the approved amount of
such claims reduced on a pro rata basis if necessary, provided that the
total of such payment for services provided to persons who received a
high school diploma or a high school equivalency diploma recognized by
New York state shall not exceed the total amount set aside for such
purpose pursuant to paragraph a-one of this subdivision in any such
school year, with the approved amount of such claims reduced on a pro
rata basis if necessary; and aid paid pursuant to this paragraph shall
not be included in the computation of the district expenditure need as
defined in such section thirty-six hundred nine-a of this part. The
employment preparation education apportionment for the city school
district of the city of New York shall be computed only for the city as
a whole.
 f. Approved application. All school districts and BOCES desiring to
operate an aidable program pursuant to this subdivision shall complete
an application, including a budget by program component. Such
application shall be in a form prescribed by the commissioner and shall
be submitted not later than May fifteenth of each school year. Within
forty-five days of such deadline, and upon evaluation of such
applications, the commissioner shall notify school districts and BOCES
of those portions of such application that will be aidable in the school
year ahead after making a determination that approval of such
application will assure maximum effectiveness, geographic availability
and lack of duplication of such programs, support for educational
initiatives, and compliance with required program and fiscal reporting
requirements. No aid shall be payable pursuant to this subdivision
unless the application is approved by the commissioner.
 g. No school district may receive under the provisions of this
subdivision an amount which when added to all other state and federal
aid received by such school district for the purposes of this
subdivision, including tuition paid to the school district for such
program, exceeds the entire cost of such program in that year.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this section to the contrary, in
the event that the total revenue received exceeds the entire cost of
such program, any state aid payable to the district in the following
year shall be reduced in the amount of such excess.
 h. Attendance of students in such approved programs shall not be
included in any other attendance counts of this section and shall not
generate aid under any other provision of this section or under section
nineteen hundred fifty of this chapter.
 12. Academic enhancement aid. a. A school district that as of April
first of the base year has been continuously identified as a district in
need of improvement for at least five years shall, for the two thousand
eight--two thousand nine school year, be entitled to an additional
apportionment equal to the positive remainder, if any, of (a) the lesser
of fifteen million dollars or the product of the total foundation aid
base, as defined by paragraph j of subdivision one of this section,
multiplied by ten percent (0.10), less (b) the positive remainder of (i)
the sum of the total foundation aid apportioned pursuant to subdivision
four of this section and the supplemental educational improvement grants
apportioned pursuant to subdivision eight of section thirty-six hundred
forty-one of this article, less (ii) the total foundation aid base.
 b. For the two thousand nine--two thousand ten through two thousand
fourteen--two thousand fifteen school years, each school district shall
be entitled to an apportionment equal to the amount set forth for such
school district as "EDUCATION GRANTS, ACADEMIC EN" under the heading
"2008-09 BASE YEAR AIDS" in the school aid computer listing produced by
the commissioner in support of the budget for the two thousand nine--two
thousand ten school year and entitled "SA0910", and such apportionment
shall be deemed to satisfy the state obligation to provide an
apportionment pursuant to subdivision eight of section thirty-six
hundred forty-one of this article.
 c. For the two thousand fifteen--two thousand sixteen year, each
school district shall be entitled to an apportionment equal to the
amount set forth for such school district as "ACADEMIC ENHANCEMENT"
under the heading "2014-15 ESTIMATED AIDS" in the school aid computer
listing produced by the commissioner in support of the budget for the
two thousand fourteen--two thousand fifteen school year and entitled
"SA141-5", and such apportionment shall be deemed to satisfy the state
obligation to provide an apportionment pursuant to subdivision eight of
section thirty-six hundred forty-one of this article.
 d. For the two thousand sixteen--two thousand seventeen school year,
each school district shall be entitled to an apportionment equal to the
amount set forth for such school district as "ACADEMIC ENHANCEMENT"
under the heading "2015-16 ESTIMATED AIDS" in the school aid computer
listing produced by the commissioner in support of the budget for the
two thousand fifteen--two thousand sixteen school year and entitled
"SA151-6", and such apportionment shall be deemed to satisfy the state
obligation to provide an apportionment pursuant to subdivision eight of
section thirty-six hundred forty-one of this article.
 e. For the two thousand seventeen--two thousand eighteen school year,
each school district shall be entitled to an apportionment equal to the
amount set forth for such school district as "ACADEMIC ENHANCEMENT"
under the heading "2016-17 ESTIMATED AIDS" in the school aid computer
listing produced by the commissioner in support of the budget for the
two thousand sixteen--two thousand seventeen school year and entitled
"SA161-7", and such apportionment shall be deemed to satisfy the state
obligation to provide an apportionment pursuant to subdivision eight of
section thirty-six hundred forty-one of this article.
 f. For the two thousand eighteen--two thousand nineteen school year,
each school district shall be entitled to an apportionment equal to the
amount set forth for such school district as "ACADEMIC ENHANCEMENT"
under the heading "2017-18 ESTIMATED AIDS" in the school aid computer
listing produced by the commissioner in support of the budget for the
two thousand seventeen--two thousand eighteen school year and entitled
"SA171-8", and such apportionment shall be deemed to satisfy the state
obligation to provide an apportionment pursuant to subdivision eight of
section thirty-six hundred forty-one of this article.
 g. For the two thousand nineteen--two thousand twenty school year,
each school district shall be entitled to an apportionment equal to the
amount set forth for such school district as "ACADEMIC ENHANCEMENT"
under the heading "2018-19 ESTIMATED AIDS" in the school aid computer
listing produced by the commissioner in support of the budget for the
two thousand eighteen--two thousand nineteen school year and entitled
"SA181-9", and such apportionment shall be deemed to satisfy the state
obligation to provide an apportionment pursuant to subdivision eight of
section thirty-six hundred forty-one of this article.
 h. For the two thousand twenty--two thousand twenty-one school year,
each school district shall be entitled to an apportionment equal to the
amount set forth for such school district as "ACADEMIC ENHANCEMENT"
under the heading "2019-20 ESTIMATED AIDS" in the school aid computer
listing produced by the commissioner in support of the budget for the
two thousand nineteen--two thousand twenty school year and entitled
"SA192-0", and such apportionment shall be deemed to satisfy the state
obligation to provide an apportionment pursuant to subdivision eight of
section thirty-six hundred forty-one of this article.
 i. For the two thousand twenty-one--two thousand twenty-two school
year through the two thousand twenty-five--two thousand twenty-six
school year, each school district shall be entitled to an apportionment
equal to the amount set forth for such school district as "ACADEMIC
ENHANCEMENT" under the heading "2020-21 ESTIMATED AIDS" in the school
aid computer listing produced by the commissioner in support of the
budget for the two thousand twenty--two thousand twenty-one school year
and entitled "SA202-1", and such apportionment shall be deemed to
satisfy the state obligation to provide an apportionment pursuant to
subdivision eight of section thirty-six hundred forty-one of this
article.
 13. Youth incarcerated in county correctional facilities
apportionment. a. In addition to any other apportionment under this
section, a school district shall be eligible for an apportionment for
current year educational services provided between July first and June
thirtieth to youth incarcerated in correctional facilities maintained by
a county or the city of New York or in a youth shelter, as defined in
paragraph f of subdivision seven of section thirty-two hundred two of
this chapter, pursuant to subdivision seven of section thirty-two
hundred two of this chapter. Such apportionment shall not exceed the sum
of the following: (i) for programs which operate between September
first and June thirtieth, the product of the district's expense per
pupil and the number of pupils in full-time equivalent attendance as
defined in regulations of the commissioner multiplied by one hundred
twenty-five per centum plus (ii) for programs which operate between July
first and June thirtieth, the product of the district's expense per
pupil and the number of pupils in full-time equivalent attendance,
multiplied by one hundred fifty per centum. Such apportionment shall be
in accordance with regulations promulgated by the commissioner and
approved by the director of the budget and shall be the lesser of the
amount computed pursuant to this paragraph or the actual amount expended
by the district for such approved educational services and approved
administrative costs as reported to the commissioner provided, however,
that the minimum allocation in any school year for a school district
providing educational services to such children shall be fifteen
thousand dollars. The educational costs for these children shall not be
otherwise aidable or reimbursable under any provision of law; provided,
however, that a city school district which operates an academy or an
alternative high school at such a facility, may elect to receive
applicable aid pursuant to other provisions of this section in lieu of
any aid under this subdivision.
 b. Notwithstanding the provisions of section thirty-six hundred nine-a
of this part, the payment of such apportionment shall be based on
reports required by the commissioner for the periods ending November
thirtieth, March thirty-first and June thirtieth of each school year.
For the city school district of the city of New York, computations made
pursuant to this subdivision shall be computed on a city-wide basis.
 d. The commissioner shall adopt regulations to implement the
provisions of this subdivision.
 14. Limitations on the apportionment. The apportionment to any school
district during any school year shall be subject to the following
provisions:
 a. District subject to reorganization. (1) No apportionments pursuant
to subdivision six of this section shall be paid to any school district
which is scheduled for reorganization pursuant to the state plan for
school district reorganization, unless there shall have been compliance
with this paragraph.
 (2) In order to obtain an apportionment under subdivision six of this
section for a district scheduled for reorganization and not reorganized,
such district shall file with the commissioner a formal written
application therefor, (a) showing (i) inadequacy or obsolescence of
present facilities, and (ii) that such construction for which such
apportionment is sought would be capable of substantial educational use
by the reorganized district in case the reorganization under the
existing plan of reorganization is effected, and that it will provide
more efficient and more economical educational facilities for such
reorganized district in the best educational interests of the children
in the reorganized school district or (b) showing that such district has
adopted a resolution or resolutions in accordance with sections eighteen
hundred one through eighteen hundred three of this chapter in favor of
such reorganization and is being prevented from reorganizing by the
action of another district which is part of the same plan of
reorganization. The commissioner shall within ninety days grant such
apportionment or deny such apportionment with leave to the district to
petition for a formal hearing. Such hearing shall be held pursuant to
the procedures provided in subdivision three of section three hundred
fourteen of this chapter.
 (3) (a) Within sixty days after such hearing is concluded and all
papers in relation thereto are submitted, the commissioner shall render
a preliminary finding recommending whether a change is warranted,
setting forth his findings and conclusions which shall be based
exclusively on the evidence presented at the hearing. The commissioner
shall recommend the amendment or confirmation of the state plan in
accordance with his preliminary finding by a report made by him and
entered in his office. The commissioner shall serve a copy of such
preliminary finding upon the clerk or in the event that there is no
clerk, the trustee or trustees of the school districts located in the
affected area or areas. In the event that such districts do not agree
with such preliminary findings, the school districts affected by the
terms of such preliminary finding may within thirty days apply to the
chancellor of the board of regents for the appointment of a committee of
the regents to review the proposed amendment or confirmation of the
state plan. In the event that an application to the chancellor is not
made within thirty days for the appointment of a committee of the
regents, the preliminary finding shall become an order without further
action of the commissioner.
 (b) Upon receipt of such application, the chancellor shall appoint a
committee of three members of the regents, one of whom shall be a regent
whose judicial district includes all or part of the areas affected. The
committee of regents shall review the proposed amendment or confirmation
of the state plan. In the event the committee is unable to resolve the
differences between the commissioner and such school districts, it shall
within sixty days from the date of the appointment of such committee,
make an order reversing, affirming, or modifying, wholly or in part,
such preliminary finding of the commissioner and amending or confirming
the state plan setting forth the committee's findings and conclusions
which shall be based exclusively on the evidence presented at the
commissioner's hearing and any additional evidence presented at the
committee's review. The committee shall have the discretion to permit
additional evidence to be presented by any party. The commissioner shall
serve a copy of such order upon the clerk or in the event there is no
clerk, the trustee or trustees of the school districts located in the
affected area or areas.
 (c) Such order of the committee of the regents shall be binding and
final and subject to review pursuant to article seventy-eight of the
civil practice law and rules. The scope of review shall include the
question whether the determination is on the entire record supported by
substantial evidence.
 (d) The commissioner shall establish and promulgate rules of practice
and procedures in connection with such hearings, shall provide for the
attendance of the hearing officer, regulate the course of the hearing,
fix the time for filing of briefs and other documents, provide a hearing
stenographer and for the making of a record as well as the making of a
full transcript of all proceedings at the hearing and shall at the
request of any party, school district or interested person have prepared
and furnish a copy of the transcript or any party thereof upon payment
of the costs therefor.
 (e) School districts designated in the established plan by an order of
the committee of the regents shall be made parties by the petitioning
district. Districts which may be affected by the proposed change may
join or be joined in such proceeding by the commissioner or any party.
 (4) Notwithstanding the provisions of subparagraphs one through three
of this paragraph, any such district which has qualified for an
apportionment for school building purposes, under laws in effect prior
to the date this act takes effect, shall receive an apportionment under
subdivision six of this section; and provided, further, that no new
apportionment shall be paid and the commissioner shall not approve any
new expenditures for school building purposes in any such district after
such date, except where the commissioner has made a determination as
herein provided.
 (5) Nothing herein provided shall prevent a school district which has
heretofore been denied an apportionment subsequent to July first,
nineteen hundred sixty-two from making an application hereunder, except
that any such apportionment which may be granted shall not be
retroactive beyond July first, nineteen hundred sixty-two.
 c. Incentive building aid for reorganized districts. (1)
Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, whenever two or more
school districts are scheduled for reorganization pursuant to section
three hundred fourteen of this chapter and whenever after July first,
nineteen hundred sixty-five all such school districts so scheduled do
reorganize, and
 (i) whenever such proposed reorganization includes at least two school
districts, each of which maintains its own high school, or
 (ii) where such proposed reorganization includes only one school
district maintaining its own high school, whenever in such case such
proposed reorganization, in addition to such school district maintaining
its own high school, includes at least nine other school districts, or
 (iii) whenever such proposed reorganization includes at least two
central school districts, or
 (iv) where such proposed reorganization includes at least one school
district maintaining its own high school and, in addition thereto,
includes at least one school district employing eight or more teachers,
or
 (v) where such proposed reorganization includes a city school
district, and in addition thereto, includes at least seven other school
districts, or
 (vi) where such proposed reorganization includes at least two school
districts employing eight or more teachers forming a central high school
district pursuant to section nineteen hundred thirteen of this chapter,
beginning with July first, nineteen hundred sixty-five or the first
school year of operation as a reorganized district after such date, such
reorganized school district shall be entitled to an additional
apportionment of twenty-five per centum of the sum of: (A) its
apportionment as provided in subdivision six of this section whenever
such apportionment is computed on the basis of its approved base year
expenditures for capital outlay from its general, capital, or a reserve
fund incurred prior to July first, two thousand one, or on the basis of
its approved base year expenditures for capital outlay from its general,
capital or a reserve fund incurred in the two thousand one--two thousand
two school year and computed pursuant to subdivision six of this section
as if such expenditures were aidable under such subdivision, and current
year approved expenditures for debt service for school building purposes
and (B) its apportionment as provided in subdivision six of this
section, the general contracts for which shall have been awarded on or
after the date this act takes effect and prior to July first, two
thousand ten, or prior to July first, two thousand twelve where such
general contracts are for projects with complete final plans and
specifications filed for approval with the commissioner prior to July
first, two thousand ten, or within ten years from the effective date of
reorganization, whichever is later as provided in subdivision six of
this section, and which said sum shall be payable for and during the
terms of any indebtedness created for the purpose of financing such
construction or other facility as aforesaid, provided however, that in
no event may the total apportionment under this paragraph, under
subdivision twelve of section thirty-six hundred forty-one of this
article, and under subdivisions six and six-f of this section for any
project exceed the product of (1) ninety-eight percent for a high need
school district, as defined pursuant to guidelines of the commissioner
for the two thousand five--two thousand six school year, for all school
building projects approved by the voters of the school district or by
the board of education of a city school district in a city with more
than one hundred twenty-five thousand inhabitants, and/or the chancellor
in a city school district in a city having a population of one million
or more, on or after July first, two thousand five, or ninety-five per
cent for any other school building project or school district,
multiplied by (2) the sum of the base year approved expenditures for
capital outlay for school building purposes from the general fund,
capital fund or from a reserve fund, and current year approved
expenditures for debt service for such purposes for such project.
 (2) Notwithstanding any provisions of this paragraph and paragraph d
of this subdivision to the contrary, the commissioner is hereby
authorized, in addition to any other state aid apportionments to which
such district may be entitled under the provisions of this chapter, to
make the additional reorganization incentive aid payments provided by
such paragraphs, in the amounts, and in the manner provided therein, to
central school district number one of the towns of Brookhaven and
Smithtown, Suffolk county, as if such newly reorganized district were
included in the various categories of reorganization referred to in such
paragraphs.
 (4) In the event a school district is eligible for incentive building
aid and again reorganizes pursuant to a new plan of reorganization
established by the commissioner, and where such new reorganization shall
again become eligible for incentive building aid, no project of such
district shall be entitled to more than one such additional twenty-five
percent apportionment. The latest date provided in this paragraph for
the awarding of general contracts shall also apply to any school
district subject to chapter five hundred eighty-eight of the laws of
nineteen hundred sixty-six as amended, notwithstanding such date
provided in such chapter.
 d. Incentive operating aid for reorganized districts. Notwithstanding
the provisions of paragraphs a through c of this subdivision, whenever
two or more school districts are scheduled for reorganization pursuant
to section three hundred fourteen of this chapter, and whenever after
July first, two thousand seven, all such school districts so scheduled
do reorganize in accordance with the provisions of such section three
hundred fourteen, as amended by chapter seven hundred forty-five of the
laws of nineteen hundred sixty-five, and
 (1) whenever such proposed reorganization includes at least two school
districts, each of which maintains its own high school, or
 (2) where such proposed reorganization includes only one school
district maintaining its own high school, whenever in such case such
proposed reorganization, in addition to such school district maintaining
its own high school, includes at least nine other school districts, or
 (3) whenever such proposed reorganization includes at least two
central school districts, or
 (4) where such proposed reorganization includes at least one school
district maintaining its own high school and, in addition thereto,
includes at least one school district employing eight or more teachers,
or
 (5) where such proposed reorganization includes a city school
district, and in addition thereto, includes at least seven other school
districts, or
 (6) where such reorganization includes at least two school districts
employing eight or more teachers forming a central high school district
pursuant to section nineteen hundred thirteen of this chapter.
 (7) such reorganized district shall be entitled to an apportionment
equal to an additional percent of the apportionment computed in
accordance with the provisions of paragraph d-1 of this subdivision; but
in no case shall the sum of such apportionment under this paragraph plus
the total operating aid base as defined in this subdivision be more than
a total of ninety-five per centum of the year prior to the base year
approved operating expense; for a period of five years beginning with
the first school year of operation as a reorganized district such
additional percent shall be forty percent; and thereafter such
additional forty percent apportionment to such district shall be reduced
by four percentage points each year, beginning with the sixth school
year of operation as a reorganized district, and continuing until such
additional forty percent apportionment is eliminated; provided, however,
that the total apportionment to such reorganized district, beginning
with the first school year of operation as a reorganized district, and
for a period of fifteen years thereafter, shall be not less than the sum
of all apportionments computed in accordance with the provisions of this
paragraph plus the apportionment computed in accordance with the
provisions of paragraph d-1 of this subdivision that each component
school district was entitled to receive and did receive during the last
school year preceding such first year of operation. In the event a
school district is eligible for incentive operating aid and again
reorganizes pursuant to a new plan or reorganization established by the
commissioner, and where such new reorganization is again eligible for
incentive operating aid, the newly created school district shall be
entitled to receive incentive operating aid pursuant to the provisions
of this paragraph, based on all school districts included in any such
reorganization, provided, however, that incentive operating aid payments
due because of any such former reorganization shall cease.
 d-1. For purposes of paragraph d of this subdivision, "total operating
aid base" shall mean the apportionment computed for the 2006-07 school
year, based on data on file with the commissioner as of the date upon
which an electronic data file was created for the purposes of compliance
with paragraph b of subdivision twenty-one of section three hundred five
of this chapter on February fifteenth, provided further that for school
districts which reorganize on or after July first, two thousand
twenty-four, for purposes of paragraph d of this subdivision, "total
operating aid base" shall mean the total foundation aid base, as defined
pursuant to paragraph j of subdivision one of this section, calculated
as of the effective date of the reorganization.
 f. For school districts which reorganize on or after July first,
nineteen hundred eighty-three, the percent increase in apportionment
pursuant to paragraph c of this subdivision shall be thirty provided
that such school districts meet all other requirements of the provisions
of such paragraph c. All other requirements of paragraph c shall apply.
School districts which receive an apportionment under this paragraph
shall not be eligible for an apportionment under paragraph c or e of
this subdivision.
 g. Whenever a school district is dissolved and portions of such former
district are added to more than one school district, each such school
district to which territory is added shall in the first year only in
which such district educates pupils from such former district be
entitled to an additional apportionment under the provisions of this
paragraph, which apportionment shall be computed in accordance with
regulations of the commissioner under one of the following
subparagraphs:
 (1) the pupils received by each such district as a result of receiving
such new territory shall be added to all of the pupil counts used to
compute operating aid for such district, or
 (2) if such receiving district is receiving aid under an option other
than formula aid for such year, the additional aid shall be computed by
dividing the operating aids base for such year by the pupil count used
for computing formula operating aid such district might otherwise have
received, and by multiplying such result by the number of additional
pupils received from such dissolved district who are then residents of
such receiving district.
 j. For school districts which reorganize on or after July first,
nineteen hundred ninety-two, the percent increase in apportionment
pursuant to paragraph c of this subdivision shall be thirty provided
that such school districts meet all other requirements of the provisions
of such paragraph c. All other requirements of paragraph c shall apply.
School districts which receive an apportionment under this paragraph
shall not be eligible for an apportionment under paragraph c, e or f of
this subdivision.
 15. Voluntary interdistrict urban-suburban transfer program aid. a. A
school district which accepts pupils from another school district in
accordance with a voluntary interdistrict urban-suburban transfer
program designed to reduce racial isolation which is approved by the
commissioner in accordance with regulations adopted by him for such
purpose shall be eligible for aid pursuant to this subdivision.
 b. Definitions. (1) "Transfer pupil count" shall mean the public
school district enrollment in the current year through such program.
 (2) "Increase in aid" shall mean the product of thirty-six and
one-half percent (0.365) and the positive remainder resulting when the
total foundation aid base is subtracted from the current year total
foundation aid as defined in subdivision four of this section.
 (3) "Aid paid per pupil" shall mean the aid computed in the current
year pursuant to subdivision four of this section divided by the total
aidable foundation pupil units for total foundation aid, computed
pursuant to paragraph g of subdivision two of this section.
 (4) "Formula pupil margin" shall mean the increase in aid divided by
aid paid per pupil.
 (5) "Excess transfer pupils" shall mean the positive remainder
resulting when the formula pupil margin is subtracted from the transfer
pupil count.
 (6) "Per pupil aid differential" shall mean the positive remainder
resulting when the aid paid per pupil for such school district is
subtracted from the aid paid per pupil for the transfer pupil's district
of residence.
 c. In addition to any other aid computed under this section, such
school district shall be eligible to receive, for each excess transfer
pupil, an amount equal to the selected foundation aid for such district
computed pursuant to subdivision four of this section.
 d. For the purposes of computing transportation aid pursuant to
subdivision seven of this section, the approved cost of the
transportation of pupils in a voluntary interdistrict transfer program
approved by the commissioner shall be used in computing approved
transportation expense.
 e. In addition to any other aid computed under this section, such
school district shall be eligible to receive an amount equal to the per
pupil aid differential multiplied by the transfer pupil count.
 16. High tax aid. Each school district shall be eligible to receive a
high tax aid apportionment in the two thousand eight--two thousand nine
school year, which shall equal the greater of (i) the sum of the tier 1
high tax aid apportionment, the tier 2 high tax aid apportionment and
the tier 3 high tax aid apportionment or (ii) the product of the
apportionment received by the school district pursuant to this
subdivision in the two thousand seven--two thousand eight school year,
multiplied by the due-minimum factor, which shall equal, for districts
with an alternate pupil wealth ratio computed pursuant to paragraph b of
subdivision three of this section that is less than two, seventy percent
(0.70), and for all other districts, fifty percent (0.50). Each school
district shall be eligible to receive a high tax aid apportionment in
the two thousand nine--two thousand ten through two thousand twelve--two
thousand thirteen school years in the amount set forth for such school
district as "HIGH TAX AID" under the heading "2008-09 BASE YEAR AIDS" in
the school aid computer listing produced by the commissioner in support
of the budget for the two thousand nine--two thousand ten school year
and entitled "SA0910". Each school district shall be eligible to
receive a high tax aid apportionment in the two thousand thirteen--two
thousand fourteen through two thousand twenty-five--two thousand
twenty-six school year equal to the greater of (1) the amount set forth
for such school district as "HIGH TAX AID" under the heading "2008-09
BASE YEAR AIDS" in the school aid computer listing produced by the
commissioner in support of the budget for the two thousand nine--two
thousand ten school year and entitled "SA0910" or (2) the amount set
forth for such school district as "HIGH TAX AID" under the heading
"2013-14 ESTIMATED AIDS" in the school aid computer listing produced by
the commissioner in support of the executive budget for the 2013-14
fiscal year and entitled "BT131-4".
 a. Definitions. (1) "Residential real property tax levy" shall mean
the school tax levy imposed on residential property, including
condominium properties, in the year commencing in the calendar year two
years prior to the calendar year in which the base year began. The final
update of such data shall be reported by the commissioner of taxation
and finance to the commissioner by February fifteenth of the base year.
The commissioner of taxation and finance shall adopt regulations as
appropriate to assure the appropriate collection, classification and
reporting of such data for the purposes of paying state aid to the
schools.
 (2) "Adjusted gross income" shall mean the adjusted gross income of a
school district as used in computation of the district's alternate pupil
wealth ratio pursuant to paragraph b of subdivision three of this
section, provided, however, that for the computation of apportionments
pursuant to this subdivision, the adjusted gross income of a central
high school district shall not equal the sum of the adjusted gross
income of each of its component school districts; and provided, further,
that commencing in calendar year two thousand twenty-two, New York state
lottery and video lottery gaming individual prizes in excess of one
million dollars that when aggregated exceeds twenty-five percent of a
district's adjusted gross income shall be excluded from a district's
adjusted gross income for the year. The commissioner of taxation and
finance shall determine the amount of this exclusion based on the annual
report of New York state lottery and video lottery gaming individual
prizes in excess of one million dollars produced by the gaming
commission pursuant to paragraph three of subdivision c of section
sixteen hundred four of the tax law.
 (3) "Tax effort ratio" shall mean the quotient of the district's
residential real property tax levy divided by the district's adjusted
gross income computed to five decimals without rounding.
 (4) "Tier 1 eligible school district" shall mean any school district
in which (i) the income wealth index, as computed pursuant to paragraph
d of subdivision three of this section, is less than two and one-half,
and (ii) the expense per pupil, as computed pursuant to paragraph f of
subdivision one of this section, is greater than the statewide average
expense per pupil as computed pursuant to subdivision five of this
section, and (iii) the tax effort ratio is greater than three and
two-tenths percent (0.032). For the two thousand eight--two thousand
nine school year, for the purpose of computing aid pursuant to this
subdivision, the statewide average expense per pupil shall be ten
thousand six hundred fifty dollars.
 (5) "Tier 2 eligible school district" shall mean any school district
in which the tax effort ratio is greater than five percent.
 (6) "Tier 3 eligible school district" shall mean any school district
in which (i) the quotient of (a) the actual valuation of the school
district divided by its total wealth pupil units computed pursuant to
subparagraph one of paragraph a of subdivision three of this section,
divided by (b) the adjusted gross income of a school district divided by
its total wealth pupil units computed pursuant to subparagraph one of
paragraph b of subdivision three of this section, is greater than four
and sixty-two hundredths (4.62), (ii) the combined wealth ratio computed
pursuant to subparagraph one of paragraph c of subdivision three of this
section is less than six, and (iii) the regional cost index determined
pursuant to subparagraph two of paragraph a of subdivision four of this
section is greater than one and three-tenths (1.3).
 b. Tier 1 high tax aid apportionment. For any tier 1 eligible school
district, the tier 1 high tax aid apportionment shall be the greater of
(1) the product of the public school district enrollment of the district
in the base year, as computed pursuant to subparagraph two of paragraph
n of subdivision one of this section, multiplied by the product of four
hundred fifty dollars multiplied by the state sharing ratio, or (2) one
hundred thousand dollars.
 c. Tier 2 high tax aid apportionment. For any tier 2 eligible school
district, the tier 2 high tax aid apportionment shall be the product of
(i) the public school district enrollment of the district in the base
year, as computed pursuant to subparagraph two of paragraph n of
subdivision one of this section, multiplied by (ii) one hundred
eighty-one thousandths (0.181) multiplied by (iii) the positive
difference, if any, of the expense per pupil, as computed pursuant to
paragraph f of subdivision one of this section, less ten thousand six
hundred sixty dollars, multiplied by (iv) an aid ratio computed by
subtracting from one the product obtained by multiplying the alternate
pupil wealth ratio computed pursuant to subparagraph one of paragraph b
of subdivision three of this section by sixty percent, provided,
however, that such aid ratio shall not be less than zero nor greater
than one, multiplied by (v) the regional cost index.
 d. Tier 3 high tax aid apportionment. For any tier 3 eligible school
district, the tier 3 high tax aid apportionment shall be the product of
(i) the public school district enrollment of the district in the base
year, as computed pursuant to subparagraph two of paragraph n of
subdivision one of this section, multiplied by (ii) fifty-two dollars,
multiplied by (iii) the regional cost index.
 17. Gap elimination adjustment. a. Notwithstanding any other provision
of law to the contrary, the commissioner shall reduce payments due to
each district for the two thousand eleven--two thousand twelve school
year and thereafter pursuant to section thirty-six hundred nine-a of
this article by an amount equal to the gap elimination adjustment
computed for such district, and such amount shall be deducted from
moneys apportioned for the purposes of payments made pursuant to such
section thirty-six hundred nine-a and if the reduction is greater than
the sum of the amounts available for such deductions, the remainder of
the reduction shall be withheld from payments scheduled to be made to
the district pursuant to section thirty-six hundred nine-a for the
following school year, and provided further that an amount equal to the
amount of such deduction shall be deemed to have been paid to the
district pursuant to this section for the school year in which such
deduction is made. The commissioner shall compute such gap elimination
adjustment and shall provide a schedule of such reduction in payments to
the state comptroller, the director of the budget, the chair of the
senate finance committee and the chair of the assembly ways and means
committee.
 b. The gap elimination adjustment for the two thousand eleven--two
thousand twelve school year shall be computed as follows, based on an
updated electronic date file containing actual and estimated data
relating to apportionments due and owing during the current school year
and projections of such apportionments for the following school year to
school districts and boards of cooperative educational services from the
general support for public schools, growth and boards of cooperative
educational services appropriations produced pursuant to paragraph b of
subdivision twenty-one of section three hundred five of this chapter on
February fifteenth of the base year. The gap elimination adjustment for
a district shall equal the lesser of the district's percentage reduction
and its TGFE check, provided, however, that in the case of a district
with a tax effort ratio greater than four percent (0.04) and a combined
wealth ratio for total foundation aid computed pursuant to subparagraph
two of paragraph c of subdivision three of this section that is less
than one and five-tenths (1.5), the gap elimination adjustment for a
district shall equal the lesser of the percentage reduction, the TGFE
check and the tax effort reduction, and further provided that in the
case of a school district, other than a city school district of a city
having a population in excess of one hundred twenty-five thousand, with
(A) an administrative efficiency ratio of less than one and eight-tenths
percent (0.018) and (B) an administrative expense per pupil of less than
three hundred forty-eight dollars ($348), the gap elimination adjustment
shall be reduced by an amount equal to the administrative efficiency
restoration, and further provided that, where applicable, the gap
elimination adjustment shall be reduced by an amount equal to the sum of
the needs-based restoration plus the low wealth-high tax effort
restoration plus the enrollment adjustment award.
 (i) The percentage reduction shall be the sum of (A) the product of
the total aid for adjustment, multiplied by six and four-tenths percent
(0.064), and (B) the product of four thousand four hundred dollars
($4,400) multiplied by the reduction factor, multiplied by the public
school district enrollment for the base year computed pursuant to
subparagraph two of paragraph n of subdivision one of this section,
provided, however, that such percentage reduction shall not be less than
the product of nine and one-half percent (0.095) multiplied by such
total aid for adjustment, and not more than the product of twenty-one
and four-tenths percent (0.214) multiplied by such total aid for
adjustment.
 (ii) The tax effort reduction shall be the product of the total aid
for adjustment, multiplied by the quotient of twenty-three percent
(0.23) divided by the quotient of the tax effort ratio computed pursuant
to subparagraph three of paragraph a of subdivision sixteen of this
section divided by four and two hundred forty-seven thousandths percent
(0.04247), provided, however, that such tax effort reduction shall not
be less than the product of thirteen percent (0.13) multiplied by such
total aid for adjustment, and not more than the product of twenty-three
percent (0.23) multiplied by such total aid for adjustment.
 (iii) The TGFE check shall be the product of the TGFE percentage and
the total general fund expenditures of such district in the base year.
 (iv) The administrative efficiency restoration shall be the product of
seventy-five dollars ($75), multiplied by the state sharing ratio,
multiplied by the total aidable foundation pupil units computed pursuant
to paragraph g of subdivision two of this section for the purposes of
computing total foundation aid.
 (v) The needs-based restoration shall be the sum of (A) the product of
the needs-based grant, multiplied by the public school district
enrollment for the base year computed pursuant to subparagraph two of
paragraph n of subdivision one of such section thirty-six hundred two of
this part, plus (B) in the case of any district for which the quotient
of the Limited English proficient count for the base year computed
pursuant to paragraph o of subdivision one of this section divided by
the public school district enrollment for the base year computed
pursuant to subparagraph two of paragraph n of subdivision one of this
section, exceeds thirteen percent (0.13), the product of the total aid
for adjustment multiplied by seventy-five hundredths of a percent
(0.0075).
 (vi) The low wealth-high tax effort restoration shall be, for any
school district with a tax effort ratio greater than six percent (0.06)
and a combined wealth ratio for total foundation aid that is less than
seven-tenths (0.7), the product of one hundred dollars ($100.00)
multiplied by the public school district enrollment for the base year
computed pursuant to subparagraph two of paragraph n of subdivision one
of this section.
 (vii) The enrollment adjustment award shall be the product of five
hundred dollars ($500.00) multiplied by the enrollment increase for any
eligible school district. An eligible school district shall be a school
district (A) with a combined wealth ratio for total foundation aid less
than three (3.0) and an enrollment increase greater than or equal to
forty-five, where, (B) for such school district, either the enrollment
increase is greater than one percent (0.01) of the public school
district enrollment for the base year or the combined wealth ratio for
total foundation aid is less than two (2.0). The enrollment increase
shall be as the positive difference of the estimated public school
district enrollment for the current year computed pursuant to
subparagraph two of paragraph n of subdivision one of this section less
the public school district enrollment for the base year computed
pursuant to subparagraph two of paragraph n of subdivision one of this
section.
 (viii) For the purposes of such computation, (A) "total aid for
adjustment" shall mean the sum of the amounts set forth for each school
district as "FOUNDATION AID", "FULL DAY K CONVERSION", BOCES + SPECIAL
SERVICES", "HIGH COST EXCESS COST", "PRIVATE EXCESS COST", "HARDWARE &
TECHNOLOGY", "SOFTWARE, LIBRARY, TEXTBOOK", "TRANSPORTATION INCL
SUMMER", "OPERATING REORG INCENTIVE", "CHARTER SCHOOL TRANSITIONAL",
"ACADEMIC ENHANCEMENT", "HIGH TAX AID" AND "SUPPLEMENTAL PUB EXCESS
COST" under the heading "2011-12 ESTIMATED AIDS" in the school aid
computer listing produced by the commissioner in support of the
executive budget proposal for the two thousand eleven--two thousand
twelve school year;
 (B) "the state sharing ratio" shall mean the state sharing ratio
computed for total foundation aid computed pursuant to paragraph g of
subdivision three of this section, but not less than ten percent (0.10);
and
 (C) "reduction factor" shall mean the product of the positive
remainder of one less the three-year average free and reduced price
lunch percent computed pursuant to subparagraph (ii) of paragraph p of
subdivision one of this section, multiplied by the combined wealth ratio
for total foundation aid computed pursuant to subparagraph two of
paragraph c of subdivision three of section thirty-six hundred two of
this part; and
 (D) "needs-based grant" shall mean, (1) in the case of a district
determined to be a high need school district pursuant to clause (c) of
subparagraph two of paragraph c of subdivision six of this section for
the school aid computer listing produced by the commissioner in support
of the enacted budget for the two thousand seven--two thousand eight
school year and entitled "SA0708", having a need-resource category of
three or four, sixty-one dollars ($61.00), and (2) in the case of a
district determined to be an average need school district pursuant to
clause (c) of subparagraph two of paragraph c of subdivision six of this
section for the school aid computer listing produced by the commissioner
in support of the enacted budget for the two thousand seven--two
thousand eight school year and entitled "SA0708", having a need-resource
category of five, fifty-four dollars ($54.00).
 (E) "administrative efficiency ratio" shall mean the quotient of the
sum of the expenditures related to the board of education, including
expenditures for the board of education, the district clerk's office,
the district meeting, auditing service, the treasurer's office, the tax
collector's office, legal services and the school census, plus
expenditures for central administration, including expenditures for the
chief school officer, the business office, the purchasing office, the
personnel office, the records management officer, public information and
services, fees for fiscal agents and undistributed indirect costs,
divided by the total expenditures charged by a district to the general,
debt service, and special aid funds, excluding transfers from the
general fund to the debt service and special aid funds, based on
expenditures reported by the district for the school year two years
prior to the base year, based on data on file for an electronic data
file used to produce the school aid computer listing produced by the
commissioner in support of the executive budget request; and
 (F) "administrative expense per pupil" shall mean the quotient of the
sum of the expenditures related to the board of education, including
expenditures for the board of education, the district clerk's office,
the district meeting, auditing service, the treasurer's office, the tax
collector's office, legal services and the school census, plus
expenditures for central administration, including expenditures for the
chief school officer, the business office, the purchasing office, the
personnel office, the records management officer, public information and
services, fees for fiscal agents and undistributed indirect costs,
charged by a district to the general, debt service, and special aid
funds, based on expenditures reported by the district for the school
year two years prior to the base year, divided by the public school
district enrollment for the base year computed pursuant to subparagraph
two of paragraph n of subdivision one of this section based on data on
file for an electronic data file used to produce the school aid computer
listing produced by the commissioner in support of the executive budget
request; and
 (G) "TGFE percentage" shall mean,
 (1) in the case of a district determined to be a high-need school
district pursuant to clause (c) of subparagraph two of paragraph c of
subdivision six of this section for the school aid computer listing
produced by the commissioner in support of the enacted budget for the
two thousand seven--two thousand eight school year and entitled
"SA0708",
 (a) in the case of a city school district in a city with a population
in excess of one million inhabitants, four and five hundred thirty-seven
thousandths percent (0.04537),
 (b) in the case of a city school district in a city with a population
of more than two hundred fifty thousand inhabitants and less than one
million inhabitants according to the two thousand federal census, four
and one-tenth percent (0.041),
 (c) in the case of a city school district in a city with a population
of more than two hundred ten thousand inhabitants and less than two
hundred fifty thousand inhabitants according to the two thousand federal
census, four and thirteen hundredths percent (0.0413),
 (d) in the case of a city school district in a city with a population
of more than one hundred seventy thousand inhabitants and less than two
hundred ten thousand inhabitants according to the two thousand federal
census, five and ninety-seven hundredths percent (0.0597),
 (e) in the case of a city school district in a city with a population
of more than one hundred thousand inhabitants and less than one hundred
seventy thousand inhabitants according to the two thousand federal
census, five and fifty-three hundredths percent (0.0553),
 (f) in the case of any other such school district which has a
three-year average free and reduced price lunch percent greater than
seventy-five percent (0.75) and which has an administrative efficiency
ratio less than one and fifty-five hundredths percent (0.0155), four and
nine hundredths percent (0.0409), and
 (g) for all other such school districts, six and eight-tenths percent
(0.068), or
 (2) in the case of all other school districts, eleven percent (0.11).
 d. The gap elimination adjustment restoration amount for the two
thousand twelve--two thousand thirteen school year for a school district
shall be computed based on data on file with the commissioner and in the
database used by the commissioner to produce an updated electronic data
file in support of the enacted budget for the two thousand twelve--two
thousand thirteen state fiscal year, and shall equal the sum of (i) the
greater of:
 (A) the product of (1) the product of the extraordinary needs index
multiplied by two hundred twenty-three dollars and eighty cents,
computed to two decimal places without rounding, multiplied by (2) the
state sharing ratio computed pursuant to paragraph g of subdivision
three of this section multiplied by (3) the public school district
enrollment for the base year, calculated pursuant to subparagraph two of
paragraph n of subdivision one of this section, where the extraordinary
needs index shall be the quotient of the extraordinary needs percent for
the district computed pursuant to paragraph w of subdivision one of this
section divided by forty-eight hundredths; or
 (B) for any district with a GEA/TGFE ratio greater than one, where the
GEA/TGFE ratio shall be the quotient of the gap elimination adjustment
for the two thousand eleven--two thousand twelve school year for the
district divided by the total general fund expenditures of such district
in the base year, divided by the quotient of the statewide total gap
elimination adjustment for the two thousand eleven--two thousand twelve
school year divided by total general fund expenditures in the base year,
the product of (1) the product of the GEA/TGFE ratio multiplied by
ninety dollars, computed to two decimal places without rounding,
multiplied by (2) the state sharing ratio computed pursuant to paragraph
g of subdivision three of this section multiplied by (3) the public
school district enrollment for the base year, calculated pursuant to
subparagraph two of paragraph n of subdivision one of this section; or
 (C) the product of two and nine hundred fifty-six one-thousandths of a
percent (0.02956) multiplied by the gap elimination adjustment for the
two thousand eleven--two thousand twelve school year; or
 (D) the product of (1) the positive difference, if any, of one and
thirty-seven one-hundredths (1.37) minus the product of the combined
wealth ratio computed pursuant to subparagraph one of paragraph c of
subdivision three of this section multiplied by one and one-half (1.5),
but not more than one, multiplied by (2) the public school district
enrollment for the base year, calculated pursuant to subparagraph two of
paragraph n of subdivision one of this section, multiplied by (3) four
hundred seventy-three dollars and seventy cents; or
 (E) for any district with a tax effort ratio computed pursuant to
subparagraph three of paragraph a of subdivision sixteen of this section
that is greater than four and four-tenths (4.4) and a combined wealth
ratio computed pursuant to subparagraph one of paragraph c of
subdivision three of this section that is less than one and one-half
(1.5), the product of (1) the state sharing ratio computed pursuant to
paragraph g of subdivision three of this section multiplied by (2) the
public school district enrollment for the base year, calculated pursuant
to subparagraph two of paragraph n of subdivision one of this section,
multiplied by (3) three hundred nine dollars and thirty cents;
but shall be no greater than the product of twenty-five percent and the
gap elimination adjustment for the two thousand eleven--two thousand
twelve school year for the district, and (ii) the Limited English
proficiency restoration which shall be apportioned to city school
districts of cities with a population in excess of one hundred
twenty-five thousand and less than one million. For any such city school
district with a limited English proficiency ratio greater than or equal
to four percent and less than five percent, the limited English
proficiency restoration shall equal the product of the limited English
proficiency restoration base multiplied by seven tenths. For any such
city school district with a limited English proficiency ratio greater
than or equal to five percent, the limited English proficiency
restoration shall equal the product of the limited English proficiency
restoration base multiplied by two and two tenths. For any such city
school district with a limited English proficiency ratio less than four
percent, the limited English proficiency restoration shall equal the
product of the limited English proficiency restoration base multiplied
by one and seventy-five hundredths.
 (A) for the purposes of computations pursuant to this subparagraph (1)
"limited English proficiency ratio" shall mean the quotient of (a) the
product of the limited English proficiency count computed pursuant to
paragraph o of subdivision one of this section multiplied by fifty
percent, divided by (b) public school district enrollment for the base
year computed pursuant to subparagraph two of paragraph n of subdivision
one of this section;
 (2) "limited English proficiency restoration base" shall mean the
product of the amount set forth for such school district as "TOTAL"
under the heading "2011-12 BASE YEAR AIDS" in the school aid computer
listing produced by the commissioner in support of the enacted budget
for the 2012-13 school year and entitled "SA121-3" multiplied by eleven
hundredths of one percent.
 (e) The gap elimination adjustment restoration amount for the two
thousand thirteen--two thousand fourteen school year for a school
district shall be computed based on data on file with the commissioner
and in the database used by the commissioner to produce an updated
electronic data file in support of the enacted budget for the two
thousand thirteen--two thousand fourteen state fiscal year end entitled
"SA131-4" and shall equal the greater of one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000) or the sum of:
 (i) the "Tier A restoration" which shall mean the amount set forth for
such school district as "GEA RESTORATION" under the heading "2013-14
ESTIMATED AIDS" in the school aid computer listing produced by the
commissioner in support of the executive budget request submitted for
the two thousand thirteen--two thousand fourteen state fiscal year and
entitled "BT131-4"; and
 (ii) the "Tier B restoration" which shall mean for a district with (1)
a combined wealth ratio of less than one and seven-tenths (1.7) and (2)
an enrollment per square mile which shall be the quotient, computed to
two decimals without rounding, of the public school enrollment of the
school district on the date enrollment was counted in accordance with
subdivision one of this section for the base year divided by the square
miles of the district, as determined by the commissioner, of less than
one hundred and seventy and (3) a designation as high need or average
need pursuant to clause (c) of subparagraph two of paragraph c of
subdivision six of this section for the school aid computer listing
produced by the commissioner in support of the enacted budget for the
two thousand seven--two thousand eight school year and entitled
"SA0708", or in the case of a reorganized district that had a
predecessor district that was so designated and (4) a tier A restoration
which equals less than twenty and seven-tenths percent (0.207) of the
gap elimination adjustment for the base year, the positive difference if
any, of the product of twenty and seven-tenths percent (0.207)
multiplied by the gap elimination adjustment for the base year minus the
tier A restoration; and
 (iii) the "Tier C restoration" which shall mean for a district for
which the sum of the tier A restoration and the tier B restoration is
less than the product of the gap elimination adjustment for the base
year multiplied by six percent (0.06), the positive difference of the
product of the gap elimination adjustment for the base year multiplied
by six percent (0.06) minus the sum of the tier A restoration and the
tier B restoration; and
 (iv) the "Tier D restoration" which shall mean for school districts
that were: (1) designated as low or average need pursuant to clause (c)
of subparagraph two of paragraph c of subdivision six of this section
for the school aid computer listing produced by the commissioner in
support of the enacted budget for the two thousand seven--two thousand
eight school year and entitled "SA0708", or in the case of a reorganized
district that had a predecessor district that was so designated and (2)
designated as high need pursuant to the regulations of the commissioner
in the most recently available study included in the school aid computer
listing produced by the commissioner in support of the enacted budget
for the two thousand thirteen--two thousand fourteen state fiscal year
and entitled "SA131-4" known as the 2008 need resource capacity category
code, the product of (a) the positive difference, if any, of the gap
elimination adjustment for such district for the two thousand
eleven--two thousand twelve school year minus the product of six and
eight tenths percent (0.068) multiplied by the total general fund
expenditures of such district for the two thousand ten--two thousand
eleven school year, multiplied by (b) thirty-five hundredths (0.35); and
 (v) the "Tier E restoration" which shall mean for districts with (1) a
quotient of the positive difference of the gap elimination adjustment
for the year prior to the base year minus the gap elimination adjustment
for the base year divided by the gap elimination adjustment for the year
prior to the base year is less than seven and five-tenths percent
(0.075) and (2) a combined wealth ratio of less than one and one-tenth
(1.10), the product of two and five-tenths percent (0.025) multiplied by
the gap elimination adjustment for the base year; and
 (vi) the "Tier F restoration" which shall mean for any district (1)
designated as high need pursuant to clause (c) of subparagraph two of
paragraph c of subdivision six of this section for the school aid
computer listing produced by the commissioner in support of the enacted
budget for the two thousand seven--two thousand eight school year and
entitled "SA0708", or in the case of a reorganized district that had a
predecessor district that was so designated, with (2) a GEA/TGFE ratio
greater than four and ninety-one hundredths percent (.0491), where the
GEA/TGFE ratio shall be the quotient of the gap elimination adjustment
for the base year for the district divided by the total general fund
expenditures of such district in the base year, the product of fifteen
dollars ($15.00), multiplied by the base year public school district
enrollment, as computed pursuant to paragraph n of subdivision one of
this section, but not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000);
and
 (vii) the "Tier G restoration" which shall mean for a city school
district of a city having a population in excess of one hundred
twenty-five thousand and less than one hundred and sixty thousand and
for city school districts of cities with populations in excess of two
hundred and five thousand and less than three hundred thousand, the
product of ten dollars ($10.00) multiplied by the base year public
school district enrollment, as computed pursuant to paragraph n of
subdivision one of this section and for a city school district of a city
having a population in excess of one hundred sixty thousand and below
two hundred thousand the product of eight dollars ($8.00) multiplied by
the base year public school district enrollment, as computed pursuant to
paragraph n of subdivision one of this section and for a city school
district of a city having a population of one million or more, the
product of forty-two dollars and two cents ($42.02), multiplied by the
base year public school district enrollment, as computed pursuant to
paragraph n of subdivision one of this section; and
 (viii) the "Tier H restoration" which shall mean for districts other
than for city school districts of cities having populations of one
hundred and twenty-five thousand or more, the product of the positive
difference of one and forty-three hundredths (1.43) minus such
district's regional cost index pursuant to subdivision four of this
section, multiplied by five, multiplied by the three-year average free
and reduced price lunch percent, multiplied by one hundred dollars
($100.00) multiplied by the base year public school district enrollment,
as computed pursuant to paragraph n of subdivision one of this section;
and
 (ix) the "Tier I restoration" which shall mean for any district with a
combined wealth ratio greater than one and one-tenth (1.1) and a
three-year average free and reduced price lunch percent greater than
six-tenths (0.6), the product of one hundred and fifty dollars ($150.00)
multiplied by the base year public school district enrollment, as
computed pursuant to paragraph n of subdivision one of this section; and
 (x) the "Tier J restoration" which shall mean for a district with a
combined wealth ratio less than one and one-tenths (1.1), the product of
(a) two hundred dollars ($200.00) multiplied by (b) the positive
difference, if any, of the base year public school district enrollment
less the public school district enrollment for the year four years prior
to the base year, as computed pursuant to paragraph n of subdivision one
of this section;
 Provided further, notwithstanding any portion of this paragraph to the
contrary, that a district's gap elimination adjustment restoration for
the two thousand thirteen--two thousand fourteen school year shall not
exceed the product of forty-three percent (0.43) and the gap elimination
adjustment for the base year for the district.
 (f) The gap elimination adjustment restoration amount for the two
thousand fourteen--two thousand fifteen school year for a school
district shall be computed based on data on file with the commissioner
and in the database used by the commissioner to produce an updated
electronic data file in support of the enacted budget for the two
thousand fourteen--two thousand fifteen state fiscal year and entitled
"SA141-5" and shall equal the greater of:
 (i) the product of fourteen and thirteen hundredths percent (0.1413)
multiplied by the gap elimination adjustment for the base year or;
 (ii) the positive difference of (a) the product of twenty-nine percent
(0.29) multiplied by the absolute value of the amount set forth for such
school district as "GAP ELIMINATION ADJUSTMENT" under the heading
"2011-12 ESTIMATED AIDS" in the school aid computer listing produced by
the commissioner in support of the executive budget request submitted
for the two thousand eleven--two thousand twelve state fiscal year and
entitled "BT111-2" minus (b) the positive difference of the absolute
value of the amount set forth for such school district as "GAP
ELIMINATION ADJUSTMENT" under the heading "2011-12 ESTIMATED AIDS" in
the school aid computer listing produced by the commissioner in support
of the executive budget request submitted for the two thousand
eleven--two thousand twelve state fiscal year and entitled "BT111-2"
minus the gap elimination adjustment for the base year or;
 (iii) seventy thousand dollars ($70,000) or;
 (iv) the sum of:
 (A) the product of the FRPL restoration amount multiplied by the base
year public school district enrollment as computed pursuant to
subparagraph two of paragraph n of subdivision one of this section
multiplied by the three-year average free and reduced price lunch
percent, provided further, for the purposes of this paragraph the FRPL
restoration amount shall equal (1) for a city school district of a city
having a population in excess of one hundred twenty-five thousand and
less than one million, five dollars ($5.00) or (2) for a city school
district of a city having a population in excess of one million, one
hundred four dollars and forty cents ($104.40) or (3) for all other
school districts forty-three dollars ($43.00); and
 (B) for a school district with (1) a three-year average free and
reduced price lunch percent greater than sixty-five percent (0.65) and
(2) base year public school district enrollment as computed pursuant to
subparagraph two of paragraph n of subdivision one of this section
greater than thirty-five hundred (3,500) and for which (3) the quotient
of (a) the positive difference, if any, of the absolute value of the
amount set forth for such school district as "GAP ELIMINATION
ADJUSTMENT" under the heading "2011-12 ESTIMATED AIDS" in the school aid
computer listing produced by the commissioner in support of the
executive budget request submitted for the two thousand eleven--two
thousand twelve state fiscal year and entitled "BT111-2" minus the
positive difference of the absolute value of the amount set forth for
such school district as "GAP ELIMINATION ADJUSTMENT" under the heading
"2014-15 ESTIMATED AIDS" in the school aid computer listing produced by
the commissioner in support of the executive budget request submitted
for the two thousand fourteen--two thousand fifteen state fiscal year
and entitled "BT141-5" divided by (b) the absolute value of the amount
set forth for such school district as "GAP ELIMINATION ADJUSTMENT" under
the heading "2011-12 ESTIMATED AIDS" in the school aid computer listing
produced by the commissioner in support to the executive budget request
submitted for the two thousand eleven--two thousand twelve state fiscal
year and entitled "BT111-2" is less than sixty percent (0.60), the
product of one hundred and forty-three dollars ($143.00) multiplied by
the base year public school district enrollment as computed pursuant to
subparagraph two of paragraph n of subdivision one of this section; and
 (C) for a school district other than a city school district of a city
having a population in excess of one million for which the quotient of
(a) the positive difference, if any, of the limited English proficient
count for the base year minus the limited English proficient count for
the two thousand eight--two thousand nine school year divided by (b) the
limited English proficient count for the two thousand eight--two
thousand nine school year is greater than five percent (0.05), the
product of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500) multiplied by the
positive difference, if any of the limited English proficient count for
the base year minus the limited English proficient count for the two
thousand eight--two thousand nine school year multiplied by such
districts extraordinary needs percent as computed pursuant to paragraph
w of subdivision one of this section; and
 (D) for a school district for which the quotient of the number of
persons aged five to seventeen within the school district, based on the
most recent decennial census as tabulated by the National Center on
Education Statistics, who were enrolled in public schools and whose
families had incomes below the poverty level, divided by the total
number of person aged five to seventeen within the school district,
based on such decennial census, who were enrolled in public schools,
computed to four decimals without rounding is greater than eighteen
percent (0.18), the product of four hundred and ninety-five dollars
($495) multiplied by the positive difference, if any of the base year
public school district enrollment as computed pursuant to subparagraph
two of paragraph n of subdivision one of this section minus the two
thousand ten--two thousand eleven public school district enrollment, as
computed pursuant to subparagraph two of paragraph n of subdivision one
of this section; and
 (E) for a school district for which (1) the quotient of the two
thousand thirteen--two thousand fourteen gap elimination adjustment
divided by the total general fund expenditures for such district for the
base year exceeds five percent (0.05), the product of ninety dollars
($90.00) multiplied by the base year public school district enrollment,
as computed pursuant to paragraph n of subdivision one of this section;
and
 (F) for school districts for which the quotient of non public school
district enrollment divided by the sum of the non public school district
enrollment and the base year public school district enrollment as
computed pursuant to subparagraph two of paragraph n of subdivision one
of this section is greater than twenty-five hundredths (0.25), the
product of (1) the quotient of non public school district enrollment
divided by the sum of the non public school district enrollment and the
base year public school district enrollment as computed pursuant to
subparagraph two of paragraph n of subdivision one of this section
multiplied by (2) the extraordinary needs percent as computed pursuant
to paragraph w of subdivision one of this section multiplied by (3) the
base year public school district enrollment as computed pursuant to
subparagraph two of paragraph n of subdivision one of this section
multiplied by (4) three hundred and fifty dollars ($350.00); and
 (G) for school districts that: (1) were designated as average need
pursuant to clause (c) of subparagraph two of paragraph c of subdivision
six of this section for the school aid computer listing produced by the
commissioner in support of the enacted budget for the two thousand
seven--two thousand eight school year and entitled "SA0708" and (2) a
combined wealth ratio computed pursuant to subparagraph one of paragraph
c of subdivision three of this section of less than one (1.0) or for a
school district designated as high need urban-suburban pursuant to
clause (c) of subparagraph two of paragraph c of subdivision six of this
section for the school aid computer listing produced by the commissioner
in support of the enacted budget for the two thousand seven--two
thousand eight school year and entitled "SA0708", the product of
fifty-one dollars ($51.00) multiplied by the base year public school
district enrollment as computed pursuant to subparagraph two of
paragraph n of subdivision one of this section; and
 (H) for a school district designated as rural high need pursuant to
clause (c) of subparagraph two of paragraph c of subdivision six of this
section for the school aid computer listing produced by the commissioner
in support of the enacted budget for the two thousand seven--two
thousand eight school year and entitled "SA0708", the product of two
hundred dollars ($200.00) multiplied by the base year public school
district enrollment as computed pursuant to subparagraph two of
paragraph n of subdivision one of this section; and
 (I) for school districts that were designated as small city school
districts or central school districts whose boundaries include a portion
of a small city for the school aid computer listing produced by the
commissioner in support of the enacted budget for the two thousand
fourteen--two thousand fifteen school year and entitled "SA1415" the
product of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) multiplied by the base year
public school district enrollment as computed pursuant to subparagraph
two of paragraph n of subdivision one of this section and for school
districts for which the quotient, computed to two decimals without
rounding, of the public school enrollment of the school district on the
date enrollment was counted in accordance with this subdivision for the
base year divided by the square miles of the district, as determined by
the commissioner is less than two hundred and fifty (250), the product
of sixteen dollars ($16.00) multiplied by the base year public school
district enrollment as computed pursuant to subparagraph two of
paragraph n of subdivision one of this section; and
 (J) For a district for which (1) the quotient, computed to two
decimals without rounding, of the public school enrollment of the school
district on the date enrollment was counted in accordance with this
subdivision for the base year divided by the square miles of the
district, as determined by the commissioner is greater than eight
hundred (800) and (2) the tax effort ratio, as defined in subdivision
sixteen of this section is greater than four and (3) the base year
public school district enrollment as computed pursuant to subparagraph
two of paragraph n of subdivision one of this section is greater than
the two thousand ten--two thousand eleven public school district
enrollment as computed pursuant to subparagraph two of paragraph n of
subdivision one of this section, the product of two hundred and fifty
dollars ($250.00) multiplied by the base year public school district
enrollment as computed pursuant to subparagraph two of paragraph n of
subdivision one of this section, provided that such amount shall not
exceed one million dollars ($1,000,000); and
 (K) For school districts that were: (1) designated as low or average
need pursuant to clause (c) of subparagraph two of paragraph c of
subdivision six of this section for the school aid computer listing
produced by the commissioner in support of the enacted budget for the
two thousand seven--two thousand eight school year and entitled
"SA0708", or in the case of a reorganized district that had a
predecessor district that was so designated and (2) designated as high
need pursuant to the regulations of the commissioner in the most
recently available study included in the school aid computer listing
produced by the commissioner in support of the enacted budget for the
two thousand thirteen--two thousand fourteen state fiscal year and
entitled "SA131-4" known as the 2008 need resource capacity category
code, the product of (a) the positive difference, if any, of the
absolute value of the amount set forth for such school district as "GAP
ELIMINATION ADJUSTMENT" under the heading "2011-12 ESTIMATED AIDS" in
the school aid computer listing produced by the commissioner in support
of the executive budget request submitted for the two thousand
eleven--two thousand twelve state fiscal year and entitled "BT111-2"
minus the product of six and eight tenths percent (0.068) multiplied by
the total general fund expenditures of such district for the two
thousand ten--two thousand eleven school year, multiplied by (b)
fifty-five hundredths (0.55); and
 (L) the amount set forth for such school district as "GEA RESTORATION"
under the heading "2014-15 ESTIMATED AIDS" in the school aid computer
listing produced by the commissioner in support of the executive budget
request submitted for the two thousand fourteen--two thousand fifteen
state fiscal year and entitled "BT141-5".
 Provided further, notwithstanding any provision of this paragraph to
the contrary, that a district's gap elimination adjustment restoration
for the two thousand fourteen--two thousand fifteen school year shall
not exceed the product of seventy percent (0.70) and the gap elimination
adjustment for the base year for the district.
 g. The gap elimination adjustment restoration amount for the two
thousand fifteen--two thousand sixteen school year for a school district
shall be computed based on data on file with the commissioner and in the
database used by the commissioner to produce an updated electronic data
file in support of the enacted budget for the two thousand fifteen--two
thousand sixteen state fiscal year and entitled "SA151-6" and shall
equal the sum of tiers one through four plus the sum of minimums A, B,
and C.
 (i) "Tier one" shall equal the product of thirty dollars ($30.00)
multiplied by the extraordinary needs count computed pursuant to
paragraph s of subdivision one of this section multiplied by the
concentration factor, where the concentration factor shall be the sum of
one plus the quotient arrived at when dividing (1) the difference of the
extraordinary needs percent computed pursuant to paragraph w of
subdivision one of this section less four-tenths (0.4) divided by (2)
nine hundred two thousandths (0.902), provided, however, that such
concentration factor shall not be less than one.
 (ii) "Tier two" shall be the product, for districts with a change in
enrollment of greater than two percent, of six hundred dollars
($600.00), and for all other districts with a change in enrollment
greater than zero but less than two percent, five hundred dollars
($500.00) multiplied by the change in enrollment, where the change in
enrollment shall be the positive difference, if any, of the base year
public school district enrollment as computed pursuant to subparagraph
two of paragraph n of subdivision one of this section for the base year
less public school district enrollment for the two thousand
thirteen--two thousand fourteen school year.
 (iii) "Tier three" shall be the product of twenty-two dollars and
fifty cents ($22.50) multiplied by the free and reduced price lunch
percent computed pursuant to paragraph p of subdivision one of this
section multiplied by the base year public school district enrollment as
computed pursuant to subparagraph two of paragraph n of subdivision one
of this section for the base year.
 (iv) "Tier four" shall be the product of three hundred dollars
($300.00) multiplied by the limited English proficient count computed
pursuant to paragraph o of subdivision one of this section multiplied by
the extraordinary needs percent computed pursuant to paragraph w of
subdivision one of this section multiplied by the sum of one and the LEP
growth percent, where the LEP growth percent shall be the quotient
arrived at by dividing the positive difference, if any, of the limited
English proficient count for the base year less such count for the year
prior to the base year divided by such count for the year prior to the
base year.
 (v) "Minimum A" shall be the minimum A percent multiplied by the gap
elimination adjustment for the base year, where the minimum A percent
shall be the greater of (1) for a city school district of a city having
a population of one million or more twenty-nine and forty-five
hundredths percent (0.2945), or (2) for a city school district of a city
having a population of one hundred twenty-five thousand or more but less
than one million and a combined wealth ratio of less than five-tenths
(0.5) eighty percent (0.80), or (3) for all other districts with a
combined wealth ratio less than one and eight-tenths (1.8) thirty-five
and six-tenths percent (0.356), or (4) for all other districts thirty
percent (0.30).
 (vi) "Minimum B" shall be for districts designated as average need
pursuant to clause (c) of subparagraph two of paragraph c of subdivision
six of this section for the school aid computer listing produced by the
commissioner in support of the enacted budget for the two thousand
seven--two thousand eight school year and entitled "SA0708" and with a
combined wealth ratio of less than seventy-eight hundredths (0.78),
twenty-six and fifteen hundredths percent (0.2615) multiplied by the gap
elimination adjustment for the base year.
 (vii) "Minimum C" shall be for districts designated as high need
pursuant to clause (c) of subparagraph two of paragraph c of subdivision
six of this section for the school aid computer listing produced by the
commissioner in support of the enacted budget for the two thousand
seven--two thousand eight school year and entitled "SA0708", other than
those city school districts of a city having a population of one hundred
twenty-five thousand or more, forty-three percent (0.43) multiplied by
the gap elimination adjustment for the base year.
 (viii) Provided however, that no GEA restoration shall be more than
the product of ninety-eight percent (0.98) multiplied by the gap
elimination adjustment for the base year.
 h. The gap elimination adjustment for the two thousand sixteen--two
thousand seventeen school year and thereafter shall equal zero.
 18. Allocable growth amount apportionment. Such amount shall be
apportioned for a school year pursuant to a chapter of the laws of New
York enacted for the state fiscal year in which such school year
commences, and shall be allocated to purposes including but not limited
to competitive grant awards made pursuant to subdivisions five and six
of section thirty-six hundred forty-one of this article, the foundation
aid phase-in amount or other foundation aid increase allocated pursuant
to subdivision four of this section and the gap elimination adjustment
restoration amount apportioned pursuant to subdivision seventeen of this
section. In the event that a chapter of the laws of New York enacted for
the state fiscal year in which such school year commences is not
enacted, the allocations in support of subdivisions five and six of
section thirty-six hundred forty-one of this article shall equal the
allocations in support of such awards in the base year, and the
apportionments pursuant to subdivisions four and seventeen of this
section for the current year shall equal the apportionments for such
subdivisions four and seventeen for the base year.
 19. Pandemic adjustment. a. Notwithstanding any other provision of law
to the contrary, the commissioner shall reduce payments due to each
district for the two thousand twenty--two thousand twenty-one school
year pursuant to section thirty-six hundred nine-a of this part by an
amount equal to the pandemic adjustment computed for such district, and
provided further that an amount equal to the amount of such deduction
shall be deemed to have been paid to the district pursuant to this
section for the school year in which such deduction is made. The
commissioner shall compute such pandemic adjustment in each electronic
data file produced pursuant to subdivision twenty-one of section three
hundred five of this chapter, based on the following information: (i)
ninety-nine and one-half percent of the funds from the elementary and
secondary emergency relief fund that are available for school districts
pursuant to the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act of
2020, and (ii) the governor's emergency relief fund pursuant to such
act, provided that a schedule of such amounts shall be approved by the
director of the budget, and provided further the commissioner shall
provide a schedule of such pandemic adjustment to the state comptroller,
the director of the budget, the chair of the senate finance committee,
and the chair of the assembly ways and means committee.
 b. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of law to the contrary,
where additional federal and state revenues are apportioned to school
districts with a pandemic adjustment reduction pursuant to this
subdivision, such additional federal and state revenues shall be
apportioned to such school district in an amount equal to the pandemic
adjustment as computed herein, unless otherwise specified by federal
law.
 c. The positive value of the pandemic adjustment payment reduction
shall not exceed the sum of moneys apportioned pursuant to sections
seven hundred one, seven hundred eleven, seven hundred fifty-one, seven
hundred fifty-three, thirty-six hundred nine-a, thirty-six hundred
nine-b, thirty-six hundred nine-d, thirty-six hundred nine-f, and
thirty-six hundred nine-h for the two thousand twenty--two thousand
twenty-one school year for any school district.
 20. Shared services aid for school districts which are not components
of a board of cooperative educational services supervisory district,
including large city school districts. Commencing with aid payable in
the nineteen hundred ninety-eight--ninety-nine school year, school
districts which are not components of a board of cooperative educational
services supervisory district, including city school districts of those
cities having populations in excess of one hundred twenty-five thousand
inhabitants that participate in, or provide, shared services for the
purpose of instructional support service as authorized by subdivision
eight-c of section nineteen hundred fifty of this chapter shall be
eligible for an additional apportionment in accordance with the
provisions of this paragraph. Within the amount appropriated for such
purpose, such districts shall be entitled to an additional apportionment
for their expenses incurred in the base year from their participation in
or provision of such shared services, in an amount equal to the amount
that would be payable for such expenses if the services were aidable
shared services under subdivision five of section nineteen hundred fifty
of this chapter; provided that in computing such aid for such city
school districts the tax rate shall be determined in the manner
prescribed in subparagraph seven of paragraph a of subdivision
thirty-one-a of this section. Such apportionment shall be paid in
accordance with section thirty-six hundred nine-a of this chapter. In
the event the appropriation for purposes of this subdivision in any year
is insufficient to pay all claims received pursuant to this subdivision,
the commissioner shall determine the percentage of the total claims
submitted that is represented by each district's claim on file with the
commissioner at the time of creation of each data file or fiscal report
required by subdivision twenty-one of section three hundred five of this
chapter and shall pay such claims based on such prorated basis among all
districts filing such claims until the appropriation is exhausted,
provided that such prorated apportionment computed and payable as of
September one of the school year immediately following the school year
for which such aid is claimed shall be deemed final and not subject to
change. For aid payable in the nineteen hundred
ninety-eight--ninety-nine school year, the aid payable pursuant to this
subdivision shall not exceed three million, five hundred thousand
dollars ($3,500,000); for the nineteen hundred ninety-nine--two thousand
school year the aid payable pursuant to this subdivision shall not
exceed ten million dollars ($10,000,000); for the two thousand--two
thousand one school year the aid payable pursuant to this subdivision
shall not exceed fifteen million dollars ($15,000,000); and for the two
thousand one--two thousand two school year and thereafter the aid
payable pursuant to this subdivision shall not exceed twenty-five
million dollars ($25,000,000).
 26-a. Aid for instructional computer technology expenses. a.
Commencing with aid payable in the nineteen hundred
ninety-eight--ninety-nine school year, the commissioner is hereby
authorized to apportion to any school district aid pursuant to this
subdivision for its approved expenditures, in excess of base year aid
received pursuant to subdivision twenty-six of this section, for the
purchase, lease-purchase and/or installation of instructional computer
technology equipment, including original purchase, lease-purchase and/or
installation of hardware and vendor-installed software for deployment in
classrooms or school libraries; or for the costs of an extended
maintenance contract for instructional computer technology equipment or
network systems for a term not to exceed the applicable period of
probable usefulness, to the extent such costs would be allowable under a
state contract; provided, however, no expenses eligible for aid pursuant
to subdivision six of this section shall be aidable pursuant to this
subdivision, and provided further, no expenses aided pursuant to this
subdivision shall be eligible for aid pursuant to subdivision twenty-six
of this section or section nineteen hundred fifty of this chapter.
 b. Aid pursuant to this subdivision shall equal the product of the
district's instructional computer technology aid ratio and approved base
year expenditures for capital outlays and/or current year expenditures
for debt service and/or current year expenditures for lease purchase for
acquisition and installation of instructional computer technology
equipment. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary,
debt service expenses or obligations due under a lease-purchase
agreement executed in a prior year for instructional computer technology
equipment pursuant to this subdivision shall be ordinary contingent
expenses.
 c. The district's instructional computer technology aid ratio shall be
the greater of (i) the district's building aid ratio selected for use in
the current year pursuant to clause (b) of subparagraph two of paragraph
c of subdivision six of this section; or (ii) the district's millage
ratio equal to one minus the quotient expressed as a decimal to three
places without rounding of eight mills divided by the tax rate of the
local district computed upon the actual valuation of taxable property,
as determined pursuant to subdivision one of this section, expressed in
mills to the nearest tenth as determined by the commissioner, provided,
however, that for a city school district in a city having a population
in excess of one hundred twenty-five thousand inhabitants the tax rate
shall be computed in the manner prescribed in subparagraph seven of
paragraph a of subdivision thirty-one-a of this section, and provided
that for a school district which is included within a central high
school district or for a central high school district, such millage
ratio shall equal one minus the quotient expressed as a decimal to three
places without rounding of three mills divided by the tax rates,
expressed in mills to the nearest tenth, of such districts, as
determined by the commissioner; or (iii) thirty-six hundredths. For the
purposes of this paragraph, the tax rate for the central high school
district shall be the amount of tax raised by the common and union free
school districts included within the central high school district for
the support of the central high school district divided by the actual
valuation of the central high school district. The tax rate for each
common or union free school district shall be the amount raised for the
support of such common or union free school district, exclusive of the
amount raised for the central high school district, divided by such
actual valuation of such common or union free school district.
 d. To be eligible for aid pursuant to this subdivision, school
districts shall develop and maintain a plan for the use of the
instructional computer technology equipment funded pursuant this
section, which shall be in a form prescribed by the commissioner and
shall include but shall not be limited to provision for maintenance and
repair of equipment and the provision of staff development in the use of
such technology. In addition, such plan may provide for the district's
participation in the universal service discount program pursuant to the
federal telecommunications act of nineteen hundred ninety-six, and the
district's participation in the federal technology literacy challenge
program, where such federal technology programs are available. In
prescribing the format for such plans, the commissioner shall assure
that to the extent possible, districts will be able to develop a single
plan that meets the requirements of this subdivision and such federal
technology programs. In addition, funds apportioned pursuant to this
subdivision shall be used in a manner consistent with the district's
long-range facilities plan and building-level, district-wide, and where
applicable, regional instructional and technology plans.
 e. Expenses for instructional computer technology equipment and
software provided through a board of cooperative educational services
pursuant to a multi-year contract entered pursuant to section nineteen
hundred fifty of this chapter shall continue to be aided under
subdivision five of section nineteen hundred fifty of this chapter for
the duration of such contract, and shall be paid in accordance with
applicable provisions of section nineteen hundred fifty of this chapter
and section thirty-six hundred nine-d of this article.
 f. In the event the appropriation for purposes of this subdivision in
any year is insufficient to pay all claims received pursuant to this
subdivision, the commissioner shall determine the percentage of the
total claims submitted that is represented by each district's claim on
file with the commissioner at the time of creation of each data file or
fiscal report required by subdivision twenty-one of section three
hundred five of this chapter and shall pay such claims based on such
prorated basis among all districts filing such claims until the
appropriation is exhausted, provided that such prorated apportionment
computed and payable as of September one of the school year immediately
following the school year for which such aid is claimed shall be deemed
final and not subject to change. For aid payable in the nineteen hundred
ninety-eight--ninety-nine school year, the aid payable pursuant to this
subdivision shall not exceed nine million dollars ($9,000,000); for the
nineteen hundred ninety-nine--two thousand school year the aid payable
pursuant to this subdivision shall not exceed twenty-five million
dollars ($25,000,000); for the two thousand--two thousand one school
year the aid payable pursuant to this subdivision shall not exceed
fifty-seven million dollars ($57,000,000); and for the two thousand
one--two thousand two school year and thereafter the aid payable
pursuant to this subdivision shall not exceed ninety-one million dollars
($91,000,000).
 41. Transitional aid for charter school payments. In addition to any
other apportionment under this section, for the two thousand seven--two
thousand eight school year and thereafter, a school district other than
a city school district in a city having a population of one million or
more shall be eligible for an apportionment in an amount equal to the
greater of the sum of paragraphs (a), (b), and (c), or paragraph (e) of
this subdivision.
 (a) the product of (i) the product of eighty percent multiplied by the
charter school basic tuition computed for such school district for the
base year pursuant to section twenty-eight hundred fifty-six of this
chapter, multiplied by (ii) the positive difference, if any, of the
number of resident pupils enrolled in the charter school in the base
year less the number of resident pupils enrolled in a charter school in
the year prior to the base year, provided, however, that a school
district shall be eligible for an apportionment pursuant to this
paragraph only if the number of its resident pupils enrolled in charter
schools in the base year exceeds two percent of the total resident
public school district enrollment of such school district in the base
year or the total general fund payments made by such district to charter
schools in the base year for resident pupils enrolled in charter schools
exceeds two percent of total general fund expenditures of such district
in the base year, plus
 (b) the product of (i) the product of sixty percent multiplied by the
charter school basic tuition computed for such school district for the
base year pursuant to section twenty-eight hundred fifty-six of this
chapter, multiplied by (ii) the positive difference, if any, of the
number of resident pupils enrolled in the charter school in the year
prior to the base year less the number of resident pupils enrolled in a
charter school in the year two years prior to the base year, provided,
however, that a school district shall be eligible for an apportionment
pursuant to this paragraph only if the number of its resident pupils
enrolled in charter schools in the year prior to the base year exceeds
two percent of the total resident public school district enrollment of
such school district in the year prior to the base year or the total
general fund payments made by such district to charter schools in the
year prior to the base year for resident pupils enrolled in charter
schools exceeds two percent of the total general fund expenditures of
such district in the year prior to the base year, plus
 (c) the product of (i) the product of forty percent multiplied by the
charter school basic tuition computed for such school district for the
base year pursuant to section twenty-eight hundred fifty-six of this
chapter, multiplied by (ii) the positive difference, if any, of the
number of resident pupils enrolled in the charter school in the year two
years prior to the base year less the number of resident pupils enrolled
in a charter school in the year three years prior to the base year,
provided, however, that a school district shall be eligible for an
apportionment pursuant to this paragraph only if the number of its
resident pupils enrolled in charter schools in the year two years prior
to the base year exceeds two percent of the total resident public school
district enrollment of such school district in the year two years prior
to the base year or the total general fund payments made by such
district to charter schools in the year two years prior to the base year
for resident pupils enrolled in charter schools exceeds two percent of
the total general fund expenditures of such district in the year two
years prior to the base year.
 (d) For purposes of this subdivision the number of pupils enrolled in
a charter school shall not include pupils enrolled in a charter school
for which the charter was approved by a charter entity contained in
paragraph a of subdivision three of section twenty-eight hundred
fifty-one of this chapter.
 (e) For school districts other than city school districts of cities
having populations of one hundred twenty-five thousand or more as of the
two thousand twenty decennial census, the product of eligible pupils
multiplied by eight-tenths (0.8) and further multiplied by charter
school basic tuition for the base year as defined pursuant to section
twenty-eight hundred fifty-six of this chapter. For purposes of this
paragraph, eligible pupils shall be equal to the positive difference, if
any, of the number of resident pupils enrolled in a charter school in
the base year less the product of two-tenths (0.2) multiplied by total
resident public school district enrollment in the base year.
 § 3602-b. Apportionment of moneys to school districts employing fewer
than eight teachers. 1. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, each
school district of the state employing fewer than eight teachers shall
receive its apportionment of public money payable during the school year
commencing July first, nineteen hundred sixty-three and during
subsequent school years pursuant to the provisions of this section. Such
apportionment shall be computed by applying the state sharing ratio of
the district computed in the same manner as provided in section
thirty-six hundred two of this article to the approved operating expense
of the school district for operating purposes and for transportation.
 a. Approved operating expense shall be for the year prior to the base
year as defined in section thirty-six hundred two of this article and
shall be determined in the same manner provided in such section,
provided, however, that the amount so approved shall not exceed the sum
of (1) four thousand five hundred dollars multiplied by the lesser of
the number of full-time teachers employed during such year prior to the
base year or seven and (2) weighted average daily attendance as defined
in section thirty-six hundred two of this article for the base year
multiplied by the sum of sixty dollars plus an amount computed by
multiplying ninety cents by such weighted average daily attendance. Any
such district employing three or more teachers shall be permitted to use
the weighted average daily attendance averaged over the three year
period immediately preceding the current year as defined in section
thirty-six hundred two of this article.
 b. Approved transportation expense shall be for the base year and
shall be determined in the same manner as provided in subdivision seven
of section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter.
 2. If the local revenue provided by any such school district in the
current year, as defined in section thirty-six hundred two of this
article, inclusive of its local nonproperty tax receipts, is less than
the amount which could be raised by a tax at the rate specified in this
section on its actual valuation as defined in such section, the
apportionment for such current year shall be reduced by the amount which
such local revenue is less than the amount which could be raised at such
rate. The rate for the school year two thousand seven--two thousand
eight and thereafter shall be the local tax factor established pursuant
to subdivision four of section thirty-six hundred two of this article.
 § 3602-c. Apportionment of moneys to school districts for the
provision of services to pupils attending nonpublic schools. 1.
Definitions. As used in this section the following terms are defined as
follows:
 a. "Services" shall mean instruction in the areas of gifted pupils,
career education and education for students with disabilities, and
counseling, psychological and social work services related to such
instruction provided during the regular school year for pupils enrolled
in a nonpublic school located in a school district, provided that such
instruction is given to pupils enrolled in the public schools of such
district.
 b. "Gifted pupils" shall mean those pupils who show evidence of high
performance capability and exceptional potential in areas such as
general intellectual ability, special academic aptitude, and outstanding
ability in visual and performing arts. Such definition shall include
those children who require educational programs or services beyond those
normally provided by the regular school program in order to realize
their full potential.
 c. "Career education" shall mean training or retraining designed to
prepare individuals who are entitled to attend the public schools of the
state without the payment of tuition pursuant to section thirty-two
hundred two of the education law for gainful employment as semi-skilled
or skilled workers or technicians or subprofessionals in recognized
occupations and in new or emerging occupations or to prepare pupils for
enrollment in advanced technical education programs, but excluding any
program to prepare pupils for employment in occupations which generally
are considered professional or which require a baccalaureate or higher
degree; such training generally being grouped within the occupational
fields of agriculture, business, distributive, health, home economics
related, trade and technical education.
 d. "Education for students with disabilities" shall mean special
educational programs designed to serve persons who meet the definition
of children with disabilities set forth in subdivision one of section
forty-four hundred one of this chapter.
 e. "Average daily attendance" shall mean the total number of
attendance days of pupils receiving services divided by the number of
days the public school was in session for each attendance period. For
each such attendance period the total number of attendance days for each
such pupil shall be determined by multiplying the number of days on
which each such pupil was in attendance by the ratio obtained by
dividing the number of class periods of each such pupil by the total
number of class periods, not to exceed five, operated by the public
school during the school day. Only pupils residing in this state shall
be included in such computation.
 * f. "School district of location" means the school district in which
the nonpublic elementary or secondary school attended by the student is
located.
 * NB Repealed June 30, 2027
 * 2. a. Boards of education of all school districts of the state shall
furnish services to students who are residents of this state and who
attend nonpublic schools located in such school districts, upon the
written request of the parent or person in parental relation of any such
student. Such a request for career education or services to gifted
students shall be filed with the board of education of the school
district in which the parent or person in parental relation of the
student resides on or before the first day of June preceding the school
year for which the request is made. In the case of education for
students with disabilities, such a request shall be filed with the
trustees or board of education of the school district of location on or
before the first of June preceding the school year for which the request
is made, or by July first, two thousand seven for the two thousand
seven--two thousand eight school year only, provided that where a
student is first identified as a student with a disability after the
first day of June preceding the school year for which the request is
made, or thirty days after the chapter of the laws of two thousand seven
which amended this paragraph, takes effect where applicable, and prior
to the first day of April of such current school year, such request
shall be submitted within thirty days after such student is first
identified. For students first identified after March first of the
current school year, any such request for education for students with
disabilities in the current school year that is submitted on or after
April first of such current school year, shall be deemed a timely
request for such services in the following school year.
 b. (1) For the purpose of obtaining education for students with
disabilities, as defined in paragraph d of subdivision one of this
section, such request shall be reviewed by the committee on special
education of the school district of location, which shall develop an
individualized education service program for the student based on the
student's individual needs in the same manner and with the same contents
as an individualized education program. The committee on special
education shall assure that special education programs and services are
made available to students with disabilities attending nonpublic schools
located within the school district on an equitable basis, as compared to
special education programs and services provided to other students with
disabilities attending public or nonpublic schools located within the
school district. Review of the recommendation of the committee on
special education may be obtained by the parent or person in parental
relation of the pupil pursuant to the provisions of section forty-four
hundred four of this chapter.
 (2) In the event an individualized education program for the two
thousand seven--two thousand eight school year is developed pursuant to
this section by the committee on special education of the student's
school district of residence prior to the effective date of this
subparagraph, with the consent of the parent or person in parental
relation, such school district shall forward such individualized
education program to the committee on special education of the school
district of location. Such individualized education program shall be
deemed to be an individualized educational services program for purposes
of this subdivision, and the school district of location shall provide
the services recommended in such individualized education program,
unless and until it is amended by its committee on special education in
the manner prescribed by law. If, prior to the effective date of this
subparagraph, a student suspected of having a disability has been
referred to the committee on special education of the student's school
district of residence the results of such evaluation, with the consent
of the parent or person in parental relation of the student, shall be
shared with the committee on special education of the school district of
location, which may adopt such evaluation as its own or conduct a new
evaluation in whole or in part.
 (3) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section to the
contrary, an individualized education program developed for the two
thousand six--two thousand seven school year shall continue to be in
full force and effect and binding on the school districts through the
end of such school year. Such individualized education program shall be
deemed an individualized educational services program for purposes of
dispute resolution.
 c. Due process complaints relating to compliance of the school
district of location with child find requirements, including evaluation
requirements, may be brought by the parent or person in parental
relation of the student pursuant to section forty-four hundred four of
this chapter.
 d. In the case of career education and education of gifted students,
the school district of residence shall contract with the school district
in which the nonpublic school attended by the pupil is located, for the
provision of services pursuant to this section.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2027
 * 2. Boards of education of all school districts of the state shall
furnish services to pupils who are residents of this state and who
attend nonpublic schools located in such school districts, upon the
written request of the parent, guardian or persons legally having
custody of any such pupil. Such a request shall be filed with the board
of education of the school district in which the parent, guardian or
persons legally having custody of the pupil resides on or before the
first day of June preceding the school year for which the request is
made; provided that, in the case of education for students with
disabilities, where a student is first identified as a student with a
disability after the first day of June preceding the school year for
which the request is made and prior to the first day of April of such
current school year or when a student with a disability establishes
residence in the school district after June first of the preceding year
and prior to April first of the current school year, such request shall
be submitted within thirty days after such student is first identified
or establishes residence in the district, as applicable. For students
first identified or establishing residence after March first of the
current school year, any such request for education for students with
disabilities in the current school year that is submitted on or after
April first of such current school year, shall be deemed a timely
request for such services in the following school year. For the purpose
of obtaining education for students with disabilities, as defined in
paragraph d of subdivision one of this section, such request shall be
reviewed by the committee on special education in accordance with the
provisions of section forty-four hundred two of this chapter. Review of
the recommendation of the committee on special education may be obtained
by the parent, guardian or persons legally having custody of the pupil
pursuant to the provisions of section forty-four hundred four of this
chapter. Such school district shall contract with the school district in
which the nonpublic school attended by the pupil is located, for the
provision of services pursuant to this section, except that in the case
of education for students with disabilities, the school district of
residence may provide such services directly or by contract with the
school district of location.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2027
 * 2-a. For the education for students with disabilities provided in
the two thousand seven--two thousand eight school year and thereafter,
to the extent required by federal law, the school district of location
of a student with a disability shall be responsible for compliance with
the requirements of paragraph ten of subsection (a) of section fourteen
hundred twelve of title twenty of the United States code, including but
not limited to, equitable provision of services, child find and
consultation requirements. The committee on special education of the
school district of location shall be responsible for evaluation and
possible identification as a student with a disability of all students
attending nonpublic schools located within the school district,
including students who are not New York residents. The school district
of location shall expend a proportionate amount of its federal funds
made available under part B of the individuals with disabilities
education act for the provision of services to students with
disabilities attending such nonpublic schools, including students who
are not New York residents, provided that such federal funds may not be
used for the cost of carrying out the child find requirement. School
districts shall obtain parental consent prior to the release of
personally identifiable information concerning a student attending a
nonpublic school from records collected or maintained pursuant to part B
of the individuals with disabilities education act between such
student's school district of residence and school district of location.
 * NB Repealed June 30, 2027
 * 2-b. The school district of location shall provide special education
programs and services to students with disabilities attending nonpublic
schools in the school district who are not New York residents to the
extent required under federal law and regulations and such students
shall not have an individual right to receive special education programs
and services pursuant to this section. The committee on special
education shall develop services plans for such students in accordance
with federal law and regulations. The provisions of subdivision two of
this section shall not apply to such students, except that due process
complaints relating to compliance of the school district of location
with child find requirements, including evaluation requirements, may be
brought by the parent or person in parental relation of the student
pursuant to section forty-four hundred four of this chapter.
 * NB Repealed June 30, 2027
 2-c. Solely for the purpose of the provision of education for students
with disabilities pursuant to this section and the computation of state
aid for such education pursuant to section thirty-six hundred two of
this article, a student in a home instruction program submitted by his
or her parent or person in parental relation for review pursuant to the
regulations of the commissioner shall be deemed to be a student enrolled
in and attending a nonpublic school eligible to receive services
pursuant to subdivision two of this section; provided that such student
is entitled to attend the public schools without payment of tuition
pursuant to subdivision one of section thirty-two hundred two of this
chapter and has an individualized home instruction plan that has been
determined by the superintendent of schools of the school district in
which the home school is located to be in compliance with the
regulations of the commissioner. The deadlines for submission of written
requests for the education of students with disabilities set forth in
subdivision two of this section shall apply to students in a home
instruction program, except that such request may be submitted within
thirty days of a change in the student's school district of residence;
provided that for services in the two thousand eight--two thousand nine
school year only such written requests for students in a home
instruction program shall be submitted by June thirtieth, two thousand
eight, or within thirty days after the effective date of this
subdivision, whichever is later, except where subdivision two of this
section or this subdivision authorizes submission at a later date.
Except as provided in this subdivision, a home school shall not be
considered a nonpublic school for any other purpose under this chapter.
 3. Boards of education, with the consent of the commissioner of
education, are authorized to contract with boards of cooperative
educational services to provide the services required by this act.
Pupils receiving services under the provisions of this subdivision shall
be deemed public school pupils for the purpose of determining aid
pursuant to section nineteen hundred fifty of the education law. Any
such pupil who attends a program offered by a board of cooperative
educational services, and who does not attend classes in the schools of
the district furnishing services, shall not be included in computing
average daily attendance in such district.
 4. Boards of education shall provide transportation for pupils
receiving gifted or career education between the nonpublic school
attended by such pupils and the public school where such services are
provided if the distance between the nonpublic school and the public
school exceeds one-fourth of a mile, except that; boards of education
shall provide transportation for pupils receiving education for students
with disabilities under the provisions of this section in accordance
with the needs of each such pupil; and state aid for all such
transportation shall be paid as though such transportation were
furnished pursuant to the provisions of article eighty-nine of this
chapter, except that such aid shall be paid at the rate of ninety
percent of the actual cost of such transportation.
 5. Boards of education, teachers and other employees of public schools
shall not be liable for harm to pupils caused by others while such
pupils are walking between public and nonpublic schools.
 6. Boards of education are authorized to determine by resolution which
courses of instruction shall be offered, the eligibility of pupils to
participate in specific courses, and the admission of pupils. All pupils
in like circumstances shall be treated similarly.
 * 7. a. Boards of education of districts providing career education
and gifted education services to non-resident students shall be entitled
to recover tuition from the district of residence of such students in
accordance with a formula promulgated by the commissioner by regulation.
 b. In the case of the education for students with disabilities who are
residents of New York, a school district of location providing services
to non-resident students shall be entitled to recover costs of services,
costs of evaluation, and costs of committee on special education
administration directly from the district of residence of the student if
consent of the parent or person in parental relation is obtained to
release of personally identifiable information concerning their child.
If such consent is not obtained, the school district of location shall
submit to the commissioner, in a form prescribed by the commissioner, a
claim for costs of services, evaluation costs, and committee on special
education administrative costs that includes the address of the
student's permanent residence, including the school district of
residence, and a certification by officials of the nonpublic school
attended by the student that such address is the address of record of
such student. Upon certification by the commissioner of the amount of
such claim, the state comptroller shall deduct such amount from any
state funds which become due to such school district of residence.
 c. The amount charged by the school district of location for services,
evaluation, eligible due process costs and committee on special
education administrative costs shall not exceed the actual cost to the
school district of location, after deducting any costs paid with federal
or state funds. The commissioner shall adopt regulations prescribing a
dispute resolution mechanism that will be available to a school district
of residence where such district disagrees with the amount of tuition or
costs charged by the school district of location.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2027
 * 7. Boards of education of districts providing services to
non-resident pupils shall be entitled to recover tuition from the
district of residence of such pupils in accordance with a formula
promulgated by the commissioner of education by regulation.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2027
 8. Average daily attendance, as computed under the provisions of this
section, shall be included in the average daily attendance and average
daily membership of the school district furnishing services for all
purposes under the provisions of section thirty-six hundred two of this
chapter, except that it shall not be used in the computation of resident
weighted average daily attendance or total wealth pupil units or total
wealth foundation pupil units or of aid ratios.
 9. Pupils enrolled in nonpublic schools for whom services are provided
pursuant to the provisions of this section shall receive such services
in regular classes of the public school and shall not be provided such
services separately from pupils regularly attending the public schools.
 * 10. State and local funds provided by the district of residence
pursuant to this section shall supplement and in no case shall supplant
the proportionate amount of federal funds required to be expended by the
school district in which the nonpublic school attended by the student is
located pursuant to the individuals with disabilities education act.
 * NB Repealed June 30, 2027
 § 3602-d. Work-prep education program. 1. Legislative findings. The
legislature recognizes that rapid technological advances and global
economic competition demand increased levels of skilled career education
preparation and readiness on the part of youths entering the workforce.
Effective strategies reaching beyond the boundaries of traditional
schooling are necessary to provide early and sustained intervention by
parents, teachers, and educational institutions in the lives of
students. The establishment of a work-prep education program requiring
systematic career education articulation agreements between secondary
schools and post-secondary educational institutions is such a strategy.
Youths participating in this program will develop the skills in liberal
arts, basic academics, including literacy instruction, and career fields
necessary to acquire an associate degree or certificate increasingly
required for positions in the workforce.
 2. Definitions. As used in this section:
 (a) "Articulation agreement" shall mean a commitment between secondary
and post-secondary institutions to a program designed to provide
students with a non-duplicative sequence of courses leading to
competencies, as demonstrated by an associate degree or certificate, in
an occupationally oriented field.
 (b) "Disadvantaged" shall mean individuals (other than handicapped
individuals) who have economic or academic disadvantages and who require
special services and assistance in order to enable them to succeed in
work-prep programs. Such term includes individuals who are: members of
economically disadvantaged families as set forth in regulations
promulgated by the department pursuant to sections sixty-four hundred
fifty-one and sixty-four hundred fifty-two of this chapter or as set
forth in the Federal Job Training Partnership Act of nineteen hundred
eighty-two (PL 97-300) (29 U.S.C.A. § 1501 et seq.); migrants; English
language learners; and individuals who are identified as potential
dropouts from secondary school.
 (c) "Work-prep education program" shall mean a combined secondary and
post-secondary program which: leads to an associate degree or
certificate; provides preparation and establishes competencies in an
occupationally oriented field; and leads to employment.
 (d) "Occupationally oriented field" shall mean applied science,
engineering, health sciences, mechanical or industrial arts, and/or home
economics.
 3. Work-prep education program. (a) The commissioner shall, out of
available funds pursuant to the Federal Carl D. Perkins Act (PL 98-524)
and/or its successor, provide grants on a competitive basis, to pay the
cost of activities authorized by this section to a consortia of:
 (1) school districts, local education agencies and/or boards of
cooperative educational services serving secondary students; and
 (2) post-secondary educational agencies which offer an associate
degree program or certificate program.
 (b) Each consortia interested in initiating a work-prep program shall
submit a five year plan for the development and implementation of
work-prep activities. At a minimum, the plan shall contain the
following:
 (1) an articulation agreement between the participants in the
consortium;
 (2) linkages between the two years of secondary school preceding
graduation and post-secondary study. Such linkage must incorporate a
next generation of required proficiency in an occupationally oriented
field leading to an associate degree or certificate in a specific career
field;
 (3) the development of work-prep education program curriculum
appropriate to the needs of consortium participants, program
participants, and the business community;
 (4) the development of specific measures to eliminate gender-based
bias in occupational recruitment, counseling, instruction, and placement
efforts;
 (5) the provision of in-service training for counselors designed to
enable counselors to effectively: recruit students for work-prep
programs; ensure the student's successful completion of such programs;
and assist in the student's employment placement; and
 (6) performance standards creating measures for evaluating program
success.
 (c) The commissioner shall give special consideration to applications
which:
 (1) provide for effective employment placement activities;
 (2) demonstrate a commitment to continue such program activities;
 (3) include the input of business, industry, labor unions, joint
apprenticeship committees, and employers conducting registered
apprenticeship programs, in its development; and
 (4) address the issues of dropout prevention, disadvantaged youths,
and handicapped youths.
 4. Apportionment of funds. (a) Allowable costs under this section
shall include expenses related to the coordination, administration
and/or delivery of the work-prep program such as: costs of assessment,
guidance, and instructional materials; purchase of equipment; personal
services associated with joint curriculum planning and development
activities; and costs of in-service training for participating teachers
and guidance counselors.
 (b) Moneys appropriated under this section shall be apportioned
ensuring an equitable distribution of assistance throughout the state
and among both urban and rural participants.
 § 3602-e. Universal prekindergarten program. 1. Definitions. For the
purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
 a. "School district" shall mean all public school districts eligible
for total foundation aid pursuant to subdivision four of section three
thousand six hundred two of this article, such term shall not include
boards of cooperative educational services.
 b. "Eligible agencies" shall mean a provider of child care and early
education, a day care provider, early childhood program or center, or
community-based organization, including but not limited to approved
pre-school special education programs, head start, and nursery schools
so long as the standards and qualifications set forth pursuant to
subdivision twelve of this section have been met.
 c. "Eligible children" shall mean resident children who are four years
of age on or before December first of the year in which they are
enrolled or who will otherwise be first eligible to enter public school
kindergarten commencing with the following school year.
 d. "Pre-kindergarten program plan" shall mean a plan approved by the
board of education or, in the case of a school district having a
population of one million or more, by the community superintendent and
the chancellor that is designed to effectively serve eligible children
directly through the school district or through collaborative efforts
between the school district and an eligible agency or agencies.
 e. "Session" shall mean one universal prekindergarten program class
operating pursuant to time, staff ratio and other regulatory
requirements as set forth by the board of regents and the commissioner
for such purpose.
 2. The commissioner is hereby authorized and directed to award grants
for the establishment and implementation of a prekindergarten program to
serve eligible children.
 * 3. Beginning in the two thousand twenty-three--two thousand
twenty-four school year, all school districts shall annually report to
the commissioner: (i) the number of four-year-old prekindergarten
students the district intends to serve in full-day and half-day slots in
district-operated prekindergarten programs in the current school year;
(ii) the number of four-year-old prekindergarten students the district
intends to serve in full-day and half-day slots in prekindergarten
programs operated by community-based organizations in the current school
year; (iii) the number of four-year-old prekindergarten students in the
current school year the district is unable to serve due to a lack of
capacity; (iv) the reason for the lack of capacity, including the
availability of appropriate space, facilities, and staff; and (v) any
other information available to districts and determined by the
commissioner to be necessary to accurately estimate the unmet demand for
four-year-old prekindergarten programs within a district. School
districts that are eligible to receive an apportionment under this
section or section thirty-six hundred two-ee of this part but have not
claimed the full apportionment shall include in the report to the
commissioner information on barriers to implementing new or expanding
existing universal prekindergarten programs despite available funding.
Such report shall be due on or before September first of each year and
shall be collected as part of the application submitted pursuant to
subdivision five of this section. Beginning November first, two thousand
twenty-three, the commissioner shall annually submit a report to the
governor, the temporary president of the senate, and the speaker of the
assembly on the information reported by districts.
 * NB Repealed December 30, 2026
 5. In any school district, other than the city school district of the
city of New York, that seeks an apportionment pursuant to this section,
the school district shall develop and submit an application pursuant to
the rules and regulations adopted by the board of regents and the
commissioner for such purpose. Such application shall be submitted by a
date and in a form prescribed by the commissioner pursuant to
subdivision eight of this section, including the program elements as
provided for in subdivision seven of this section and shall be
consistent with the plan adopted by the district.
 a. If the school district chooses to coordinate proposals for
prekindergarten program services, it shall conduct a competitive process
in accordance with procedures set forth by the commissioner and with the
requirements and regulations set forth in, and pursuant to, subdivisions
seven, eight and twelve of this section.
 b. An application developed by coordinating proposals submitted by
eligible agencies pursuant to a competitive process shall ensure
delivery of prekindergarten program services in an effective, efficient
and non-duplicative manner.
 c. The results of the competitive process for prekindergarten program
services shall be made public at a regular meeting of the board of
education. An eligible agency may request a written statement from the
board of education stating why the application was not accepted.
 d. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the school districts
shall be authorized to enter any contractual or other arrangements
necessary to implement the district's prekindergarten plan.
 e. Not less than ten percent of the total grant award to the school
district shall be set aside for collaborative efforts with eligible
agencies, provided that the commissioner may waive such set aside
requirement based upon documented evidence that the school district was
unable to use the set aside to make a collaborative arrangement that
would meet all requirements of this subdivision because of
unavailability of eligible agencies willing to collaborate or other
factors beyond the control of the school district, or for school
districts which have fully implemented a universal prekindergarten
program by serving all eligible four year olds in the nineteen hundred
ninety-eight--ninety-nine school year and due to parental choice the ten
percent set aside requirement exceeds the total of the district's aid
per kindergarten pupil multiplied by the number of pre-kindergarten
pupils in collaborative programs. In such cases, school districts shall
set aside, for collaborative efforts with eligible agencies, the total
of the district's aid per kindergarten pupil multiplied by the number of
prekindergarten pupils in collaborative programs.
 f. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section to the
contrary, two or more school districts may submit a joint application to
operate a joint universal prekindergarten program. For purposes of
paragraph e of this subdivision and all other provisions of this section
except subdivision ten, all references to a school district shall be
deemed a reference to all school districts participating in such joint
program as if they were a single district. For purposes of subdivision
ten of this section, the grant award for the joint program shall be the
sum of the grant awards computed for each participating district
pursuant to such subdivision ten.
 6. In the city school district of the city of New York, if a community
school superintendent seeks to receive an apportionment pursuant to this
section, the community school superintendent shall submit such plan to
the chancellor for adoption, modification or rejection.
 a. If the chancellor adopts such plan as submitted or as modified by
the chancellor, the chancellor shall submit an application in accordance
with subdivision five of this section.
 b. If the chancellor rejects such plan, he or she shall notify the
community superintendent in writing and shall state the reasons for such
rejection.
 The community superintendent may modify and resubmit such application
to the chancellor for adoption.
 7. In order to receive approval from the commissioner to implement a
prekindergarten program, applications and proposals shall demonstrate
that the program to be implemented contains, at a minimum, the following
components:
 a. provides for an age and developmentally appropriate curriculum and
activities which are learner-centered;
 b. provides for an assessment of the development of language,
cognitive and social skills;
 c. ensures continuity in the program with instruction in the early
elementary grades;
 d. encourages children to be self-assured and independent;
 e. encourages the co-location and integration of children with special
needs;
 f. utilizes staff who meet the qualifications set forth pursuant to
the rules of the board of regents;
 g. provides for strong parental partnerships and involvement in the
implementation of and participation in the plan;
 h. provides staff development and teacher training for staff and
teachers in all settings in which prekindergarten services are provided
pursuant to this section; and
 i. establishes a method for selection of eligible children to receive
prekindergarten program services on a random selection basis where there
are more eligible children than can be served in a given school year,
provided, however, that a school district that operated a targeted
prekindergarten program in the base year may use the selection process
established for such program.
 8. Each application for a prekindergarten program pursuant to this
section shall be on a form prescribed by the commissioner and shall
include, but not be limited to:
 a. a prekindergarten program plan identifying specific goals,
including how the district will expand its program to assure that all
eligible children may be served, and a proposed timetable for the
implementation and achievement of such goals;
 b. a proposed budget and a description of the proposed use of the
grant funds including the mechanism for the distribution of such funds;
 c. the local share to be used, as defined by the commissioner, which
may include resources which may be available from the community;
 d. the participation and contribution of each of the collaborative
partners; and
 e. a description of any costs associated with the administration of
the program.
 9. a. Each year, the commissioner shall determine the maximum
allocation that each district would be eligible to receive pursuant to
this section in the following school year based on pupil data on file
with the commissioner on a date prescribed by the commissioner, and
applying the formula specified in subdivision ten of this section. No
later than April thirtieth of the base year, the commissioner shall
notify districts of the maximum allocations they may be eligible for
pursuant to this section in the following school year, and such maximum
allocations shall be deemed final and not subject to change thereafter.
 b. The board of regents and the commissioner shall develop criteria
for awarding all grants pursuant to this section. The commissioner shall
give preference to those applications which demonstrate innovative
methods for serving eligible children, are strong collaborative
arrangements which maximize, to the extent possible, the utilization of
existing resources of the school district, eligible agencies and the
community, have an immediate capacity for providing services, and which
can most effectively address the prekindergarten needs of each of the
eligible children.
 10. Universal prekindergarten aid. Notwithstanding any provision of
law to the contrary,
 (i) for aid payable in the two thousand eight--two thousand nine
school year, the grant to each eligible school district for universal
prekindergarten aid shall be computed pursuant to this subdivision, and
 (ii) for the two thousand nine--two thousand ten and two thousand
ten--two thousand eleven school years, each school district shall be
eligible for a maximum grant equal to the amount computed for such
school district for the base year in the electronic data file produced
by the commissioner in support of the two thousand nine--two thousand
ten education, labor and family assistance budget, provided, however,
that in the case of a district implementing programs for the first time
or implementing expansion programs in the two thousand eight--two
thousand nine school year where such programs operate for a minimum of
ninety days in any one school year as provided in section 151-1.4 of the
regulations of the commissioner, for the two thousand nine--two thousand
ten and two thousand ten--two thousand eleven school years, such school
district shall be eligible for a maximum grant equal to the amount
computed pursuant to paragraph a of subdivision nine of this section in
the two thousand eight--two thousand nine school year, and
 (iii) for the two thousand eleven--two thousand twelve school year
each school district shall be eligible for a maximum grant equal to the
amount set forth for such school district as "UNIVERSAL PREKINDERGARTEN"
under the heading "2011-12 ESTIMATED AIDS" in the school aid computer
listing produced by the commissioner in support of the enacted budget
for the 2011-12 school year and entitled "SA111-2", and
 (iv) for two thousand twelve--two thousand thirteen through two
thousand sixteen--two thousand seventeen school years each school
district shall be eligible for a maximum grant equal to the greater of
(A) the amount set forth for such school district as "UNIVERSAL
PREKINDERGARTEN" under the heading "2010-11 BASE YEAR AIDS" in the
school aid computer listing produced by the commissioner in support of
the enacted budget for the 2011-12 school year and entitled "SA111-2",
or (B) the amount set forth for such school district as "UNIVERSAL
PREKINDERGARTEN" under the heading "2010-11 BASE YEAR AIDS" in the
school aid computer listing produced by the commissioner on May
fifteenth, two thousand eleven pursuant to paragraph b of subdivision
twenty-one of section three hundred five of this chapter, and
 (v) for the two thousand seventeen--two thousand eighteen and two
thousand eighteen--two thousand nineteen school years, each school
district shall be eligible to receive a grant amount equal to the sum of
(A) the amount set forth for such school district as "UNIVERSAL
PREKINDERGARTEN" under the heading "2016-17 ESTIMATED AIDS" in the
school aid computer listing produced by the commissioner in support of
the enacted budget for the two thousand sixteen--two thousand seventeen
school year and entitled "SA161-7" plus (B) the amount awarded to such
school district for the priority full-day prekindergarten and expanded
half-day prekindergarten grant program for high need students for the
two thousand sixteen--two thousand seventeen school year pursuant to
chapter fifty-three of the laws of two thousand thirteen, provided that
for purposes of calculating the maintenance of effort reduction in
subdivision eleven of this section grant amounts shall be the
four-year-old grant amount, and
 (vi) for the two thousand nineteen--two thousand twenty school year,
each school district shall be eligible to receive a grant amount equal
to the sum of (A) the amount set forth for such school district as
"UNIVERSAL PREKINDERGARTEN" in the school aid computer listing produced
by the commissioner in support of the enacted budget for the two
thousand eighteen--two thousand nineteen school year plus (B) the amount
awarded to such school district for the federal preschool development
expansion grant for the two thousand seventeen--two thousand eighteen
school year pursuant to the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009 (ARRA), Sections 14005, 14006, and 14013, Title XIV, (Public Law
112-10), as amended by section 1832(b) of Division B of the Department
of Defense and Full-Year Continuing Appropriations Act, 2011 (Pub. L.
112-10), and the Department of Education Appropriations Act, 2012 (Title
III Division F of Pub. L. 112-74, the Consolidated Appropriations Act,
2012) plus (C) the amount awarded to such school district for the
expanded prekindergarten program for three and four year-olds for the
two thousand eighteen--two thousand nineteen school year pursuant to
chapter sixty-one of the laws of two thousand fifteen plus (D) the
amount awarded to such school district for the expanded prekindergarten
for three-year-olds in high need districts program for the two thousand
eighteen--two thousand nineteen school year pursuant to chapter
fifty-three of the laws of two thousand sixteen plus (E) the amount
awarded to such school district for the expanded prekindergarten program
for three- and four-year-olds for the two thousand eighteen--two
thousand nineteen school year pursuant to a chapter of the laws of two
thousand seventeen plus (F) the amount awarded to such school district,
subject to an available appropriation, through the pre-kindergarten
expansion grant for the two thousand eighteen--two thousand nineteen
school year, provided that such school district has met all requirements
pursuant to this section and for purposes of calculating the maintenance
of effort reduction in subdivision eleven of this section that such
grant amounts shall be divided into a four-year-old grant amount based
on the amount each district was eligible to receive in the base year to
serve four-year-old prekindergarten pupils and a three-year-old grant
amount based on the amount each district was eligible to receive in the
base year to serve three-year-old pupils, and
 (vii) for the two thousand twenty--two thousand twenty-one school
year, each school district shall be eligible to receive a grant amount
equal to the amount set forth for such school district as "UNIVERSAL
PREKINDERGARTEN ALLOCATION" on the computer file produced by the
commissioner in support of the enacted budget for the prior year
excluding amounts subject to section thirty-six hundred two-ee of this
part, and provided further that the maximum grant shall not exceed the
total actual grant expenditures incurred by the school district in the
current school year as approved by the commissioner, and
 (viii) for the two thousand twenty-one--two thousand twenty-two school
year, each school district shall be eligible to receive a grant amount
equal to the sum of (A) the amount set forth for such school district as
"UNIVERSAL PREKINDERGARTEN ALLOCATION" on the computer file produced by
the commissioner in support of the enacted budget for the prior year
excluding amounts subject to section thirty-six hundred two-ee of this
part and further excluding amounts paid pursuant to subdivision nineteen
of this section plus (B) the Full-day 4-Year-Old Universal
Prekindergarten Expansion added pursuant to paragraph e of subdivision
nineteen of this section, provided that such school district has met all
requirements pursuant to this section and such grants shall be added
into a four-year-old grant amount based on the amount each district was
eligible to receive in the base year to serve four-year-old
prekindergarten pupils, and provided further that the maximum grant
shall not exceed the total actual grant expenditures incurred by the
school district in the current school year as approved by the
commissioner, and
 (ix) for the two thousand twenty-two--two thousand twenty-three school
year and thereafter, each school district shall be eligible to receive a
grant amount equal to the sum of (A) the amount set forth for such
school district as "UNIVERSAL PREKINDERGARTEN ALLOCATION" on the
computer file produced by the commissioner in support of the enacted
budget for the prior year excluding amounts subject to section
thirty-six hundred two-ee of this part and further excluding amounts
paid pursuant to subdivision nineteen of this section plus (B) the
Full-day 4-Year-Old Universal Prekindergarten Expansion added pursuant
to paragraph e of subdivision nineteen of this section, provided that
such school district has met all requirements pursuant to this section
and such grants shall be added into a four-year-old grant amount based
on the amount each district was eligible to receive in the base year to
serve four-year-old prekindergarten pupils, plus (C) funds allocated
pursuant to a universal prekindergarten expansion under subdivision
twenty of this section as of the school aid computer listing produced by
the commissioner in support of the enacted budget for the current year,
provided that such grant amounts shall be divided into a four-year-old
grant amount based on the amount each district was eligible to receive
in the base year to serve four-year-old prekindergarten pupils, if any,
and a three-year-old grant amount based on the amount each district was
eligible to receive in the base year to serve three-year-old pupils, if
any, and provided further that the maximum grant shall not exceed the
total actual grant expenditures incurred by the school district in the
current school year as approved by the commissioner.
 a. Each school district shall be eligible to serve the sum of (i)
eligible full-day four-year-old prekindergarten pupils plus (ii)
eligible half-day four-year-old prekindergarten pupils plus (iii)
eligible full-day three-year-old prekindergarten pupils plus (iv)
eligible half-day three-year-old prekindergarten pupils.
 b. For purposes of paragraph a of this subdivision:
 (i) "Selected aid per prekindergarten pupil" shall equal the greater
of (A) the product of five-tenths and the school district's selected
foundation aid for the current year, or (B) the aid per prekindergarten
pupil calculated pursuant to this subdivision for the two thousand
six-two thousand seven school year, based on data on file for the school
aid computer listing produced by the commissioner in support of the
enacted budget for the two thousand six--two thousand seven school year
and entitled "SA060-7"; provided, however, that in the two thousand
eight--two thousand nine school year, a city school district in a city
having a population of one million inhabitants or more shall not be
eligible to select aid per prekindergarten pupil pursuant to clause (A)
of this subparagraph;
 (ii) (1) "Eligible Full-day four-year-old prekindergarten pupils"
shall equal:
 For the two thousand seventeen--two thousand eighteen school year the
sum of, from the priority full-day prekindergarten program, (A) the
maximum aidable pupils such district was eligible to serve in the base
year plus (B) the maximum aidable number of half-day prekindergarten
pupils converted into a full-day prekindergarten pupil in the base year;
 For the two thousand eighteen--two thousand nineteen school year the
sum of, from the programs pursuant to this section, (A) the maximum
aidable full-day prekindergarten pupils such district was eligible to
serve in the base year plus (B) the maximum aidable number of half-day
prekindergarten pupils converted into full-day prekindergarten pupils in
the base year;
 For the two thousand nineteen--two thousand twenty school year the sum
of, from each of (A) the programs pursuant to this section, (B) the
federal preschool development expansion grant, (C) the expanded
prekindergarten program, (D) the expanded prekindergarten program for
three- and four-year-olds, and (E) the prekindergarten expansion grant,
(1) the maximum aidable full-day four-year-old prekindergarten pupils
such district was eligible to serve in the base year, plus (2) the
maximum aidable number of half-day four-year-old prekindergarten pupils
converted into full-day prekindergarten pupils in the base year;
 For the two thousand twenty--two thousand twenty-one school year the
sum of, from each of (A) the programs pursuant to this section and (B)
the pre-kindergarten expansion grant, (1) the maximum aidable full-day
four-year-old prekindergarten pupils such district was eligible to serve
in the base year, plus (2) the maximum aidable number of half-day
four-year-old prekindergarten pupils converted into full-day
prekindergarten pupils in the base year;
 For the two thousand twenty-one--two thousand twenty-two school year,
the sum of, from the programs pursuant to this subdivision, (1) the
maximum aidable full-day four-year-old prekindergarten pupils such
district was eligible to serve in the base year, plus (2) the maximum
aidable number of half-day four-year-old prekindergarten pupils
converted into full-day prekindergarten pupils in the base year, plus
(3) expansion slots added pursuant to paragraph e of subdivision
nineteen of this section.
 For the two thousand twenty-two--two thousand twenty-three school year
and thereafter, the sum of, from the programs pursuant to this
subdivision, (1) the maximum aidable full-day four-year-old
prekindergarten pupils such district was eligible to serve in the base
year, plus (2) the maximum aidable number of half-day four-year-old
prekindergarten pupils converted into full-day prekindergarten pupils in
the base year, plus (3) expansion slots calculated pursuant to
subdivision twenty of this section.
 (2) "Eligible full-day three-year-old prekindergarten pupils" shall
equal:
 For the two thousand nineteen--two thousand twenty school year, the
sum of, from each of (A) the expanded prekindergarten program, (B) the
expanded prekindergarten program for three-year-olds, (C) the expanded
prekindergarten program for three- and four-year-olds, and (D) the
prekindergarten expansion grant, (1) the maximum aidable full-day
three-year-old prekindergarten pupils such district was eligible to
serve in the base year, plus (2) the maximum aidable number of half-day
three-year-old prekindergarten pupils converted into full-day
prekindergarten pupils in the base year;
 For the two thousand twenty--two thousand twenty-one school year and
thereafter, the sum of, from each of (A) the programs pursuant to this
section, and (B) the prekindergarten expansion grant, (1) the maximum
aidable full-day three-year-old prekindergarten pupils such district was
eligible to serve in the base year, plus (2) the maximum aidable number
of half-day three-year-old prekindergarten pupils converted into
full-day prekindergarten pupils in the base year;
 (iii) (1) "Eligible half-day four-year-old prekindergarten pupils"
shall equal:
 For the two thousand seventeen--two thousand eighteen school year the
sum of the maximum aidable half-day prekindergarten pupils such district
was eligible to serve for the base year from (A) the program pursuant to
this section plus such pupils from (B) the priority full-day
prekindergarten program, less the maximum aidable number of half-day
prekindergarten pupils converted into full-day prekindergarten pupils
under the priority full-day prekindergarten program for the base year;
 For the two thousand eighteen--two thousand nineteen school year, the
maximum aidable half-day prekindergarten pupils such district was
eligible to serve for the base year from the program pursuant to this
section;
 For the two thousand nineteen--two thousand twenty school year, the
sum of the maximum aidable half-day four-year-old prekindergarten pupils
such district was eligible to serve for the base year from (A) the
program pursuant to this section plus such pupils from (B) the expanded
prekindergarten program plus such pupils from (C) the expanded
prekindergarten program for three- and four-year-olds plus such pupils
from (D) the prekindergarten expansion grant, less the sum of the
maximum aidable number of half-day four-year-old prekindergarten pupils
converted into full-day four-year-old prekindergarten pupils under each
of (1) the federal preschool expansion grant for the base year plus such
pupils from (2) the expanded prekindergarten program plus such pupils
from (3) the expanded prekindergarten program for three- and
four-year-olds plus such pupils from (4) the prekindergarten expansion
grant for the base year;
 For the two thousand twenty--two thousand twenty-one school year and
thereafter, the sum of the maximum aidable half-day four-year-old
prekindergarten pupils such district was eligible to serve for the base
year from (A) the program pursuant to this section plus such pupils from
(B) the pre-kindergarten expansion grant, less the maximum aidable
number of half-day four-year-old prekindergarten pupils converted into
full-day four-year-old prekindergarten pupils under the prekindergarten
expansion grant for the base year;
 (2) "Eligible half-day three-year-old prekindergarten pupils" shall
equal:
 For the two thousand nineteen--two thousand twenty school year, the
sum of the maximum aidable half-day three-year-old prekindergarten
pupils such district was eligible to serve for the base year from (A)
the expanded prekindergarten program plus such pupils from (B) the
expanded prekindergarten for three-year-olds plus such pupils from (C)
the expanded prekindergarten program for three- and four-year-olds plus
such pupils from (D) the prekindergarten expansion grant, less the sum
of the maximum aidable number of half-day three-year-old prekindergarten
pupils converted into full-day three-year-old prekindergarten pupils
under each of (1) the expanded prekindergarten program plus such pupils
from (2) the expanded prekindergarten for three-year-olds plus such
pupils from (3) the expanded prekindergarten program for three- and
four-year-olds plus such pupils from (4) the prekindergarten expansion
grant for the base year;
 For the two thousand twenty--two thousand twenty-one school year and
thereafter, the sum of the maximum aidable half-day three-year-old
prekindergarten pupils such district was eligible to serve for the base
year from (A) the program pursuant to this section plus such pupils from
(B) the prekindergarten expansion grant, less the maximum aidable number
of half-day three-year-old prekindergarten pupils converted into
full-day three-year-old prekindergarten pupils under the prekindergarten
expansion grant for the base year;
 (iv) "Unserved four-year-old prekindergarten pupils" shall mean the
product of eighty-five percent multiplied by the positive difference, if
any, between the sum of the public school enrollment and the nonpublic
school enrollment of children attending full day and half day
kindergarten programs in the district in the year prior to the base year
less the number of resident children who attain the age of four before
December first of the base year, who were served during such school year
by a prekindergarten program approved pursuant to section forty-four
hundred ten of this chapter, where such services are provided for more
than four hours per day;
 (v) (1) "Prekindergarten four-year-old maintenance of effort base"
shall mean the number of eligible full-day four-year-old prekindergarten
pupils set forth for the district in this paragraph plus the product of
one half (0.5) multiplied by the number of eligible half-day
four-year-old prekindergarten pupils set forth for the district in this
paragraph;
 (2) "Prekindergarten three-year-old maintenance of effort base" shall
mean the number of eligible full-day three-year-old prekindergarten
pupils set forth for the district in this paragraph plus the product of
one half (0.5) multiplied by the number of eligible half-day
three-year-old prekindergarten pupils set forth for the district in this
paragraph;
 (vi) (1) "Current year four-year-old prekindergarten pupils served"
shall mean the sum of full day four-year-old prekindergarten pupils
served in the current year plus the product of one half (0.5) multiplied
by the half day four-year-old prekindergarten pupils in the current year
less the half-day four-year-old conversion overage;
 (2) "Current year three-year-old prekindergarten pupils served" shall
mean the sum of full day three-year-old prekindergarten pupils served in
the current year plus the product of one half (0.5) multiplied by the
half day three-year-old prekindergarten pupils in the current year less
the half-day three-year-old conversion overage;
 (vii) (1) "Half-day four-year-old conversion overage" shall equal, for
districts with thirty percent fewer full-day four-year-old
prekindergarten pupils served in the current year than eligible full-day
four-year-old prekindergarten pupils as set forth in this paragraph due
to the conversion of full-day four-year-old prekindergarten pupils
served in the current year to half-day four year-old prekindergarten
pupils served in the current year, the difference of the product of
seven-tenths multiplied by the eligible full-day four-year-old
prekindergarten pupils rounded down to the nearest whole number, less
the number of full-day four-year-old prekindergarten pupils served in
the current year;
 (2) "Half-day three-year-old conversion overage" shall equal, for
districts with thirty percent fewer full-day three-year-old
prekindergarten pupils served in the current year than eligible full-day
three-year-old prekindergarten pupils as set forth in paragraph b of
this subdivision due to the conversion of full-day three-year-old
prekindergarten pupils served in the current year to half-day
three-year-old prekindergarten pupils served in the current year, the
difference of the product of seven-tenths multiplied by the eligible
full-day three-year-old prekindergarten pupils rounded down to the
nearest whole number, less the number of full-day three-year-old
prekindergarten pupils served in the current year;
 (3) Provided that a district may apply to the commissioner for a
hardship waiver that would allow a district to convert more than thirty
percent of full-day four-year-old prekindergarten pupils served in the
current year to half-day four-year-old prekindergarten pupils served in
the current year or three-year-old prekindergarten pupils served in the
current year to half-day three-year-old prekindergarten pupils served in
the current year and receive funding for such slots. Such waiver shall
be granted upon a demonstration by the school district that due to a
significant change in the resources available to the school district and
absent this hardship waiver, the school district would be unable to
serve such pupils in prekindergarten programs, without causing
significant disruption to other district programming;
 (viii) (1) "Maintenance of effort factor for four-year-olds" shall
mean the quotient arrived at when dividing the current year
four-year-old prekindergarten pupils served by the prekindergarten
four-year-old maintenance of effort base;
 (2) "Maintenance of effort factor for three-year-olds" shall mean the
quotient arrived at when dividing the current year three-year-old
prekindergarten pupils served by the prekindergarten three-year-old
maintenance of effort base;
 (ix) For the purposes of this paragraph:
 (A) "Priority full-day prekindergarten program" shall mean the
priority full-day prekindergarten and expanded half-day prekindergarten
grant program for high need students pursuant to chapter fifty-three of
the laws of two thousand thirteen;
 (B) "Federal preschool development expansion grant" shall mean the
federal preschool development expansion grant pursuant to the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (ARRA), Sections 14005, 14006, and
14013, Title XIV, (Public Law 112-10), as amended by section 1832(b) of
Division B of the Department of Defense and Full-Year Continuing
Appropriations Act, 2011 (Pub. L. 112-10), and the Department of
Education Appropriations Act, 2012 (Title III Division F of Pub. L.
112-74, the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2012);
 (C) "Expanded prekindergarten program" shall mean the expanded
prekindergarten program for three- and four-year-olds pursuant to
chapter sixty-one of the laws of two thousand fifteen;
 (D) "Expanded prekindergarten for three-year-olds" shall mean the
expanded prekindergarten for three-year-olds in high need districts
program pursuant to chapter fifty-three of the laws of two thousand
sixteen;
 (E) "Expanded prekindergarten program for three- and four-year-olds"
shall mean the expanded prekindergarten program for three- and
four-year-olds pursuant to a chapter of the laws of two thousand
seventeen;
 (F) "Prekindergarten expansion grant" shall mean the prekindergarten
expansion grant for the two thousand eighteen--two thousand nineteen
school year and thereafter, pursuant to subdivision eighteen of this
section, to the extent such program was available subject to
appropriation, and provided that such school district has met all
requirements pursuant to this section.
 c. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the total
grant payable pursuant to this section shall equal the lesser of: (i)
the sum of the four-year-old grant amount plus the three-year-old grant
amount computed pursuant to this subdivision for the current year, based
on data on file with the commissioner as of September first of the
school year immediately following or (ii) the total actual grant
expenditures incurred by the school district as approved by the
commissioner.
 d. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, apportionments
under this section greater than the amounts provided in the two thousand
sixteen--two thousand seventeen school year shall only be used to
supplement and not supplant current local expenditures of local funds on
prekindergarten programs and the number of eligible full-day
four-year-old prekindergarten pupils and eligible full-day
three-year-old prekindergarten pupils in such programs from such
sources. Current local expenditures shall include any local expenditures
of local funds used to supplement or extend services provided directly
or via contract to eligible children enrolled in a universal
prekindergarten program pursuant to this section.
 11. Maintenance of effort reduction.
 (a) Where a school district's current year four-year-old
prekindergarten pupils served is less than its prekindergarten
four-year-old maintenance of effort base, the school district shall have
its current year four-year-old apportionment equal to the product of the
four-year-old maintenance of effort factor computed in paragraph b of
subdivision ten of this section multiplied by the four-year-old grant
amount it was eligible to receive pursuant to subdivision ten of this
section.
 (b) Where a school district's current year three-year-old
prekindergarten pupils served is less than its prekindergarten
three-year-old maintenance of effort base, the school district shall
have its current year three-year-old apportionment equal to the product
of the three-year-old maintenance of effort factor computed in paragraph
b of subdivision ten of this section multiplied by the three-year-old
grant amount it was eligible to receive pursuant to subdivision ten of
this section.
 12. The board of regents and the commissioner shall be authorized to
adopt regulations to implement the provisions of this section and which
shall prescribe uniform quality standards for such prekindergarten
programs. In developing such regulations, the board of regents and the
commissioner shall consider and seek to coordinate any regulations which
may currently be applicable to any existing programs or eligible
agencies. In addition, the regents when developing regulations shall
consider and recognize the diversity of settings and models available
for the delivery of prekindergarten programs operated by eligible
agencies in alternative settings, including libraries and community
based organizations, that comply with this section. Such regulations
shall include but not be limited to:
 a. minimum qualifications for personnel providing instructional and
other services in prekindergarten programs. In promulgating such
regulations, the commissioner and the board of regents shall take into
account the availability of certified teachers and teaching assistants
to provide instruction in prekindergarten programs and shall consider
ways to increase the pool of qualified personnel;
 b. curriculum standards consistent with the New York state
prekindergarten early learning standards to ensure that such programs
have strong instructional content that is integrated with the school
district's instructional program in grades kindergarten through twelve;
 c. performance standards for prekindergarten programs, which shall
include procedures for assessing the performance of such programs and
establishing mechanisms for tracking progress of such programs and
reporting such progress to parents of prekindergarten students and the
public;
 d. transitional guidelines and rules which allow a program to meet the
required staff qualifications and any other requirements set forth
pursuant to this section and regulations adopted by the board of regents
and the commissioner; provided that such guidelines include an annual
process by which a district may apply to the commissioner by September
first of the current school year for a waiver that would allow personnel
employed by an eligible agency that is collaborating with a school
district to provide prekindergarten services and licensed by an agency
other than the department, to meet the staff qualifications prescribed
by the licensing or registering agency. Provided, further, that the
commissioner shall annually submit a report by November first to the
chairperson of the assembly ways and means committee, the chairperson of
the senate finance committee and the director of the budget which shall
include but not be limited to the following: (a) a listing of the school
districts receiving a waiver pursuant to this paragraph from the
commissioner for the current school year; (b) the number and proportion
of students within each district receiving a waiver pursuant to this
paragraph for the current school year that are receiving instruction
from personnel employed by an eligible agency that is collaborating with
a school district to provide prekindergarten services and licensed by an
agency other than the department; and (c) the number and proportion of
total prekindergarten personnel for each school district that are
providing instructional services pursuant to this paragraph that are
employed by an eligible agency that is collaborating with a school
district to provide prekindergarten services and licensed by an agency
other than the department, to meet the staff qualifications prescribed
by the licensing or registering agency.
 e. health and safety standards;
 f. time requirements which reflect the needs of the individual school
districts for flexibility, but meeting a minimum weekly time
requirement; provided, however, that the minimum weekly time requirement
for full-day programs shall be twenty-five hours, and the weekly minimum
time requirement for half-day programs shall be twelve and one-half
hours;
 g. the staff/child ratio;
 h. reasonable grounds and basis for the non-acceptance of a proposal
submitted to the school district when the proposal otherwise meets, to
the extent applicable, all the regulations of the commissioner and the
requirements set forth in this subdivision, as well as subdivisions
seven and eight of this section;
 i. any other program components, such as health, nutrition or support
services, which the regents deem appropriate and necessary for the
appropriate and effective implementation of a prekindergarten program;
 j. a provision for a waiver of any inconsistent provisions of this
section or the regulations implementing this section to allow school
districts that operated a targeted prekindergarten program in the two
thousand six--two thousand seven school year to continue to operate such
program pursuant to the regulations of the commissioner that applied to
targeted prekindergarten programs in such school year; provided that,
notwithstanding any other provision of this section to the contrary, the
amounts allocated to such targeted prekindergarten program from grants
awarded pursuant to this section shall not exceed the amount of targeted
prekindergarten grant funds received by the district for the two
thousand six--two thousand seven school year;
 k. a process by which a school district must submit an application;
 l. a definition of the approved expenditures for which grant funds may
be used, which shall include but not be limited to transportation
services and lease expense or other appropriate facilities expenses; and
 m. a process for the waiver of the time requirements established
pursuant to this subdivision in order to authorize the operation of a
summer universal prekindergarten program limited to the months of July
and August, upon a finding by the commissioner that the school district
is unable to operate the program during the regular school session
because of a lack of available space pursuant to regulations of the
commissioner. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section to the
contrary, such process shall provide for a reduction of the aid per
prekindergarten pupil payable for pupils served pursuant to such waiver
by one one-hundred eightieth of the aid per prekindergarten pupil
determined pursuant to paragraph a of subdivision ten or subparagraph
(i) of paragraph b of subdivision ten-a of this section for each day
less than one hundred eighty days that the summer program is in session.
 13. Each school district that has implemented a prekindergarten
program shall on an annual basis report to the board of regents, the
commissioner, parents, teachers and the public on the status of such
program. Such annual report shall include a financial summary of the
approved expenditures of the program, as defined pursuant to paragraph l
of subdivision twelve of this section, setting forth the expenditures
from state, local and other revenue sources, and the district shall
maintain documentation to insure that all grant funds are used for such
approved expenditures.
 14. On February fifteenth, two thousand, and annually thereafter, the
commissioner and the board of regents shall include in its annual report
to the legislature and the governor, information on school districts
receiving grants under this section; the amount of each grant; a
description of the program that each grant supports and an assessment by
the commissioner of the extent to which the program meets measurable
outcomes required by the grant program or regulations of such
commissioner; and any other relevant information, which shall include
but not be limited to the following:
 a. (i) the total number of students served in state-funded
district-operated prekindergarten programs, (ii) the total number of
students served in state-funded community-based prekindergarten
programs, (iii) the total number of students served in state-funded
half-day prekindergarten programs, and (iv) the total number of students
served in state-funded full-day prekindergarten programs;
 b. (i) the total number of students served in state, federal and
locally funded district-operated prekindergarten programs, (ii) the
total number of students served in state, federal and locally funded
community-based prekindergarten programs, (iii) the total number of
students served in state, federal and locally funded half-day
prekindergarten programs, and (iv) the total number of students served
in state, federal and locally funded full-day prekindergarten programs;
 c. the total spending on prekindergarten programs from state, federal,
and local sources;
 d. the total number of students on a district wait list for a
prekindergarten slot in a state-funded prekindergarten program; and
 e. for each program described in subparagraphs (i), (ii), (iii) and
(iv) of paragraph a of this subdivision, and subparagraphs (i), (ii),
(iii) and (iv) of paragraph b of this subdivision, the total number of
students served with disabilities that have an individualized education
plan and, of those, the total number of students requiring any of the
following approved services: special education itinerant services;
special class in an integrated setting; or a special class. Such report
shall also contain any recommendations to improve or otherwise change
the program.
 15. The commissioner shall also provide for a system for evaluation
and assessment of the prekindergarten programs which have been
implemented to determine the short and long-term success, outcomes and
effects of the programs based on relevant and measurable performance
standards. The commissioner shall prohibit the administration of
traditional standardized tests, as defined in regulations issued by the
commissioner, in prekindergarten programs; provided, however, that
nothing herein shall prohibit assessments in which students perform
real-world tasks that demonstrate application of knowledge and skills or
assessments that are otherwise required to be administered by federal
law.
 16. The grant payable to a school district pursuant to this section in
the current year shall be reduced by one one-hundred eightieth for each
day less than one hundred eighty days that the universal prekindergarten
classes of the district were actually in session, except that the
commissioner may disregard such reduction for any deficiency that may be
disregarded in computing total foundation aid pursuant to subdivision
seven or eight of section thirty-six hundred four of this chapter and in
addition may disregard a reduction for any deficiency that is caused by
a delay in the opening of public school classes due to extraordinarily
adverse weather conditions or other cause cited in such subdivision
seven of section thirty-six hundred four that results in cancellation of
the prekindergarten program or of transportation to such program.
 17. Approved quality indicators. A school district receiving funding
pursuant to this section shall agree to adopt approved quality
indicators within two years, including, but not limited to, valid and
reliable measures of environmental quality, the quality of
teacher-student interactions and child outcomes, and ensure that any
such assessment of child outcomes shall not be used to make high-stakes
educational decisions for individual children.
 18. Universal prekindergarten expansion grants. a. Subject to
available appropriation, any additional funding for pre-kindergarten in
the two thousand eighteen--two thousand nineteen school year and
thereafter shall be made available for additional grants for
pre-kindergarten programs; provided that such grants shall be awarded to
school districts to establish new full-day and half-day prekindergarten
placements. All school districts shall be eligible to apply for such
grants, which shall be awarded based on factors including, but not
limited to, the following: (i) measures of school district need, (ii)
measures of the need of students to be served by the school district,
(iii) the school district's proposal to target the highest-need schools
and students, (iv) the extent to which the district's proposal would
prioritize funds to maximize the total number of eligible children in
the district served in prekindergarten programs, and (v) proposal
quality.
 b. Such grants shall only be available to support programs: (i) that
agree to offer instruction consistent with applicable New York state
prekindergarten early learning standards; and (ii) that otherwise comply
with all of the same rules and requirements as universal prekindergarten
programs pursuant to this section.
 c. A school district's grant shall equal the product of: (i) (A) two
multiplied by the approved number of new full-day prekindergarten
placements plus (B) the approved number of half-day prekindergarten
placement conversions and new half-day prekindergarten placements, and
(ii) the district's selected aid per prekindergarten pupil pursuant to
subparagraph (i) of paragraph b of subdivision ten of this section;
provided, however, that no district shall receive a grant in excess of
the total actual grant expenditures incurred by the district in the
current school year as approved by the commissioner.
 19. Full-day four-year-old universal prekindergarten expansion. a.
Allocation. For the two thousand twenty-one--two thousand twenty-two
through two-thousand twenty-three--two thousand twenty-four school
years, school districts shall be eligible to receive a grant amount
equal to twice the product of expansion slots multiplied by selected aid
per prekindergarten pupil calculated pursuant to subparagraph i of
paragraph b of subdivision ten of this section for the two thousand
twenty-one--two thousand twenty-two school year, and provided further
that this allocation shall not exceed the total actual full-day
four-year-old universal prekindergarten expansion grant expenditures
incurred by the school district in the current school year as approved
by the commissioner. Grantees awarded funds under this subdivision shall
comply with all of the same rules and requirements as the universal
prekindergarten programs pursuant to this section.
 b. Expansion slots. (i) For the two thousand twenty-one--two thousand
twenty-two school year, for eligible school districts, the preliminary
slot count shall be equal to the positive difference of: (1) the product
of three thousand five hundred and four ten-thousandths (0.3504) and
unserved four-year-old prekindergarten pupils calculated pursuant to
subparagraph (iv) of paragraph b of subdivision ten of this section;
less (2) the sum of: (A) full-day four-year-old prekindergarten pupils
served in the two thousand nineteen--two thousand twenty school year
pursuant to this section; plus (B) students served in full-day
prekindergarten programs funded by grants pursuant to section thirty-six
hundred two-ee of this part in the year prior to the base year. If such
preliminary slot count is less than ten, the expansion slots shall be
zero; if such preliminary slot count is greater than or equal to ten but
less than twenty, the expansion slots shall be twenty; for all other
eligible districts, the expansion slots shall equal to the preliminary
slot count.
 c. Eligibility. (i) For the two thousand twenty-one--two thousand
twenty-two school year, school districts shall be eligible for this
expansion if: (1) the combined wealth ratio computed pursuant to
subparagraph one of paragraph c of subdivision three of section
thirty-six hundred two of this part is less than two (2.0); and (2) the
quotient arrived at when dividing: (A) the sum of: (1) full-day and
half-day four-year-old prekindergarten pupils served in the two thousand
nineteen--two thousand twenty school year pursuant to this section; plus
(2) students served in full-day prekindergarten programs funded by
grants pursuant to section thirty-six hundred two-ee of this part in the
two thousand nineteen--two thousand twenty school year; divided by (B)
unserved four-year-old prekindergarten pupils calculated pursuant to
subparagraph (iv) of paragraph b of subdivision ten of this section is
less than five tenths (0.50).
 d. Maintenance of effort. Where a school district serves fewer
four-year-old prekindergarten pupils in full-day programs funded by the
full-day four-year-old universal prekindergarten expansion pursuant to
this subdivision than the number of expansion slots as defined in
paragraph b of this subdivision, the school district shall have its
current year full-day four-year-old universal prekindergarten expansion
payment reduced to an amount equal to the product of: (i) the full-day
four-year-old universal prekindergarten expansion; multiplied by (ii)
the quotient of four-year-old prekindergarten pupils served in programs
funded by the full-day four-year-old universal prekindergarten expansion
divided by the number of expansion slots. Funds provided pursuant to
this subdivision shall only be used to supplement and not supplant
current local expenditures of state or local funds on prekindergarten
programs.
 e. Universal prekindergarten program consolidation. In the event the
director of the budget determines that the available appropriation of
federal funds is insufficient for the allocation pursuant to this
subdivision, the difference between the available appropriation and the
allocation shall be added to universal prekindergarten aid grants
pursuant to subdivision ten of this section. The department shall
determine which and how many grants shall be awarded pursuant to
subdivision ten of this section in lieu of this subdivision provided
that such determination shall be subject to the approval of the director
of the budget. The corresponding number of expansion slots shall also be
added to eligible full-day four-year-old prekindergarten pupils as
defined in subparagraph (ii) of paragraph b of subdivision ten of this
section to ensure continuity of services. Provided that for the two
thousand twenty-four--two thousand twenty-five school year, any full-day
four-year-old universal prekindergarten expansion allocation from the
two thousand twenty-three--two thousand twenty-four school year not
previously added to universal prekindergarten aid grants pursuant to
this paragraph shall be so added, and all expansion slots not previously
added to eligible full-day four-year-old prekindergarten pupils shall
also be added.
 f. Future expansions. Within the additional amounts appropriated
therefor in the state budgets enacted for the two thousand
twenty-two--two thousand twenty-three and two thousand twenty-three--two
thousand twenty-four fiscal years, additional grants shall be allocated
pursuant to this subdivision.
 g. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of law, for the purposes
of determining the prekindergarten allocation on the electronic data
file prepared by the commissioner pursuant to subdivision twenty-one of
section three hundred five of this chapter for the two thousand
twenty-one--two thousand twenty-two through two thousand
twenty-three--two thousand twenty-four school years, the commissioner is
directed to include the grant amounts awarded pursuant to this section
in the amount set forth for such school district as "UNIVERSAL
PRE-KINDERGARTEN."
 20. Universal prekindergarten expansions.
 a. Two thousand twenty-two--two thousand twenty-three school year.
 (i) The universal prekindergarten expansion for the two thousand
twenty-two--two thousand twenty-three school year shall be equal to
twice the product of (1) expansion slots multiplied by (2) selected aid
per prekindergarten pupil calculated pursuant to subparagraph (i) of
paragraph b of subdivision ten of this section for the two thousand
twenty-two--two thousand twenty-three school year.
 (ii) For purposes of this paragraph, "expansion slots" shall be slots
for new full-day four-year-old prekindergarten pupils for purposes of
subparagraph (ii) of paragraph b of subdivision 10 of this section.
Expansion slots shall be equal to the positive difference, if any, of
(1) the product of fifty-nine hundred and nineteen ten thousandths
(0.5919) multiplied by unserved four-year-old prekindergarten pupils as
defined in subparagraph (iv) of paragraph b of subdivision ten of this
section less (2) the eligible four-year old students. If such expansion
slots are greater than or equal to ten but less than twenty, the
expansion slots shall be twenty; if such expansion slots are less than
ten, the expansion slots shall be zero; and for a city school district
in a city having a population of one million or more, the expansion
slots shall be zero.
 (iii) For purposes of this paragraph, "eligible four-year old
students" shall be equal to the sum of (1) eligible full-day
four-year-old prekindergarten pupils as defined in subparagraph (ii) of
paragraph b of subdivision ten of this section for the base year plus
(2) the product of five tenths (0.5) and the eligible half-day
four-year-old prekindergarten pupils as defined in subparagraph (ii) of
paragraph b of subdivision ten of this section for the base year, plus
(3) the maximum number of students that may be served by uncertified
classroom teachers in full-day prekindergarten programs funded by grants
pursuant to section thirty-six hundred two-ee of this part in the base
year, plus (4) expansion slots for the base year pursuant to subdivision
nineteen of this section.
 b. Two thousand twenty-three--two thousand twenty-four school year.
 (i) The universal prekindergarten expansion for the two thousand
twenty-three--two thousand twenty-four school year shall be equal to
twice the product of (1) expansion slots multiplied by (2) selected aid
per prekindergarten pupil calculated pursuant to subparagraph (i) of
paragraph b of subdivision ten of this section for the two thousand
twenty-three--two thousand twenty-four school year.
 (ii) For purposes of this paragraph, "expansion slots" shall be slots
for new full-day four-year-old prekindergarten pupils for purposes of
subparagraph (ii) of paragraph b of subdivision ten of this section.
Expansion slots shall be equal to the positive difference, if any, of
(1) the product of eight hundred ninety-seven thousandths (0.897)
multiplied by unserved four-year-old prekindergarten pupils as defined
in subparagraph (iv) of paragraph b of subdivision ten of this section
less (2) the sum of four-year-old students served plus the underserved
count. If such expansion slots are greater than or equal to ten but less
than twenty, the expansion slots shall be twenty; if such expansion
slots are less than ten, the expansion slots shall be zero; and for a
city school district in a city having a population of one million or
more, the expansion slots shall be zero.
 (iii) For purposes of this paragraph, "four-year-old students served"
shall be equal to the sum of (1) the number of four-year-old students
served in full-day and half-day settings in a state funded program which
must meet the requirements of this section as reported to the department
for the two thousand twenty-one--two thousand twenty-two school year,
plus (2) the number of four-year-old students served in full-day
settings in a state funded program which must meet the requirements of
section thirty-six hundred two-ee of this part and for which grants were
awarded prior to the two thousand twenty--two thousand twenty-one school
year, plus (3) the number of expansion slots allocated pursuant to
paragraph b of subdivision nineteen of this section, plus (4) the number
of expansion slots allocated pursuant to paragraph a of this
subdivision, plus (5) the maximum number of students that may be served
in full-day prekindergarten programs funded by grants which must meet
the requirements of section thirty-six hundred two-ee of this part for
grants awarded in the two thousand twenty-one--two thousand twenty-two
or two thousand twenty-two--two thousand twenty-three school year.
 (iv) For purposes of this paragraph, the underserved count shall be
equal to the positive difference, if any, of (1) the sum of (a) eligible
full-day four-year-old prekindergarten pupils as defined in subparagraph
(ii) of paragraph b of subdivision ten of this section for the two
thousand twenty-one--two thousand twenty-two school year, plus (b) the
product of five-tenths (0.5) and the eligible half-day four-year-old
prekindergarten pupils as defined in subparagraph (iii) of paragraph b
of subdivision ten of this section for the two thousand twenty-one--two
thousand twenty-two school year, less (2) the positive difference of (a)
the number of four-year-old students served in full-day and half-day
settings in a state-funded program which must meet the requirements of
this section as reported to the department for the two thousand
twenty-one--two thousand twenty-two school year, with students served in
half-day settings multiplied by five-tenths (0.5), less (b) the number
of pupils served in a conversion slot pursuant to section thirty-six
hundred two-ee of this part in the two thousand twenty-one--two thousand
twenty-two school year multiplied by five-tenths (0.5).
 § 3602-ee. Statewide universal full-day pre-kindergarten program. 1.
The purpose of the universal full-day pre-kindergarten program is to
incentivize and fund state-of-the-art innovative pre-kindergarten
programs and to encourage program creativity through competition.
 2. All universal full-day pre-kindergarten programs shall demonstrate
quality on the following elements:
 (a) curriculum;
 (b) learning environment, materials and supplies;
 (c) family engagement;
 (d) staffing patterns;
 (e) teacher education and experience;
 (f) facility quality;
 (g) physical well-being, health and nutrition; and
 (h) partnerships with non-profit, community and educational
institutions.
 3. (a) The universal full-day pre-kindergarten program shall make
awards to (i) consolidated applications submitted by school districts
which include pre-kindergarten programs offered by schools, non-profit
organizations, community-based organizations, charter schools, libraries
and/or museums, which shall demonstrate geographic diversity within the
area to be served as well as diversity of providers; and (ii) non-profit
organizations, community-based organizations, charter schools, libraries
and museums, which may apply individually to the extent allowed under
paragraph (b) of this subdivision. Any consolidated application must
include, but is not limited to, the names of individual locations and
providers, applicable licenses, facility lease information, and intended
staffing plans and certifications.
 (b) Prior to submission of a consolidated application, a school
district shall widely solicit non-profit organizations, community-based
organizations, charter schools, libraries and museums located within the
school district to be included in its application. The school district
shall notify any applicant who has been denied for inclusion in the
consolidated application no later than two weeks prior to submission of
such application. Such eligible providers denied for inclusion may apply
individually as provided in paragraph (a) of this subdivision.
 (c) The department shall establish two application periods in advance
of a school year.
 (d) Providers awarded slots under this section that they actually
utilized would continue to have such slots renewed in subsequent years
provided the program meets quality standards and all applicable
requirements.
 4. Programs that provide more stimulation, enhance child development
and demonstrate creative approaches to improve early childhood education
will have a competitive advantage in the application process.
 5. The department shall develop a scoring system, which it shall use
to evaluate which applications shall be funded on a competitive basis
based on merit and factors including but not limited to the criteria
listed above and student and community need. Upon review of
applications, if the program is oversubscribed in any region or regions
of the state, the department shall notify the division of the budget,
which shall develop a plan for distribution of available slots within
any oversubscribed region. The subscription for the New York city region
is three hundred million dollars. The department shall allocate full-day
pre-kindergarten conversion slots and new full-day pre-kindergarten
slots based on available funding and shall make payments upon
documentation of eligible expenditures in the base year, which shall be
limited to the actual number of slots operated and paid on a per-pupil
basis pursuant to subdivision fourteen of this section.
 6. The department shall develop a statewide inspection protocol, which
shall provide for annual inspections of all universal full-day
pre-kindergarten providers, and shall develop a quality assurance
protocol and physical plant review protocol for such reviews.
 7. Statewide universal full-day pre-kindergarten slots shall only be
awarded to support programs that provide instruction for at least five
hours per school day for the full school year and that otherwise comply
with the rules and requirements pursuant to section thirty-six hundred
two-e of this part except as otherwise provided in this section.
 8. All teachers in the universal full-day pre-kindergarten program
shall meet the same teacher certification standards applicable to public
schools. Pre-kindergarten teachers providing instruction through this
section shall possess:
 (a) a teaching license or certificate valid for service in the early
childhood grades; or
 (b) a teaching license or certificate for students with disabilities
valid for service in early childhood grades; or
 (c) for eligible agencies as defined in paragraph b of subdivision one
of section thirty-six hundred two-e of this part that are not schools, a
bachelor's degree in early childhood education. Provided however,
beginning with the two thousand twenty-two--two thousand twenty-three
school year, a school district may annually apply to the commissioner by
September first of the current school year for a waiver that would allow
personnel employed by an eligible agency that is collaborating with a
school district to provide prekindergarten services and licensed by an
agency other than the department, to meet the staff qualifications
prescribed by the licensing or registering agency. Provided further that
the commissioner shall annually submit a report by November first to the
chairperson of the assembly ways and means committee, the chairperson of
the senate finance committee and the director of the budget which shall
include but not be limited to the following: (a) a listing of the school
districts receiving a waiver pursuant to this paragraph from the
commissioner for the current school year; (b) the number and proportion
of students within each district receiving a waiver pursuant to this
paragraph for the current school year that are receiving instruction
from personnel employed by an eligible agency that is collaborating with
a school district to provide prekindergarten services and licensed by an
agency other than the department; and (c) the number and proportion of
total prekindergarten personnel for each school district that are
providing instructional services pursuant to this paragraph that are
employed by an eligible agency that is collaborating with a school
district to provide prekindergarten services and licensed by an agency
other than the department, to meet the staff qualifications prescribed
by the licensing or registering agency.
 9. The process by which applicants submit proposals to collaborate
with the school district or individually to the department, and the
renewal process for such providers, shall take into account any record
of violations of health and safety codes and/or licensure or
registration requirements. In addition, any agency that is cited for a
violation classified as an "imminent danger" by the office of children
and family services or as a "public health hazard" by the New York city
department of health and mental hygiene which is not immediately
corrected and which is not of a life threatening or of a grave and
serious nature shall be suspended from the program and, upon final
determination of such violation by the regulating agency, suspended or
terminated from participating in the program under this section based on
the severity of the violation. Provided further, that eligible agencies
with a record of other serious or critical and/or repeated violations
that pose a risk to health or safety shall, upon final determination of
such violations, be suspended or terminated from participating in the
program under this section, and the office of children and family
services shall establish statewide standards for determining such
grounds for such suspension or termination based on violations issued by
the applicable regulatory agency.
 10. Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, a universal
full-day pre-kindergarten provider shall be inspected by the department,
the school district with which it partners, if any, and its respective
licensing, permitting, regulatory, oversight, registration or enrolling
agency or entity no fewer than two times per school year, at least one
inspection of which shall be performed by the eligible agency's
respective licensing, permitting, regulatory, oversight, registration or
enrolling agency, as applicable.
 11. Facilities providing universal full-day pre-kindergarten under
this section shall meet all applicable fire safety and building codes
and any applicable facility requirements of a state or local licensing
or registering agency and at all times shall maintain building and
classroom space in a manner that ensures and protects the health and
safety of students in all programs statewide, notwithstanding any
changes in such applicable codes or requirements.
 12. Notwithstanding paragraph (a) of subdivision one of section
twenty-eight hundred fifty-four of this chapter and paragraph (c) of
subdivision two of section twenty-eight hundred fifty-four of this
chapter, charter schools shall be eligible to participate in universal
full-day pre-kindergarten programs under this section, provided that all
such monitoring, programmatic review and operational requirements under
this section shall be the responsibility of the charter entity and shall
be consistent with the requirements under article fifty-six of this
chapter. The provisions of paragraph (b) of subdivision two of section
twenty-eight hundred fifty-four of this chapter shall apply to the
admission of pre-kindergarten students, except parents of
pre-kindergarten children may submit applications for the two thousand
fourteen--two thousand fifteen school year by a date to be determined by
the charter school upon selection to participate in the universal
full-day pre-kindergarten program. The limitations on the employment of
uncertified teachers under paragraph (a-1) of subdivision three of
section twenty-eight hundred fifty-four of this chapter shall apply to
all teachers from pre-kindergarten through grade twelve.
 13. Apportionments under this section shall only be used to supplement
and not supplant current local expenditures of federal or local funds on
pre-kindergarten programs and the number of slots in such programs from
such sources. Current local expenditures shall include any local
expenditures of federal or local funds used to supplement or extend
services provided directly or via contract to eligible children enrolled
in a universal pre-kindergarten program pursuant to section thirty-six
hundred two-e of this part.
 14. (a) The award per pupil for an eligible entity pursuant to
subdivision three of this section shall equal: (i) for each new full-day
pre-kindergarten placement the lesser of the full-day pre-kindergarten
per pupil amount or the total approved expenditures per pupil and (ii)
for each existing half-day pre-kindergarten placement converted into a
full-day pre-kindergarten placement the lesser of (A) the positive
difference of the full-day pre-kindergarten per pupil amount minus the
district's selected aid per pre-kindergarten pupil pursuant to
subparagraph (i) of paragraph b of subdivision ten of section thirty-six
hundred two-e of this part or (B) the positive difference of the total
approved expenditures per pupil minus the district's selected aid per
pre-kindergarten pupil pursuant to subparagraph (i) of paragraph b of
subdivision ten of section thirty-six hundred two-e of this part. Each
participating eligible entity pursuant to subdivision three of this
section shall provide its expenses under this provision in a format
prescribed by the commissioner.
 (b) For the purposes of this section, "full-day pre-kindergarten per
pupil amount" shall mean (i) for pupils enrolled in programs where the
teacher of record for such pupil holds a teaching certificate issued by
the commissioner in an appropriate certificate title, ten thousand
dollars, and (ii) for pupils enrolled in programs where the teacher of
record for such pupil does not hold a teaching certificate issued by the
commissioner in an appropriate certificate title, seven thousand
dollars.
 (c) For the purposes of this section, "teacher of record" shall mean
the teacher who is primarily and directly responsible for a student's
learning activities, as reported to the department in a manner
prescribed by the commissioner.
 15. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply:
 (a) "regions of the state" shall mean:
 (i) Capital Region: Includes Albany, Columbia, Greene, Rensselaer,
Saratoga, Schenectady, Warren, and Washington counties.
 (ii) Central New York Region: Includes Cayuga, Cortland, Madison,
Onondaga and Oswego counties.
 (iii) Finger Lakes Region: Includes Genesee, Livingston, Monroe,
Ontario, Orleans, Seneca, Wayne, Wyoming and Yates counties.
 (iv) Long Island Region: Includes Nassau and Suffolk counties.
 (v) Mid-Hudson Region: Includes Dutchess, Orange, Putnam, Rockland,
Sullivan, Ulster and Westchester counties.
 (vi) Mohawk Valley Region: Includes Fulton, Herkimer, Montgomery,
Oneida, Otsego and Schoharie counties.
 (vii) New York City Region: Includes Bronx, Kings, New York, Queens
and Richmond counties.
 (viii) North Country Region: Includes Clinton, Essex, Franklin,
Hamilton, Jefferson, Lewis and St. Lawrence counties.
 (ix) Southern Tier Region: Includes Broome, Chemung, Chenango,
Delaware, Schuyler, Steuben, Tioga and Tompkins counties.
 (x) Western New York Region: Includes Allegany, Cattaraugus,
Chautauqua, Erie and Niagara counties.
 (b) "community-based organization" shall mean a provider of child care
and early education, a day care provider, early childhood program or
center, approved preschool special education program, Head Start or
other such community-based organization.
 16. The authority of the department to administer the universal
full-day pre-kindergarten program shall expire June thirtieth, two
thousand twenty-six; provided that the program shall continue and remain
in full effect.
 17. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of law to the contrary,
for the purposes of determining the prekindergarten allocation on the
electronic data file prepared by the commissioner pursuant to
subdivision twenty-one of section three hundred five of this chapter for
the two thousand nineteen--two thousand twenty school year and
thereafter, the commissioner is directed to include the grant amounts
awarded pursuant to this section in the amount set forth for such school
district as "UNIVERSAL PRE-KINDERGARTEN."
 § 3602-f. Apportionment of moneys to school districts that result from
the partitioning of territory and formation of new school districts by
district superintendents. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to
the contrary, the apportionment of public money payable to school
districts resulting from the partitioning of territory and formation of
new school districts pursuant to section twenty-two hundred eighteen of
this chapter shall be computed pursuant to section thirty-six hundred
two of this article as adjusted by this section.
 1. Definitions. As used in this section the following terms shall be
defined as follows: a. "Combined data" shall mean any data or reports of
factors specified in statute or regulation for the calculation and
payment of any apportionment of state aid during the current school year
pursuant to this chapter that derive from the annual records of the
pre-existing school district, the remaining school district or the new
school district for any school year ending prior to the first complete
school year commencing on or after partitioning of territory of the
pre-existing school district and formation of the new and remaining
school districts pursuant to section twenty-two hundred eighteen of this
chapter.
 b. "Partitioned data" shall mean: (i) for the new school district, the
product of combined data multiplied by the quotient of the resident
public school district enrollment during the current year of such new
school district divided by the sum of the resident public school
district enrollment during the current year of the new school district
and of the remaining school district, and (ii) for the remaining school
district the product of combined data multiplied by the quotient of the
resident public school district enrollment during the current year of
such remaining school district divided by the sum of the resident public
school district enrollment during the current year of the new school
district and of the remaining school district.
 c. "Adjusted actual valuation" shall mean the product of the actual
valuation of the pre-existing school district, as defined in paragraph c
of subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this article,
that would have been used to compute aids apportioned to the
pre-existing school district in the current school year if partitioning
had not occurred, and the actual valuation adjustment factor.
 d. "Actual valuation adjustment factor" shall mean (i) the quotient of
the total taxable value of the assessment roll used by the school
district claiming an apportionment pursuant to this section to levy
taxes in the first complete school year commencing on or after
partitioning divided by the applicable equalization rate used to
apportion such tax levy, divided by (ii) the sum of such quotients
computed for the new school district and for the remaining school
district. Such factor shall be computed by the director of the office of
real property services based on reports to be submitted to the director
of real property services by the new school district and by the
remaining school district, in a format specified by the director, no
later than thirty days after the levy of taxes for the first complete
school year commencing on or after partitioning. The director of the
office of real property services shall certify the value computed for
the new school district and for the remaining school district to the
commissioner no later than thirty days after the receipt of such
reports.
 e. "Adjusted income" shall mean the product of the adjusted gross
income of the pre-existing school district as set forth in paragraph k
of subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this article,
that would have been used to compute aids apportioned to the
pre-existing school district in the current school year if partitioning
had not occurred, and the actual valuation adjustment factor.
 2. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, for the
purposes of computing any apportionment of state aid payable pursuant to
this chapter to the new school district or to the remaining school
district during the first complete school year commencing on or after
partitioning or any school year thereafter, the following factors used
in the apportionment and payment of aid to the new school district or to
the remaining school district shall be used in lieu of the indicated
factors for any calculations that are based pursuant to statute on such
data for a school year ending prior to such first complete school year
commencing on or after partitioning, except that where the commissioner
determines that more accurate data is available for actual valuation
and/or income, the commissioner shall use such more accurate data:
 a. Adjusted actual valuation as defined in paragraph c of subdivision
one of this section in lieu of actual valuation as defined in paragraph
c of subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this article.
 b. Adjusted income as defined in paragraph e of subdivision one of
this section in lieu of adjusted gross income as set forth in paragraph
k of subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this article.
 3. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, for the
purposes of computing any apportionment of state aid payable pursuant to
this chapter to the new school district or to the remaining school
district during the first complete school year commencing on or after
partitioning or any school year thereafter, the following factors used
in the apportionment and payment of aid to the new school district or to
the remaining school district shall be computed using combined data for
any calculations that are based pursuant to statute on such data for a
school year ending prior to such first complete school year commencing
on or after partitioning.
 a. Percentage of pupils with special educational needs as defined in
subparagraph one of paragraph e of subdivision one of section thirty-six
hundred two of this article.
 b. Expense per pupil as defined in paragraph f of subdivision one of
section thirty-six hundred two of this article.
 c. Attendance ratio as defined in paragraph m of subdivision one of
section thirty-six hundred two of this article.
 d. Percent of eligible applicants for the free and reduced price lunch
program as defined in paragraph p of subdivision one of section
thirty-six hundred two of this article.
 e. Sparsity factor as set forth in subparagraph (ii) of paragraph r of
subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this article.
 f. Percentage of pupils with compensatory educational needs as defined
in paragraph t of subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of
this article.
 g. Tax effort ratio as defined in subparagraph one of paragraph a of
subdivision sixteen of section thirty-six hundred two of this article.
 h. Residential real property tax levy as defined in subparagraph three
of paragraph a of subdivision sixteen of section thirty-six hundred two
of this article.
 i. School district basic contribution as defined in subdivision eight
of section forty-four hundred one of this chapter.
 4. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, for the
purposes of computing any apportionment of state aid payable pursuant to
this chapter to the new school district or to the remaining school
district during the first complete school year commencing on or after
partitioning or any school year thereafter, the following factors used
in the apportionment of aid to the new school district or to the
remaining school district shall be computed using partitioned data for
any calculations that are based pursuant to statute on such data for a
school year ending prior to such first complete school year commencing
on or after partitioning:
 a. Summer session pupils as defined in paragraph g of subdivision one
of section thirty-six hundred two of this article.
 b. Comprehensive operating aids base as defined in paragraph j of
subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this article.
 c. Enrollment, public school district enrollment, nonpublic school
enrollment, resident public school district enrollment, resident
nonpublic school district enrollment and additional public school
enrollment each as defined in paragraph n of subdivision one of section
thirty-six hundred two of this article.
 d. English language learner pupil count as defined in paragraph o of
subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this article.
 e. Public excess cost aid base as defined in paragraph y of
subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this article.
 f. Extraordinary needs aid base as defined in paragraph z of
subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this article.
 g. Resident weighted average daily attendance as defined in
subdivision two of section thirty-six hundred two of this article.
 h. Adjusted average daily attendance as defined in subdivision two-a
of section thirty-six hundred two of this article.
 i. Total wealth pupil units as defined in subdivision two-b of section
thirty-six hundred two of this article.
 j. Approved transportation expense as defined in subdivision seven of
section thirty-six hundred two of this article.
 k. Total aidable pupil units as defined in subdivision eight of
section thirty-six hundred two of this article.
 l. Weighted pupils with handicapping conditions as defined in
subparagraph b of paragraph one of subdivision nineteen of section
thirty-six hundred two of this article.
 m. Number of declassified pupils as defined in paragraph seven of
subdivision nineteen of section thirty-six hundred two of this article.
 n. Approved expenses for instructional computer hardware and
technology equipment as defined in subdivision twenty-six of section
thirty-six hundred two of this article.
 o. Approved expenses for instructional computer technology as defined
in subdivision twenty-six-a of section thirty-six hundred two of this
article.
 5. In the event the effective date of a reorganization pursuant to
section twenty-two hundred eighteen of this chapter is after July first
in any school year, or for any other grant or apportionment of aid not
referenced in this section, aid shall be computed in the manner
prescribed in the regulations of the commissioner.
 6. Notwithstanding any provision of section three hundred fourteen of
this chapter or paragraph a of subdivision fourteen of section
thirty-six hundred two of this article to the contrary, a school
district that has been reorganized pursuant to section twenty-two
hundred eighteen of this chapter shall be eligible for apportionments of
building aid pursuant to subdivision six of such section thirty-six
hundred two of this article and this section for the construction,
acquisition, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of school
buildings after a reorganization pursuant to section twenty-two hundred
eighteen of this chapter despite any inconsistency between such
reorganization and the state plan for school reorganization. In
addition, following the partitioning of territory pursuant to section
twenty-two hundred eighteen of this chapter, the remaining school
district shall continue to be eligible to receive reorganization
incentive aid and/or reorganization incentive building aid for a prior
reorganization in accordance with subdivision fourteen of section
thirty-six hundred two of this article, except where such partitioning
reverses the prior reorganization for which such aid would be paid.
 § 3604. Conditions under which districts are entitled to
apportionment. Apportionment of state funds shall be made subject to
the following conditions:
 4. The apportionments provided for in section thirty-six hundred two
of this chapter are for the purpose of aiding school districts in paying
the salaries of teachers and the cost of school maintenance, and the
sums so apportioned to such school districts shall be applied for such
purposes and such sums shall not in any case be placed in the city
treasury of any city to the credit of the general fund of such city for
the reduction of taxation therein, notwithstanding any provision to the
contrary contained in the charter of such city or in any act relating to
such city or in any general, special or local law.
 5. a. State aid adjustments. All errors or omissions in the
apportionment shall be corrected by the commissioner. Whenever a school
district has been apportioned less money than that to which it is
entitled, the commissioner may allot to such district the balance to
which it is entitled. Whenever a school district has been apportioned
more money than that to which it is entitled, the commissioner may, by
an order, direct such moneys to be paid back to the state to be credited
to the general fund local assistance account for state aid to the
schools, or may deduct such amount from the next apportionment to be
made to said district, provided, however, that, upon notification of
excess payments of aid for which a recovery must be made by the state
through deduction of future aid payments, a school district may request
that such excess payments be recovered by deducting such excess payments
from the payments due to such school district and payable in the month
of June in (i) the school year in which such notification was received
and (ii) the two succeeding school years, provided further that there
shall be no interest penalty assessed against such district or collected
by the state. Such request shall be made to the commissioner in such
form as the commissioner shall prescribe, and shall be based on
documentation that the total amount to be recovered is in excess of one
percent of the district's total general fund expenditures for the
preceding school year. The amount to be deducted in the first year shall
be the greater of (i) the sum of the amount of such excess payments that
is recognized as a liability due to other governments by the district
for the preceding school year and the positive remainder of the
district's unreserved fund balance at the close of the preceding school
year less the product of the district's total general fund expenditures
for the preceding school year multiplied by five percent, or (ii)
one-third of such excess payments. The amount to be recovered in the
second year shall equal the lesser of the remaining amount of such
excess payments to be recovered or one-third of such excess payments,
and the remaining amount of such excess payments shall be recovered in
the third year. Provided further that, notwithstanding any other
provisions of this subdivision, any pending payment of moneys due to
such district as a prior year adjustment payable pursuant to paragraph c
of this subdivision for aid claims that had been previously paid as
current year aid payments in excess of the amount to which the district
is entitled and for which recovery of excess payments is to be made
pursuant to this paragraph, shall be reduced at the time of actual
payment by any remaining unrecovered balance of such excess payments,
and the remaining scheduled deductions of such excess payments pursuant
to this paragraph shall be reduced by the commissioner to reflect the
amount so recovered. The commissioner shall certify no payment to a
school district based on a claim submitted later than three years after
the close of the school year in which such payment was first to be made.
For claims for which payment is first to be made in the nineteen hundred
ninety-six--ninety-seven school year, the commissioner shall certify no
payment to a school district based on a claim submitted later than two
years after the close of such school year. For claims for which payment
is first to be made in the nineteen hundred ninety-seven--ninety-eight
school year and thereafter, the commissioner shall certify no payment to
a school district based on a claim submitted later than one year after
the close of such school year. Provided, however, no payments shall be
barred or reduced where such payment is required as a result of a final
audit of the state. It is further provided that, until June thirtieth,
nineteen hundred ninety-six, the commissioner may grant a waiver from
the provisions of this section for any school district if it is in the
best educational interests of the district pursuant to guidelines
developed by the commissioner and approved by the director of the
budget.
 b. Claims resulting from court orders or judgments. Any payment which
would be due as the result of a court order or judgment shall not be
barred, provided that, commencing January first, nineteen hundred
ninety-six, such court order or judgment and any other data required
shall be filed with the comptroller within one year from the date of the
court order or judgment, and provided further that the commissioner
shall certify no payment to a school district for a specific school year
that is based on a claim that results from a court order or judgement so
filed with the comptroller unless the total value of such claim, as
determined by the commissioner, is greater than one percent of the
school district's total revenues from state sources as previously
recorded in the general fund and reported to the comptroller in the
annual financial report of the school district for such school year.
 c. Payment of moneys due for prior years. State aid payments due for
prior years in accordance with the provisions of this subdivision shall
be paid within the limit of the appropriation designated therefor
provided, however, that each eligible claim shall be payable in the
order that it has been approved for payment by the commissioner, but in
no case shall a single claim draw down more than forty percent of the
appropriation so designated for a single year, and provided further that
no claim shall be set aside for insufficiency of funds to make a
complete payment, but shall be eligible for a partial payment in one
year and shall retain its priority date status for appropriations
designated for such purposes in future years.
 6. The commissioner of education may also in his discretion excuse the
default of a trustee or a board of education in employing a teacher not
legally qualified, legalize the time so taught and authorize the payment
of the salary of such teacher.
 7. No district shall be entitled to any portion of such school moneys
on such apportionment unless the report of the trustees or board of
education for the preceding school year shall show that the public
schools were actually in session in the district and taught by a
qualified teacher or by successive qualified teachers or by qualified
teachers for not less than one hundred eighty days. The moneys payable
to a school district pursuant to section thirty-six hundred nine-a of
this part in the current year shall be reduced by one one-hundred
eightieth of the district's total foundation aid for the base year for
each day less than one hundred eighty days that the schools of the
district were actually in session, except that the commissioner may
disregard such reduction in the apportionment of public money: (i) for
any day or days on which session had been previously scheduled but the
superintendent was required to close the school or schools due to a
properly executed declaration of a state or local state of emergency
pursuant to article two-B of the executive law; or (ii) for up to five
days if he or she finds that the schools of the district were not in
session for one hundred eighty days because of extraordinarily adverse
weather conditions, impairment of heating facilities, insufficiency of
water supply, shortage of fuel, lack of electricity, natural gas
leakage, unacceptable levels of chemical substances, a credible threat
to student safety as reasonably determined by a lead school official or
the destruction of a school building either in whole or in part, and if,
further, the commissioner finds that such district cannot make up such
days of instruction by using for the secondary grades all scheduled
vacation days which occur prior to the first scheduled regents
examination day in June, and for the elementary grades all scheduled
vacation days which occur prior to the last scheduled regents
examination day in June; or (iii) for any day or days in the two
thousand nineteen -- two thousand twenty school year on which session
had been previously scheduled but the chancellor of the city school
district of the city of New York or the superintendent of a district
closed the school or schools due to a determination by the chancellor or
superintendent that it was in the best interest of public health or
safety of the school district to close the school or schools in response
to the novel coronavirus, COVID-19. For the purposes of this
subdivision, "scheduled vacation days" shall mean days on which the
schools of the district are not in session and for which no prohibition
exists in subdivision eight of this section for them to be in session.
 8. No school shall be in session on a Saturday, the first day of the
second lunar month after the winter solstice in the preceding calendar
year known as Asian Lunar New Year, or a legal holiday, except general
election day, Washington's birthday and Lincoln's birthday, and except
that driver education classes may be conducted on a Saturday. A
deficiency not exceeding four days during any school year caused by
teachers' attendance upon conferences held by superintendents of schools
of city school districts or other school districts employing
superintendents of schools shall be excused by the commissioner,
notwithstanding any provision of law, rule or regulation to the
contrary, a school district may elect to schedule such conference days
in the last two weeks of August, subject to collective bargaining
requirements pursuant to article fourteen of the civil service law, and
such days shall be counted towards the required one hundred eighty days
of session, provided however, that such scheduling shall not alter the
obligation of the school district to provide transportation to students
in non-public elementary and secondary schools or charter schools. At
least two such conference days during such school year shall be
dedicated to staff attendance upon conferences providing staff
development relating to implementation of the new high learning
standards and assessments, as adopted by the board of regents.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, rule or regulation to the
contrary, school districts may elect to use one or more of such
allowable conference days in units of not less than one hour each to
provide staff development activities relating to implementation of the
new high learning standards and assessments. A district making such
election may provide such staff development on any day during which
sessions are allowed and apply such units to satisfy a deficiency in the
length of one or more daily sessions of instruction for pupils as
specified in regulations of the commissioner. The commissioner shall
assure that such conference days include appropriate school violence
prevention and intervention training, and may require that up to one
such conference day be dedicated for such purpose.
 8-b. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision eight of this
section, a trustee or board of trustees or a board of education of a
school district having fewer than six hundred pupils in grades
kindergarten through twelve may provide for classes to be held on any
day of the week in connection with educational programs for the
disadvantaged operated under the elementary and secondary education act;
provided, however, no pupils or teachers shall be required to attend
such classes if they observe any such day as a Sabbath or a holy day in
accordance with the requirements of their religion.
 9. Whenever it shall appear that any school district has had an
average daily attendance of five or less during the three years
immediately preceding the first of July, if such district continues to
maintain a school the succeeding year, it shall be entitled to receive
for such year an amount equivalent to the average daily attendance of
pupils in such district divided by fifteen and multiplied by the amount
it would be entitled to receive under the provisions of this chapter.
Provided, however, whenever the commissioner of education is satisfied
that the closing of the school in any district is impracticable or that
the cost to such district of contracting for the education of its pupils
would exceed the cost involved in maintaining a school in the district
and such district maintains a school, he may apportion to such district
the total amount of state aid to which it is entitled.
 10. No school district shall be eligible to receive the full
apportionment of state aid to which it is entitled under other
provisions of this chapter unless the trustees or board of education
comply with the requirements of article eighty-nine of this chapter. If
the trustees or board of education of a school district fail to comply
with such requirements or reduce the programs provided thereunder below
the corresponding programs provided during the school year commencing
July first, nineteen hundred sixty-one, except as a result of a
reduction in the number of pupils affected, the commissioner of
education shall withhold from the full apportionment of such state aid
an amount equal to the difference between (i) the expenditures which he
estimates the district would have had to make or incur during the school
year upon which such apportionments are based if the district had fully
complied with such requirements or if the district had maintained such
programs, and (ii) the expenditures actually made or incurred by the
district for such programs during the same school year.
 11. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the commissioner shall
withhold the general fund apportionment due to any school district when
such school district fails to submit by the date specified in section
thirty-six hundred one of this part the reports required by the
commissioner to calculate such apportionments, until the time such
reports have been submitted in proper fashion.
 12. All the acts done and proceedings heretofore had and taken or
caused to be had and taken by the Center Moriches Union Free School
district and by all its officers or agents relating to or in connection
with certain transportation contractual obligations for regular student
transportation of the nineteen hundred ninety-nine--two thousand school
year, which was part of the two thousand--two thousand one state aid
claim submitted to the department by such school district, are hereby
legalized, validated, ratified and confirmed, notwithstanding any
failure to comply with the approval and filing provisions of this
chapter or any other law or any other statutory authority, rule or
regulation, other than those filing provisions defined in paragraph a of
subdivision five of this section, in relation to any omission, error,
defect, irregularity or illegality in such proceeding had and taken. For
the purpose of those filing provisions defined in such paragraph a of
subdivision five of this section, the district shall be deemed to have
filed such contract within one year after the close of the two
thousand--two thousand one school year, and aid due and payable for such
filing shall be deemed to be state aid payments due for prior years and
shall be paid pursuant to paragraph c of subdivision five of this
section.
 13. For purposes of this chapter, "limited English proficient" and
"limited English proficiency" shall mean "English language learner".
 § 3606. Nonresident academic attendance; manner of certifying and
paying apportionment. The commissioner of education immediately after
making an apportionment shall certify, or cause to be certified, to the
treasurer, if there be one, otherwise to the disbursing officer or
collector of each school district or academy included in such
apportionment, except those located within the territory of the city of
New York, the amount of money which has been allotted to each said
school district or academy. The payment of said allotment shall be made
by the commissioner of taxation and finance directly to the treasurer,
if there be one, otherwise to the disbursing officer or collector of
each school district or academy named in the certificate of the
commissioner of education. Any apportionment which shall be made to the
city school district of the city of New York shall be certified and paid
to the commissioner of finance of the city of New York, and any
apportionment which shall be made to any private academy situated within
the territory of the city of New York, shall be certified and paid
directly to the disbursing officer of the academy to which the
apportionment is made.
 § 3607. Manner of payment of moneys apportioned. Upon the audit of
vouchers certified by the commissioner of education, the comptroller
shall draw his warrant on the commissioner of taxation and finance for
payment of any moneys apportioned for the support of common schools.
Such payment shall be made to the treasurer, if there be one, otherwise
to the disbursing officer or collector of each school district, and to
the commissioner of finance of the city of New York for the city school
district of the city of New York, through the commissioner of education.
 § 3608. Certificate of apportionment by commissioner of education. As
soon as possible after the making of any annual or general or
supplemental apportionment, the commissioner of education shall certify
it, or cause it to be certified, to the district superintendents, city
treasurer or chamberlain of each city school district of a city having
one hundred twenty-five thousand inhabitants or more according to the
latest federal census, the city school district treasurer of every other
city school district, and the treasurer, if there be one, otherwise to
the disbursing officer or collector of each school district included in
such apportionment.
 § 3609-a. Moneys apportioned, when and how payable commencing July
first, two thousand seven.
 For aid payable in the two thousand seven--two thousand eight school
year through the two thousand twenty-five--two thousand twenty-six
school year, "moneys apportioned" shall mean the lesser of (i) the sum
of one hundred percent of the respective amount set forth for each
school district as payable pursuant to this section in the school aid
computer listing for the current year produced by the commissioner in
support of the budget which includes the appropriation for the general
support for public schools for the prescribed payments and
individualized payments due prior to April first for the current year
plus the apportionment payable during the current school year pursuant
to subdivision six-a and subdivision fifteen of section thirty-six
hundred two of this part minus any reductions to current year aids
pursuant to subdivision seven of section thirty-six hundred four of this
part or any deduction from apportionment payable pursuant to this
chapter for collection of a school district basic contribution as
defined in subdivision eight of section forty-four hundred one of this
chapter, less any grants provided pursuant to subparagraph two-a of
paragraph b of subdivision four of section ninety-two-c of the state
finance law, less any grants provided pursuant to subdivision five of
section ninety-seven-nnnn of the state finance law, less any grants
provided pursuant to subdivision twelve of section thirty-six hundred
forty-one of this article, or (ii) the apportionment calculated by the
commissioner based on data on file at the time the payment is processed;
provided however, that for the purposes of any payments made pursuant to
this section prior to the first business day of June of the current
year, moneys apportioned shall not include any aids payable pursuant to
subdivisions six and fourteen, if applicable, of section thirty-six
hundred two of this part as current year aid for debt service on bond
anticipation notes and/or bonds first issued in the current year or any
aids payable for full-day kindergarten for the current year pursuant to
subdivision nine of section thirty-six hundred two of this part. The
definitions of "base year" and "current year" as set forth in
subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this part shall
apply to this section. For aid payable in the two thousand
twenty-five--two thousand twenty-six school year, reference to such
"school aid computer listing for the current year" shall mean the
printouts entitled "SA252-6".
 1. General support for public schools (GSPS) appropriation. The GSPS
appropriation shall be used to support payments made pursuant to this
section, plus apportionments made pursuant to section seven hundred one,
seven hundred eleven, seven hundred fifty-one, seven hundred
fifty-three, thirty-two hundred two, thirty-six hundred nine-b,
thirty-six hundred forty-one and forty-four hundred five of this
chapter, any other applicable allocations made pursuant to this chapter,
but not paid pursuant to the schedule prescribed by this section or
sections thirty-six hundred nine-b, thirty-six hundred nine-d or
thirty-six hundred nine-f of this article; plus any unconsolidated law
provisions which apply to programs funded from such appropriation; plus
any sums paid out upon audit of the state comptroller as final
adjustments of apportionments originally claimed and payable pursuant to
this subdivision in prior school years; plus sums paid out as prior year
adjustments, to the extent an allowance was included in such
appropriation for such purpose. Any apportionments provided by this
chapter shall be paid in accordance with this section unless
specifically exempted.
 a. Prescribed payments. (1) District payments to the teachers'
retirement system. Of the moneys apportioned by the commissioner to
school districts for the current year, after the payment of lottery aid
in accordance with subparagraph two of this paragraph, an amount not to
exceed one-third of the amount owed by such school district to the New
York state teachers' retirement system for salaries paid in the base
year or for other obligations pursuant to section five hundred
twenty-one of this chapter shall be payable to such teachers' retirement
system on behalf of the school district on or before the fifteenth day
of each of the months of September, October and November, except that
special payments due such teachers' retirement system shall be payable
on or before the fifteenth day of October. Any underpayment resulting
from data changes shall be payable from spring payments. Any portion of
the payments due such teachers' retirement system that exceed the
remainder of the moneys to be apportioned to the school district shall
be made directly by the school district to the system.
 (2) Lottery apportionment. Of the estimated moneys to be apportioned
by the commissioner to school districts for the current year, that
portion payable pursuant to section ninety-two-c of the state finance
law, exclusive of the minimum lottery grant provided for the purchase of
textbooks pursuant to subparagraph one of paragraph b of subdivision
four of section ninety-two-c of such law and the lottery grant provided
pursuant to subparagraph two-a of paragraph b of subdivision four of
section ninety-two-c of the state finance law, shall be payable on or
before the last state business day of September.
 (3) Lottery textbook apportionment. The minimum lottery grant provided
for the purchase of textbooks pursuant to subparagraph one of paragraph
b of subdivision four of section ninety-two-c of the state finance law,
shall be payable on or before the last state business day of September.
 (4) Fixed fall payments. Of the moneys apportioned remaining to be
paid to school districts for the current year after deductions are made
for the purpose of subparagraph one of this paragraph, districts shall
be eligible to receive payments determined as follows: (i) on or before
October fifteenth, an estimated twelve and one-half percent of such
remaining amount minus the amount paid pursuant to subparagraph two of
this paragraph; (ii) on or before November fifteenth, an estimated
eighteen and seventy-five one hundredths percent of such remaining
amount minus the sum of the amounts paid pursuant to clause (i) of this
subparagraph and subparagraph two of this paragraph; and (iii) on or
before December fifteenth, an estimated twenty-five percent of such
remaining amount minus the sum of the amounts paid pursuant to clauses
(i) and (ii) of this subparagraph and subparagraph two of this
paragraph. Such amounts shall be payable only to the extent that reports
due the commissioner have been filed.
 (5) Remaining apportionment. The remaining moneys apportioned for the
current year after deductions are made for the purposes of subparagraphs
one, two and four of this paragraph, shall be payable pursuant to
paragraph b of this subdivision to the extent that reports due the
commissioner have been filed.
 b. Individualized payments. (1) District expenditure need. To
determine the payments a district shall be eligible to receive under
this paragraph, a district expenditure need shall be computed, based on
estimated data on file with the commissioner as of December first, which
shall equal the general fund expenditures for the base year (i) minus
the sum of base year aids and grants recorded as revenue to such general
fund but not payable pursuant to this section; (ii) minus the district's
base year general fund expenditures to the New York state teachers'
retirement system; (iii) minus that portion of the district's base year
general fund expenditures for debt service eligible for an apportionment
pursuant to subdivision six of section thirty-six hundred two of this
chapter plus such general fund expenditures for debt service for the
current year; and (iv) minus current year aid pursuant to subparagraphs
two and four of paragraph a of this subdivision.
 (2) Payment amounts. For remaining aid payments due prior to July,
moneys apportioned shall be determined based on preliminary aid data on
file with the commissioner on December first, provided that such
commissioner shall recompute such amounts designated for the month of
June based on aid data on file with the commissioner as of May first.
(i) January amount. If the aid payable under this paragraph exceeds
fifty percent of the expenditure need of the district, then such excess
amount shall be designated for the month of January. (ii) February
amount. If such aid, minus any aid payable pursuant to clause (i) of
this subparagraph, exceeds forty percent of such expenditure need, then
such excess amount shall be designated for the month of February. (iii)
March amount. If such aid, minus any aid payable pursuant to clauses (i)
and (ii) of this subparagraph, exceeds thirty percent of such
expenditure need, then such excess amount shall be designated for the
month of March. (iv) April amount. If such aid, minus any aid payable
pursuant to clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) of this subparagraph, exceeds
twenty percent of the expenditure need of the district, then such excess
amount shall be designated for the month of April. (v) May amount. If
such aid, minus any aid payable pursuant to clauses (i), (ii), (iii) and
(iv) of this subparagraph, exceeds ten percent of such expenditure need,
then such excess amount shall be designated for the month of May. (vi)
June amount. Any moneys apportioned not designated pursuant to clauses
(i), (ii), (iii), (iv) and (v) of this subparagraph shall be designated
for the month of June.
 (3) Payments. (i) Winter payments. The amounts designated for January,
February and March pursuant to clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) of
subparagraph two of this paragraph shall be paid on or before the last
state business day of such months.
 (ii) Sustaining advance payments. In order to sustain all advance
payments made in previous school years pursuant to subparagraph five of
this paragraph or the comparable provisions of section thirty-six
hundred nine of this article, the commissioner shall establish a
schedule to distribute the sustaining advance payment amount among
school districts. Such sustaining advance payments due to school
districts shall be, first, in the same proportion as such school
district's share bears to the total moneys designated for payment in the
month of April, second, as a share of the total moneys designated for
May and last, if applicable, as a share of the total moneys designated
for June to all such school districts pursuant to clauses (iv), (v), and
(vi) of subparagraph two of this paragraph. The sustaining advance
payment due shall be deducted first from a school district's designated
amount for April, then from a school district's designated amount for
May and finally from any moneys due in June. The commissioner shall
transmit a schedule to the comptroller, the director of the budget and
the chairs of the legislative fiscal committees displaying for each
district, the sustaining advance payment due, the portion of such amount
to be withheld pursuant to subparagraph four of this paragraph and the
remainder, if any, to be paid to the school district on or before March
thirty-first.
 (iii) Determining final payment for the state fiscal year. Prior to
transmitting the March payment to the state comptroller, based on
current year, base year and prior school year state aid payments made or
scheduled to be made from the general support for public schools
appropriations for the state fiscal year ending March thirty-first, the
commissioner shall determine the extent to which the amount designated
for June pursuant to clause (vi) of subparagraph two of this paragraph,
as adjusted in accordance with clause (ii) of this subparagraph, net of
any disallowances, would need to be advanced and paid on or before March
thirty-first in order to use the remainder of such appropriations,
excluding amounts assigned to the department of health pursuant to
subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred nine-b of this article, on
or before March thirty-first, or to the extent to which the amount
designated for March would need to be proportionally reduced so as not
to exceed such state fiscal year appropriations. The commissioner shall
report the amount of money required to be advanced or deferred and the
percent it represents of the June or March amounts, as the case may be,
to the director of the budget, the chairperson of the senate finance
committee and the chairperson of the assembly ways and means committee.
To the extent that moneys are advanced or deferred pursuant to this
paragraph, they shall be in the same proportion as each school
district's share bears to the total of such June or March amount. Upon
approval of the director of the budget, the commissioner shall transmit
the schedule of any such partial June prepayments or such reduced March
payments to the state comptroller. Any portion of the March payment
deferred shall be added to the June payment; any portion of the June
payment advanced shall be paid on or before March thirty-first.
 (iv) April and May payments. Any amount designated for and remaining
to be paid in April or May pursuant to clauses (iv) and (v) of
subparagraph two of this paragraph minus any portion of such amounts
advanced pursuant to clause (ii) of this subparagraph shall be paid on
or before the last state business day of such months.
 (v) June payment. The moneys apportioned to school districts and
designated for June pursuant to clause (vi) of subparagraph two of this
paragraph shall be paid on or before the last state business day of such
month, to the extent that moneys are owed to school districts pursuant
to this section for the current year, including claims for current year
aid for debt service on bond anticipation notes aidable in June and/or
new bonds and capital notes aidable in June pursuant to subdivisions six
and fourteen, if applicable, of section thirty-six hundred two of this
part and claims for current year aid for conversion to full day
kindergarten, after taking into account any adjustments made in
accordance with clauses (ii) and (iii) of this subparagraph, net of any
disallowances.
 (vi) Deferred July payment of certain claims for debt service on bond
anticipation notes and on bonds or capital notes first issued in the
current year. The moneys apportioned to school districts for claims for
current year aid for debt service on bond anticipation notes aidable in
July following the current year and/or new bonds and capital notes
aidable in July following the current year pursuant to subdivisions six
and fourteen, if applicable, of section thirty-six hundred two of this
part shall be paid on or before the last state business day of July
immediately following the current school year, to the extent that moneys
are owed to school districts pursuant to this section for the current
year, net of any disallowances.
 (vii) Deferred September payments. Any amounts payable to a school
district pursuant to this section which exceeded one hundred percent of
the respective amount set forth for such district as payable pursuant to
this section in the school aid computer listing for the current school
year shall be designated for payment for the month of September next
following the close of the current school year. Such payments shall be
made on or before the last state business day of the month of September,
based on data on file as of August first.
 (4) State share of medicaid reimbursements. For the purposes of this
subparagraph, for aid payable in the two thousand ten--two thousand
eleven school year, the first reporting period shall run from May first
of the base year through January thirty-first of the current year, and
the second reporting period shall run from February first of the current
year through March thirty-first of the current year. For aid payable in
the two thousand eleven--two thousand twelve school year and thereafter,
the first reporting period shall run from April first of the base year
through December thirty-first of the current year, and the second
reporting period shall run from January first of the current year
through March thirty-first of the current year. Notwithstanding any
inconsistent provisions of law to the contrary, the sustaining advance
payment due any school district pursuant to clause (ii) of subparagraph
three of this paragraph in March shall be reduced by fifty percent of
any federal participation during the first reporting period pursuant to
title XIX of the social security act, in special education programs
provided pursuant to article eighty-nine of this chapter for services
provided on or before June thirtieth, two thousand nine; the June
payment due any school district pursuant to clause (v) of subparagraph
three of this paragraph shall be reduced by fifty percent of any federal
participation during the second reporting period for services provided
on or before June thirtieth, two thousand nine. Not later than ten days
after the end of the first reporting period ending on January
thirty-first, two thousand eleven, not later than forty-one days after
each first reporting period thereafter and not later than forty days
after the end of each second reporting period, the commissioner of
health, as the authorized fiscal agent of the state education
department, shall certify to the commissioner and the director of the
budget the total amount of such federal moneys paid to a school district
for such services during such reporting period. Following each cycle
payment, the commissioner of health shall report to the commissioner the
aggregate amount of such federal medicaid payments to each school
district. The commissioner shall recoup such amounts first, to the
extent possible, from the specified payment, then by withholding any
other moneys due the school district and finally by direct billing to
any school district still owing moneys to the state. All moneys withheld
or paid to the state on account of this paragraph shall be credited by
the comptroller to the local assistance account for general support for
public schools.
 (5) Advance payments. To the extent that any moneys payable pursuant
to clauses (iv) and (v) of subparagraph two of this paragraph, are paid
in advance of April first, such moneys shall be paid in accordance with
chapter two hundred twenty of the laws of nineteen hundred ninety, as
amended, and in the same proportion as such school district's share
bears to the total moneys, payable to all such school districts pursuant
to such clauses (iv) and (v) provided however, that any moneys so
advanced shall be deducted first from a school district's payment due in
April, then from any moneys due in May and finally from any remaining
moneys due in June.
 (6) Apportionments to the city school district of the city of New York
under the provisions of this paragraph shall be computed and paid on a
city-wide basis.
 c. Deficit reduction assessment for two thousand nine--two thousand
ten. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the commissioner shall
reduce payments due to each district pursuant to this section by an
amount equal to the amounts set forth for each school district as
"DEFICIT REDUCTION ASSESSMENT" in the school aid computer listing
produced by the commissioner in support of the executive budget request
for the two thousand nine--two thousand ten school year and entitled
"BT112-1", and such amount shall be deducted from moneys apportioned for
the purposes of payments made pursuant to section thirty-six hundred
nine-a of the education law and provided further that the amount of such
reduction shall be deemed to have been paid to the district pursuant to
this section for the school year in which such deduction is made. The
commissioner shall provide a schedule of such reductions in payments to
the state comptroller, the director of the budget, the chair of the
senate finance committee and the chair of the assembly ways and means
committee.
 d. Supplemental deficit reduction assessment for the two thousand
nine--two thousand ten school year. (1) Notwithstanding any other
provision of law to the contrary, the commissioner shall reduce payments
due to each district for the two thousand nine--two thousand ten school
year pursuant to this section by an amount equal to the supplemental
deficit reduction assessment computed for such district, and such amount
shall be deducted from moneys apportioned for the purposes of payments
made pursuant to this section and if the reduction is greater than the
sum of the amounts available for such deductions, the remainder of the
reduction shall be withheld from payments scheduled to be made to the
district pursuant to this section for the two thousand ten--two thousand
eleven school year, and provided further that an amount equal to the
amount of such deduction shall be deemed to have been paid to the
district pursuant to this section for the school year in which such
deduction is made. The commissioner shall compute such supplemental
deficit reduction assessment and shall provide a schedule of such
reduction in payments to the state comptroller, the director of the
budget, the chair of the senate finance committee and the chair of the
assembly ways and means committee.
 (2) The supplemental deficit reduction assessment shall be computed as
the product of thirty-five and sixty-two one-hundredths of a percent
(0.3562) multiplied by the absolute value of the deficit reduction
assessment established pursuant to paragraph c of this subdivision.
 2. a. Such moneys shall be payable to the treasurer of each city
school district, and the treasurer of each union free school district
and of each central school district and of each other school district,
if there be a treasurer, otherwise to the collector or other disbursing
officer of such district, who shall apply for and receive the same as
soon as payable.
 b. In the case of city school districts of cities with one hundred
twenty-five thousand inhabitants or more, any payment which pursuant to
this section is required to be made to the treasurer of the city school
district, shall be made to the city treasurer or chamberlain.
 3. Except as otherwise provided by law, payment to a school district
pursuant to this section shall be general receipts of the district and
may be used for any lawful purpose of the district provided, however
that any payments for debt service for school building purposes on debt
which has been excluded in ascertaining the power of the school district
to contract indebtedness shall be used solely for the purpose of payment
of the interest on and amortization of or payment of such indebtedness.
 § 3609-b. Moneys apportioned for students with disabilities, when and
how payable. Moneys apportioned to school districts for the excess cost
aid setaside pursuant to subdivision four of section thirty-six hundred
two of this article and the apportionments for students with
disabilities due in accordance with the provisions of subdivisions five
and five-a of section thirty-six hundred two of this article and section
forty-four hundred five of this chapter, shall be paid to or on behalf
of school districts in accordance with the provisions of this section,
provided, however, that payments made to or on behalf of any school
district pursuant to this section shall be adjusted subsequent to the
filing, in an acceptable manner, of aid claim forms prescribed by the
commissioner.
 For aid payable in the two thousand seven--two thousand eight school
year and thereafter, "moneys apportioned" shall mean the sum of; (i) the
lesser of (A) one hundred percent of the respective amount set forth for
each school district as payable pursuant to this section in the school
aid computer listing for the current year, as defined in the opening
paragraph of section thirty-six hundred nine-a of this article, or (B)
the apportionment calculated by the commissioner for the current year
based on data on file at the time the payment is processed plus (ii) the
excess cost aid setaside computed pursuant to subdivision four of
section thirty-six hundred two of this article, based on data utilized
in producing such school aid listing for the current year. The
definitions "base year" and "current year" as set forth in subdivision
one of section thirty-six hundred two of this article shall apply to
this section.
 1. Assignment of certain moneys. a. Any moneys to be apportioned by
the commissioner to school districts during the school year pursuant to
this section for services provided on or before June thirtieth, two
thousand nine that were reimbursed by the state on or before April
first, two thousand eleven shall, in the first instance, be designated
as the state share of moneys due a school district pursuant to title XIX
of the social security act, on account of school supportive health
services provided to students with disabilities in special education
programs pursuant to article eighty-nine of this chapter and to those
pupils who are qualified handicapped persons as defined in the federal
rehabilitation act of nineteen hundred seventy-three, as amended. Some
or all of such state share may be assigned on behalf of school districts
to the department of health, as provided herein; any remaining state
share moneys shall be paid to school districts on the same schedule as
the federal share of such title XIX payments and shall be based on the
monthly report of the commissioner of health to the commissioner; and
any remaining moneys to be apportioned to a school district pursuant to
this section shall be paid in accordance with the provisions of
subdivision two of this section. The amount to be assigned to the
department of health, as determined by the commissioner of health, for
any school district shall not exceed the federal share of any moneys due
such school district pursuant to title XIX. Moneys designated as state
share moneys shall be paid to such school districts based on the
submission and approval of claims related to such school supportive
health services, in the manner provided by law.
 a-1. Any moneys to be apportioned by the commissioner to school
districts during the school year pursuant to this section for services
provided during the two thousand nine--two thousand ten school year and
thereafter, or for services provided in a prior school year that were
not reimbursed by the state on or before April first, two thousand
eleven, shall, in the first instance, be designated as the state share
of moneys due a school district pursuant to title XIX of the social
security act, on account of school supportive health services provided
to students with disabilities in special education programs pursuant to
article eighty-nine of this chapter and to those pupils who are
qualified handicapped persons as defined in the federal rehabilitation
act of nineteen hundred seventy-three, as amended. Such state share
shall be assigned on behalf of school districts to the department of
health, as provided herein; the amount designated as such nonfederal
share shall be transferred by the commissioner to the department of
health based on the monthly report of the commissioner of health to the
commissioner; and any remaining moneys to be apportioned to a school
district pursuant to this section shall be paid in accordance with the
provisions of subdivision two of this section. The amount to be assigned
to the department of health, as determined by the commissioner of
health, for any school district shall not exceed the federal share of
any moneys due such school district pursuant to title XIX. Moneys
designated as state share moneys shall be paid to such school districts
by the department of health based on the submission and approval of
claims related to such school supportive health services, in the manner
provided by law.
 b. Any moneys remaining to be apportioned to a school district
pursuant to this section shall, in the second instance, be used to
reimburse the commissioner for any moneys due from a school district
found to be financially responsible, in accordance with the provisions
of paragraph e of subdivision four of section thirty-two hundred two of
this chapter, for the cost of instruction of a student with a disability
placed by a local social services district or other state department or
agency in a family home at board that receives program support from a
child care institution affiliated with a special act school district
which is located in another school district which contracts for the
education of such student, upon the recommendation of its committee on
special education, for the instruction of such student pursuant to
paragraph c, d, e or f of subdivision two of section forty-four hundred
one of this chapter or for a nonresidential placement pursuant to
paragraph one of such subdivision. In the event that a district owes
more than the moneys remaining to be apportioned to the district
pursuant to this section, the commissioner shall withhold such excess
from any other moneys due the district.
 2. Payments to school districts. a. The moneys apportioned by the
commissioner to school districts in accordance with the provisions of
subdivisions five and five-a of section thirty-six hundred two of this
article and section forty-four hundred five of this chapter and the
moneys apportioned to school districts for the excess cost aid setaside
pursuant to subdivision four of section thirty-six hundred two of this
article, during the school year and remaining due after deductions are
made for the purposes of subdivision one of this section, shall be
payable, for the two thousand seven--two thousand eight school year and
thereafter in accordance with the following schedule:
 (1) December payment. On or before December fifteenth, a portion shall
be paid equal to the positive remainder of twenty-five percent of the
moneys apportioned less any payments made pursuant to paragraph a of
subdivision one of this section for the current year.
 (2) March payment. On or before March fifteenth, a portion shall be
paid equal to the positive remainder of seventy percent of the moneys
apportioned less any payments made pursuant to paragraph a of
subdivision one of this section and subparagraph one of this paragraph
for the current year.
 (3) June payment. On or before June fifteenth, a portion shall be paid
equal to the positive remainder of eighty-five percent of the moneys
apportioned less any payments made pursuant to paragraph a of
subdivision one of this section and subparagraphs one and two of this
paragraph for the current year.
 (4) August payment. To the extent that any moneys are owed to a school
district pursuant to this section, a portion shall be paid on or before
August fifteenth equal to the positive remainder of one hundred percent
of the moneys apportioned less any payments made pursuant to paragraph a
of subdivision one of this section and subparagraphs one, two and three
of this paragraph for the current year.
 (5) Deferred September payment. Any amount payable to a school
district pursuant to this section which exceeded one hundred percent of
the respective amount set forth for such district as payable pursuant to
this section in the school aid computer listing for the current school
year shall be designated for payment for the month of September next
following the close of the current school year. Such payments shall be
made on the first state business day of the month of September, based on
data on file as of August first; provided however, that for the
September two thousand six payment such calculation shall be based on
the computer listing for the current year using data on file as of
August first.
 b. Such moneys shall be payable to the treasurer of each city school
district, and the treasurer of each union free school district and of
each central school district and of each other school district, if there
be a treasurer, otherwise to the collector or other disbursing officer
of such district or board of cooperative educational services, who shall
apply for and receive the same as soon as payable. In the case of city
school districts of cities with one hundred twenty-five thousand
inhabitants or more, any payment which pursuant to this section is
required to be made to the treasurer of the city school district, shall
be made to the city treasurer or chamberlain.
 3. Due minimum supplemental apportionment. Notwithstanding any
inconsistent provisions of subdivisions five and five-a of section
thirty-six hundred two of this article and section forty-four hundred
five of this chapter, for the two thousand seven--two thousand eight
school year and thereafter, the due minimum supplemental apportionment
shall equal the positive remainder resulting when the sum of the
apportionments due a school district pursuant to such subdivisions five
and five-a and such section forty-four hundred five for any school year
and, the moneys apportioned for the excess cost aid setaside pursuant to
subdivision four of section thirty-six hundred two of this article, is
subtracted from the amount designated as the state share of moneys due a
school district pursuant to title XIX of the social security act, on
account of school supportive health services provided to pupils with
disabilities in special education programs pursuant to article
eighty-nine of this chapter as determined in accordance with the
provisions of subdivision one of this section. Any additional
apportionment pursuant to this subdivision shall be computed and
recomputed by the commissioner in the normal course of auditing school
district claims for aid.
 4. In addition to any other payments due a district pursuant to this
section, the commissioner shall also reimburse districts for any amounts
due in accordance with the provisions of paragraph e of subdivision four
of section thirty-two hundred two of this chapter as follows:
 a. thirty-five percent of any amounts due shall be payable on or
before December fifteenth;
 b. seventy percent of any amounts due, minus any payment made pursuant
to paragraph a of this subdivision, shall be payable on or before March
fifteenth; and
 c. any remaining amount due shall be payable on or before June
fifteenth.
 § 3609-d. Moneys apportioned for board of cooperative educational
services aidable expenditures when and how payable commencing July
first, two thousand four. Notwithstanding the provisions of section
thirty-six hundred nine-a of this article, apportionments payable
pursuant to section nineteen hundred fifty of this chapter shall be paid
pursuant to this section. For aid payable in the two thousand four--two
thousand five school year and thereafter, "moneys apportioned" shall
mean the lesser of (i) one hundred percent of the respective amount set
forth for each school district as payable pursuant to this section in
the school aid computer listing produced by the commissioner in support
of the budget including the appropriation for support of boards of
cooperative educational services for payments due prior to April first
for the current year, or (ii) the apportionment calculated by the
commissioner based on data on file at the time the payment is processed;
provided however, that for the purposes of any payment to be made in the
month of June of two thousand six such calculation shall be based on the
school aid computer listing for the current year using updated data at
the time of each payment. For districts subject to chapter five hundred
sixty-three of the laws of nineteen hundred eighty, thirty-six hundred
two-b, or two thousand forty of this chapter, for aid payable in the two
thousand four--two thousand five school year and thereafter, "moneys
apportioned" shall mean the apportionment calculated by the commissioner
based on data on file at the time the payment is processed. The "school
aid computer listing for the current year" shall be as defined in the
opening paragraph of section thirty-six hundred nine-a of this article.
The definitions "base year" and "current year" as set forth in
subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this article shall
apply to this section.
 1. Prescribed payments. Of the moneys to be apportioned by the
commissioner to school districts during the school year, that portion
payable pursuant to section nineteen hundred fifty of this chapter shall
be used in the first instance to make payments on behalf of boards of
cooperative educational services to the teachers' retirement system in
the same manner as payments made on behalf of school districts pursuant
to subparagraph one of paragraph a of subdivision one of section
thirty-six hundred nine-a of this article, and additional payments shall
be paid to boards of cooperative educational services as follows: the
greater of any payments made to the teachers' retirement system pursuant
to this paragraph or twenty-five percent of the moneys apportioned less
any payments made to the teachers' retirement system pursuant to this
paragraph on the first state business day of February, to the extent
that acceptable data has been filed with the commissioner; fifty-five
percent of the moneys apportioned, less the payment made in February and
less any payments made to the teachers' retirement system pursuant to
this paragraph, on the first state business day of June; and a final
apportionment equal to the amount calculated based on data on file as of
August first next following the close of the current year, provided
however, that for the September two thousand six payment such
calculation shall be based on the computer listing for the current year
using data on file as of August first, less payments made to date, on
the first state business day of September next following the close of
the current year; provided, however, that any obligation of a board of
cooperative educational services to the bond trustee of the dormitory
authority shall be paid in accordance with the applicable provisions of
the public authorities law.
 2. Such moneys shall be payable to the treasurer of each board of
cooperative educational services, if there be a treasurer, otherwise to
the collector or other disbursing officer of such board of cooperative
educational services, who shall apply for and receive the same as soon
as payable.
 3. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provisions of this chapter, for
aid payable in the nineteen hundred ninety-six--ninety-seven school year
the apportionment calculated pursuant to section nineteen hundred fifty
of this chapter shall be reduced by two percent.
 § 3609-e. School tax relief aid, when and how payable commencing July
first, nineteen hundred ninety-eight. Notwithstanding any other
provisions of this article, school tax relief aid shall be paid pursuant
to this section.
 1. Definitions. As used in this section the following terms shall be
defined as follows:
 a. "Amount of tax levy" shall mean the amount of property taxes levied
for school purposes in the current year pursuant to subdivision one of
section thirteen hundred six of the real property tax law, except that
for a city school district of a city with one hundred twenty-five
thousand inhabitants or more "amount of tax levy" shall mean an amount
equal to the product of the tax rate computed pursuant to paragraph e of
this subdivision for aids payable in the current year multiplied by such
district's actual valuation as defined in subdivision one of section
thirty-six hundred two of this article.
 b. "Phase-in factor" shall mean: (i) for aid payable in the two
thousand--two thousand one school year, seventy-five percent and (ii)
for aid payable in the two thousand one--two thousand two school year
and thereafter, one hundred percent.
 c. "STAR portion of the tax levy" shall mean the quotient of the
school tax relief aid payable in the current year divided by the amount
of tax levy expressed as a decimal to four places without rounding.
 d. The definitions of "school tax relief aid," "current year" and
"base year" as set forth in subdivision one of section thirty-six
hundred two of this article shall apply to this section.
 e. "Tax rate" shall mean the amount computed by dividing a school
district's total revenues from real property and non-property tax levies
for the base year levied for school purposes exclusive of library
purposes plus any payments in lieu of taxes received pursuant to section
four hundred eighty-five of the real property tax law and exclusive of
any balances in excess of six percent of general fund expense remaining
in the general fund of the district at the end of the base year, by such
district's actual valuation as defined in subdivision one of section
thirty-six hundred two of this article including any actual valuation
equivalent of payments in lieu of taxes determined pursuant to section
four hundred eighty-five of the real property tax law, provided,
however, that in the instance of a fiscally dependent city school
district, the tax rate shall be computed by dividing (i) such district's
total general fund expenditures, plus inter-fund transfers outgoing from
the general fund, and plus general fund reserve expenditures, less any
and all general fund non-tax revenue of such city school district which
has been paid and identified by an original payer as being specifically
on behalf of such city school district, and less any and all non-tax
revenue of the city upon which such city school district is fiscally
dependent which has been paid and identified by an original payer as
being specifically on behalf of such city school district but which has
not been identified as revenue of such city school district, and less
any and all other general fund revenues of such city school district
which are determined by the commissioner to be non-tax revenue of the
city upon which such city school district is fiscally dependent, by (ii)
such district's actual valuation as defined in subdivision one of such
section thirty-six hundred two. Revenues raised by a school district in
support of a central high school district shall be included in the
revenue of the district raising such revenue, and no local revenue shall
be attributed to such central high school districts. Such tax rate shall
be computed to five decimals without rounding and shall be multiplied by
one thousand to be expressed in mills.
 2. Prescribed payments. a. October payment for aids payable in the
nineteen hundred ninety-eight--ninety-nine through two thousand two--two
thousand three school years and the two thousand four--two thousand five
through two thousand eight--two thousand nine school years. On or before
October fifteenth, a portion of the school tax relief aid payable to the
school district for the current year shall be paid equal to the product
of the total school tax relief aid for the current school year adjusted
to reflect adjustments to payments for prior years and thirty-five
one-hundredths.
 b. October payment for aids payable in the two thousand three--two
thousand four school year, and the two thousand nine--two thousand ten
school year and thereafter. On or before October fifteenth, a portion of
the school tax relief aid payable to the school district for the current
year adjusted to reflect adjustments to payments for prior years, not to
exceed one hundred percent of such aid payable, shall be paid equal to
the product of the amount of tax levy and the positive difference, if
any, of the STAR portion of the tax levy minus the product of
twenty-five one-hundredths and the phase-in factor.
 c. November payment for the aids payable in the nineteen hundred
ninety-eight--ninety-nine through two thousand two--two thousand three
school years and the two thousand four--two thousand five through two
thousand eight--two thousand nine school years. On or before November
fifteenth, a portion of the school tax relief aid payable to the school
district for the current year shall be paid equal to the product of the
total school tax relief aid for the current school year adjusted to
reflect adjustments to payments for prior years and seventy-one
hundredths less any payments made pursuant to paragraph a of this
subdivision.
 d. November payment for aids payable in the two thousand three--two
thousand four school year, and the two thousand nine--two thousand ten
school year and thereafter. On or before November fifteenth, a portion
of the school tax relief aid payable to the school district for the
current year adjusted to reflect adjustments to payments for prior
years, not to exceed one hundred percent of such aid payable, shall be
paid equal to: (i) the product of the amount of tax levy and the
positive difference, if any, of the STAR portion of the tax levy minus
the product of twenty one hundredths and the phase-in factor less (ii)
any payments made pursuant to paragraph b of this subdivision.
 e. December payment for aids payable in the nineteen hundred
ninety-eight--ninety-nine through two thousand two--two thousand three
school years and the two thousand four--two thousand five through two
thousand eight--two thousand nine school years. On or before December
fifteenth, a portion of the school tax relief aid payable to the school
district for the current year shall be paid equal to the product of the
total school tax relief aid for the current school year adjusted to
reflect adjustments to payments for prior years and eighty
one-hundredths less any payments made pursuant to paragraphs a and c of
this subdivision.
 f. December payment for aids payable in the two thousand three--two
thousand four school year, and the two thousand nine--two thousand ten
school year and thereafter. On or before December fifteenth, a portion
of the school tax relief aid payable to the school district for the
current year adjusted to reflect adjustments to payments for prior
years, not to exceed one hundred percent of such aid payable, shall be
paid equal to: (i) the product of the amount of tax levy and the
positive difference, if any, of the STAR portion of the tax levy minus
the product of fifteen one-hundredths and the phase-in factor less (ii)
any payments made pursuant to paragraphs b and d of this subdivision.
 g. January payment. On or before the first business day of January, a
portion of the school tax relief aid payable to the school district for
the current year shall be paid equal to one hundred percent of such
total school tax relief aid payable for the current school year adjusted
to reflect adjustments to payments for prior years less any payments
made pursuant to paragraph a, b, c, d, e or f of this subdivision.
 h. On or before March thirty-first a portion of the school tax relief
aid payable to the school district for the current year shall be paid
equal to one hundred percent of any increase in such aid over the total
of such aids paid through the first business day of January, adjusted to
reflect adjustments to payments for prior years, as certified to the
commissioner by the office of real property services on or before March
first.
 3. a. Such moneys shall be payable to the treasurer of each city
school district, and the treasurer of each union free school district
and of each central school district and of each other school district,
if there be a treasurer, otherwise to the collector or other disbursing
officer of such district, who shall apply for and receive the same as
soon as payable.
 b. In the case of city school districts of the cities with one hundred
twenty-five thousand inhabitants or more, any payments which pursuant to
this section is required to be made to the treasurer of the city school
district, shall be made to the city treasurer or chamberlain.
 4. Any payment to a school district pursuant to this section shall be
general receipts of the district and may be used for any lawful purpose
of the district.
 § 3609-f. Moneys apportioned to school districts for lottery grants
pursuant to subparagraph two-a of paragraph b of subdivision four of
section ninety-two-c of the state finance law, when and how payable
commencing July first, two thousand seven. Notwithstanding the
provisions of section thirty-six hundred nine-a of this article,
apportionments payable pursuant to subparagraph two-a of paragraph b of
subdivision four of section ninety-two-c of the state finance law shall
be paid pursuant to this section. The definitions of "base year" and
"current year" as set forth in subdivision one of section thirty-six
hundred two of this article shall apply to this section.
 1. Prescribed payments. The moneys apportioned by the commissioner to
school districts pursuant to subparagraph two-a of paragraph b of
subdivision four of section ninety-two-c of the state finance law during
the school year shall be paid as follows:
 (a) September payment. The product of the moneys apportioned to such
district pursuant to subparagraph two-a of paragraph b of subdivision
four of section ninety-two-c of the state finance law multiplied by ten
percent, and such amount shall be payable on the same date as the
payment computed pursuant to subparagraph two of paragraph a of
subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred nine-a of this article.
 (b) October payment. The product of the moneys apportioned to such
district pursuant to subparagraph two-a of paragraph b of subdivision
four of section ninety-two-c of the state finance law multiplied by
fifteen percent, and such amount shall be payable on the same date as
the payment computed pursuant to clause (i) of subparagraph four of
paragraph a of subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred nine-a of
this article.
 (c) November payment. The product of the moneys apportioned to such
district pursuant to subparagraph two-a of paragraph b of subdivision
four of section ninety-two-c of the state finance law multiplied by
fifteen percent, and such amount shall be payable on the same date as
the payment computed pursuant to clause (ii) of subparagraph four of
paragraph a of subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred nine-a of
this article.
 (d) December payment. The product of the moneys apportioned to such
district pursuant to subparagraph two-a of paragraph b of subdivision
four of section ninety-two-c of the state finance law multiplied by
fifteen percent, and such amount shall be payable on the same date as
the payment computed pursuant to clause (iii) of subparagraph four of
paragraph a of subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred nine-a of
this article.
 (e) January payment. The product of the moneys apportioned to such
district pursuant to subparagraph two-a of paragraph b of subdivision
four of section ninety-two-c of the state finance law multiplied by
fifteen percent, and such amount shall be payable on the same date as
the payment computed pursuant to clause (i) of subparagraph two of
paragraph b of subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred nine-a of
this article.
 (f) February payment. The product of the moneys apportioned to such
district pursuant to subparagraph two-a of paragraph b of subdivision
four of section ninety-two-c of the state finance law multiplied by
fifteen percent, and such amount shall be payable on the same date as
the payment computed pursuant to clause (ii) of subparagraph two of
paragraph b of subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred nine-a of
this article.
 (g) March payment. The positive difference, if any, of the moneys
apportioned to such district pursuant to subparagraph two-a of paragraph
b of subdivision four of section ninety-two-c of the state finance law
less the sum of the payments made pursuant to paragraphs (a), (b), (c),
(d), (e) and (f) of this subdivision, and such amount shall be payable
on the same date as the payment computed pursuant to clause (iii) of
subparagraph two of paragraph b of subdivision one of section thirty-six
hundred nine-a of this article.
 2. Any payment to a school district pursuant to this section shall be
general receipts of the district and may be used for any lawful purpose
of the district.
 § 3609-g. Moneys apportioned to school districts for reimbursement of
article twenty-three of the tax law payments commencing in the 2009-2010
school year. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary,
school districts shall be reimbursed for payments made pursuant to
article twenty-three of the tax law pursuant to this section.
 1. Definition. As used in this section the following term shall be
defined as follows: "School district" shall mean a public school
district and shall not include a special act school district as defined
in section four thousand one of this chapter.
 2. Prescribed payments. On or after the first business day of June of
each school year, commencing June first, two thousand ten, a school
district shall be paid an amount equal to one hundred percent of the
payments made by a school district on or after May first of the prior
school year and before May first of the current school year to the
commissioner of taxation and finance pursuant to article twenty-three of
the tax law. No payment may be made pursuant to this subdivision until
such amount for each school district is certified by the commissioner of
taxation and finance and transmitted to the commissioner. Such
certification shall be made on or before May thirty-first so as to
facilitate payments to be made pursuant to this section.
 3. (a) Moneys paid pursuant to this section shall be payable to the
treasurer of each city school district, and the treasurer of each union
free school district and of each central school district and of each
other school district, if there be a treasurer, otherwise to the
collector or other disbursing officer of such district, who shall apply
for and receive the same as soon as payable.
 (b) In the case of city school districts of the cities with one
hundred twenty-five thousand inhabitants or more, any payment which
pursuant to this section is required to be made to the treasurer of the
city school district, shall be made to the city treasurer or
chamberlain.
 4. Any payment to a school district pursuant to this section shall be
general receipts of the district and may be used for any lawful purpose
of the district.
 5. It is the intent of the governor to submit and the legislature to
enact for each fiscal year after the two thousand nine--two thousand ten
fiscal year in an annual budget bill an appropriation in the amount to
be paid to school districts pursuant to this section.
 § 3609-h. Moneys apportioned to school districts for commercial gaming
grants pursuant to subdivision six of section ninety-seven-nnnn of the
state finance law, when and how payable commencing July first, two
thousand fourteen. Notwithstanding the provisions of section thirty-six
hundred nine-a of this part, apportionments payable pursuant to
subdivision six of section ninety-seven-nnnn of the state finance law
shall be paid pursuant to this section. The definitions of "base year"
and "current year" as set forth in subdivision one of section thirty-six
hundred two of this part shall apply to this section.
 1. The moneys apportioned by the commissioner to school districts
pursuant to subdivision six of section ninety-seven-nnnn of the state
finance law for the two thousand fourteen-two thousand fifteen school
year and thereafter shall be paid as a commercial gaming grant, as
computed pursuant to such subdivision, as follows:
 a. For the two thousand fourteen--two thousand fifteen school year,
one hundred percent of such grant shall be paid on the same date as the
payment computed pursuant to clause (v) of subparagraph three of
paragraph b of subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred nine-a of
this article.
 b. For the two thousand fifteen--two thousand sixteen school year
through the two thousand eighteen--two thousand nineteen school year,
seventy percent of such grant shall be paid on the same date as the
payment computed pursuant to clause (ii) of subparagraph three of
paragraph b of subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred nine-a of
this article, and thirty percent of such grant shall be paid on the same
date as the payment computed pursuant to clause (v) of subparagraph
three of paragraph b of subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred
nine-a of this article.
 c. For the two thousand nineteen--two thousand twenty school year and
thereafter, one hundred percent of such grant shall be paid on the same
date as the payment computed pursuant to clause (ii) of subparagraph
three of paragraph b of subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred
nine-a of this article.
 2. Any payment to a school district pursuant to this section shall be
general receipts of the district and may be used for any lawful purpose
of the district.
 § 3610. Apportionment for apprenticeship training. 1. Apprenticeship
training programs. Local education agencies which provide related or
supplemental instruction to apprentices registered by the state
department of labor pursuant to article twenty-three of the labor law
shall be eligible for an apportionment pursuant to the provisions of
this section for the operation of apprenticeship training programs as
approved by the commissioner. Priority shall be given to local education
agencies which provide for an increased number of participants in the
related or supplemental instructional component of apprentice training
programs. Designated local education agencies may provide such programs
directly, or by contracting with school districts, boards of cooperative
educational services and other providers of apprentice training
services, including postsecondary institutions and other providers
authorized to confer degrees in this state or in which the course of
instruction is licensed, registered or approved pursuant to any
provision of this chapter.
 2. Apprenticeship training hours. For the purpose of computing an
apportionment under this section, apprenticeship training hours shall be
the total number of hours of related or supplemental instruction given
all apprentices in approved apprenticeship training programs in the area
served by the designated local education agency between July first and
June thirtieth of the base year as reported to the commissioner by
September first of the current year.
 3. Maximum apportionment per hour. For aid payable for school year
nineteen hundred eighty-nine--ninety the maximum apportionment per
apprenticeship training hour shall be computed by dividing the state
appropriation for related and supplemental instruction for apprentices
by the total number of apprenticeship training hours of all designated
local education agencies in the state, computed in accordance with the
regulations of the commissioner. For aid payable for school year
nineteen hundred ninety--ninety-one and thereafter, this apportionment
shall be at the rate of one dollar per training hour.
 4. Apprenticeship training program apportionment. The apportionment
pursuant to this section shall be the product obtained when the
apportionment per hour is multiplied by the number of apprenticeship
training hours of the designated local education agency. Notwithstanding
the provisions of section thirty-six hundred nine of this article,
payment of such apportionment shall be made by November first of the
current year.
 5. State aid. No designated local education agency may receive under
the provisions of this section an amount which when added to all other
state aid received by such designated local education agency for the
purpose of this section, exceeds one-half the cost of such program in
that year. Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, if the
total aid received exceeds one-half the cost of the program, any state
aid payable to the designated local education agency shall be reduced in
the amount of such excess.
 6. Apprentices. Apprentices in apprenticeship training programs shall
not be included in any attendance count of this article and shall not
generate aid under any other provisions of this chapter.
 7. Apportionment for administrative costs. In addition to the
apportionment under subdivision four of this section, any designated
local education agency which has reported by September first the
processing of more than one hundred fifty apprentices shall receive an
amount equal to three dollars per apprentice served.
 8. Regulations. The commissioner may adopt regulations to implement
any of the provisions of this section.
 § 3611. Racial and cultural awareness fund. 1. There is hereby
established in the joint custody of the state comptroller and the
commissioner of taxation and finance a fund to be known as the racial
and cultural awareness fund.
 2. Such fund shall consist of all revenues received from any source,
public or private, for the purposes provided in this section and all
other moneys credited or transferred thereto from any other fund or
source pursuant to law. No monies from the state general fund shall be
transferred to, or otherwise made available for deposit into this fund.
 3. Moneys of the fund, following appropriation by the legislature, may
be expended for operational and planning grants to local school
districts to promote racial and cultural understanding and awareness, as
provided in this section. Moneys shall be paid out of the fund on the
audit and warrant of the state comptroller on vouchers certified or
approved by the commissioner.
 4. A school district, or two or more school districts acting jointly,
shall be eligible to receive a planning or operational grant, or both,
pursuant to the provisions of this section for the purposes of
developing and implementing programs designed to meet local needs in the
reduction and prevention of racial and cultural conflict, such programs
to be approved by the commissioner in accordance with regulations
adopted by him for such purpose. A school district which applies for a
planning grant pursuant to subdivision five of this section for such new
programs shall not be eligible for an operational grant pursuant to
subdivision six of this section until the school year following the year
in which the planning grant was received. For purposes of this section
as applied within the city of New York, such city school district shall
be eligible for multiple awards on behalf of each community school
district or high school district as though each was a separate school
district.
 5. A school district shall be eligible to apply for a planning grant
on a one-year competitive basis for the purpose of planning for the
implementation of programs for prevention and reduction of racial and
cultural conflict. Applications shall be evaluated on a competitive
basis and such grants shall be awarded accordingly. Applications shall
include the planning budget and program description for prevention and
reduction of racial and cultural conflict. A school district which
receives a competitive planning grant and implements a successful
planning program shall be eligible to apply for a two-year operational
grant. Reports may be required for the purposes of program evaluation.
 6. A school district shall be eligible to receive an operational grant
over a two-year period as provided in this section for programs for the
prevention and reduction of racial and cultural conflict. First-year
applications shall be evaluated on a competitive basis and grants shall
be awarded accordingly. Both first-year applications and continuing
applications shall include the operating budget and program description
for prevention and reduction of racial and cultural conflict for
approval of the proposed program and the estimated expenditures for the
current year. Reports may be required as necessary for the purposes of
program evaluation.
 7. An advisory committee shall be established and assigned to the
department to consult, review and make recommendations concerning
policy, procedure, program content and community needs. Such advisory
committee shall consist of ten members appointed by the commissioner.
Such appointees shall include representatives from civil/human rights
organizations; educators; community-based organizations and members of
parent associations.
 8. The commissioner may adopt rules and regulations as are necessary
and appropriate to carry out the provisions of this section.
 9. The commissioner shall issue an annual report to the legislature
concerning the overall and individual programs, detailing their impact;
and shall include any report or materials produced by the advisory
committee.
 § 3612. Teachers of tomorrow teacher recruitment and retention
program. 1. Definitions. a. The term "teacher shortage area" means a
public school or subject area in which there was a shortage of certified
teachers in the previous school year and there is a projected shortage
in the current school year as determined by the commissioner.
 b. The term "certified teacher" means a teacher who holds a state
teaching certificate appropriate to the teaching position, including the
subject area if applicable, in which he or she is to be employed.
 c. The term "school district" shall mean a common, union free,
central, central high school, or city school district.
 d. The term "board of education" shall mean the governing board of any
public school or public school district defined in paragraph c of this
subdivision.
 e. The term "low performing school" shall mean a school building which
is under registration review or a school building performing
significantly below state standards as defined by the commissioner.
 f. The term "year of service" shall mean ten months of continuous
full-time service as a teacher during a school year, generally occurring
between September first and June thirtieth.
 2. Application and funding. a. Grants shall be made to school
districts for teacher recruitment, retention and certification
activities necessary to increase the supply of qualified teachers in
school districts experiencing a teacher shortage in accordance with
subdivisions three, four, five, seven and eight of this section and in
school districts containing a low-performing school pursuant to
subdivision six of this section.
 b. Such grants shall be awarded to school districts, within the limits
of funds appropriated therefor, through a competitive process that takes
into consideration the magnitude of any shortage of teachers in the
school district, the number of teachers employed in the school district
who hold temporary licenses to teach in the public schools of the state,
the number of provisionally certified teachers, the fiscal capacity and
geographic sparsity of the district, the number of new teachers the
school district intends to hire in the coming school year and the number
of summer in the city student internships proposed by an eligible school
district, if applicable. Grants provided pursuant to this section shall
be used only for the purposes enumerated in this section.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, a city
school district in a city having a population of one million or more
inhabitants receiving a grant pursuant to this section may use no more
than eighty percent of such grant funds for any recruitment, retention
and certification costs associated with transitional certification of
teacher candidates for the school years two thousand one--two thousand
two through two thousand twenty-eight--two thousand twenty-nine.
 c. Not more than sixty percent of the funds allocated pursuant to this
section shall be made available to any one school district and provided
further that a city school district in a city with populations in excess
of one million inhabitants may, notwithstanding any other provision of
this section, allocate a portion of the grant received pursuant to this
section for teacher recruitment and outreach activities provided that
any allocation for teacher recruitment and outreach activities shall not
exceed two hundred twenty-five thousand dollars.
 d. In allocating grants pursuant to this section, a school district
shall give priority in the following order:
 (1) first, to a school under registration review that is designated as
a teacher shortage area;
 (2) second, to any school performing significantly below state
standards as defined by the commissioner; and
 (3) third, to any school that is designated as a teacher shortage
area.
 e. Any school district receiving funds under this section shall
maintain any local effort in the current year equivalent to such effort
in the base year for any local program related to the recruitment or
retention of teachers or any program that has purposes that are similar
to any purpose of this section or the district shall provide a local
match to state funds received pursuant to this section. State funds
provided pursuant to this section shall not supplant local funds for any
purpose similar to the purposes of this section.
 f. Applications by a school district for funding pursuant to this
section shall be filed with the commissioner, in a form determined by
the commissioner, by June first of the base year and school districts
shall be notified of their grant award by June thirtieth of the base
year, provided that in any year such application and award dates may be
modified by the commissioner for the reasonable administration of the
program. Such application shall include a plan by the school district
for the expenditure of the funds in each category of allowable expenses
authorized by subdivisions three, four, five, six, seven and eight of
this section, and such expenditures shall be consistent with such plan
and the provisions of this section.
 g. A person receiving an award pursuant to any subdivision of this
section shall not be eligible for an award pursuant to any other
subdivision of this section in a school year.
 3. Teachers of tomorrow teacher recruitment incentive program.
Teachers of tomorrow teacher recruitment incentive awards may be
available to teachers pursuant to the provisions of this subdivision to
attract teachers to employment in teacher shortage areas.
 a. Eligibility. To be eligible for an award pursuant to this
subdivision, an applicant shall:
 (1) have initial, provisional, permanent or professional certification
to teach in New York state;
 (2) agree to a service obligation of one year of service in a teacher
shortage area as a condition of receiving an award pursuant to this
subdivision; and
 (3) be employed for the first time as a teacher in the school
district.
 b. Application and selection. (1) The board of education shall
determine the form of the application and the application process for
teachers deemed eligible for the award, and shall in its discretion
select the number of eligible applicants who will receive an award
pursuant to this subdivision.
 (2) If the number of eligible applicants exceeds the number of awards
determined by the board pursuant to this subdivision then the board
shall use an objective competitive process based on educational
qualifications to determine which eligible applicants shall receive
awards.
 c. Payment of awards. (1) Annual awards from state and local funds
provided for this purpose shall be paid by the board of education to the
award recipient. Award recipients shall be entitled to receive awards
pursuant to the provisions of this subdivision and such awards shall be
in addition to and not part of any award recipient's base salary.
 (2) The initial annual award shall be three thousand four hundred
dollars, and such initial award may be renewable each year, for up to
three additional years, provided that the recipient agrees to one year
of service as a full-time teacher in a teacher shortage area for each
year of a renewed award and has provided satisfactory service in any
prior year in which an initial or renewed award was granted to the
recipient. No awards shall be made for less than one school year of
service and the sum of any initial and renewed awards shall not exceed
thirteen thousand six hundred dollars.
 Awards made pursuant to this subdivision shall be used to reimburse
any educational costs, including those for which student loans may have
been taken, incurred by the recipient prior to receipt of the award for
certification as a teacher in the public schools of the state.
 (3) The board of education shall develop and secure from the award
recipient a written agreement outlining the service obligation. Such
agreement shall include provisions for the recipient to repay the amount
of the award to the school district if the recipient fails to complete
their service obligation in any year where an initial or renewed award
is granted, and such repaid amounts shall be deducted from any grant
amounts due to the district from the state pursuant to this section.
Upon a written appeal by an award recipient, the board of education, in
its discretion, may provide a waiver of repayment provisions for an
award recipient who fails to complete his or her service requirement for
documented reasons of health or other severe hardship, as determined by
the commissioner.
 d. Notification. The board of education shall notify both successful
and unsuccessful applicants by September first of any school year for
which an initial or renewed award is provided to teachers pursuant to
this subdivision.
 4. Teachers of tomorrow certification stipends. Teachers of tomorrow
certification stipends may be available to eligible teachers pursuant to
this subdivision for the purpose of providing additional training and
education required for the applicants to obtain initial or provisional
certification. Such additional training and education may be held during
the summer or during any other season or time of the year.
 a. Eligibility. To be eligible for an award pursuant to this
subdivision, an applicant shall:
 (1) provide proof that he or she has received a temporary license to
teach from the commissioner and at the time of application does not hold
any initial, provisional, permanent or professional certification to
teach in the public schools of the state; and
 (2) agree to a service obligation of one year of service in a teacher
shortage area as a condition for receiving an award pursuant to this
subdivision.
 b. Application and selection. (1) The board of education shall
determine the form of the application and the application process for
teachers deemed eligible for the award, and shall in its discretion
select the number of eligible applicants who will receive an award
pursuant to this subdivision.
 (2) If the number of eligible applicants exceeds the number of awards
determined by the board pursuant to this subdivision then the board
shall use an objective competitive process based on educational
qualifications to determine which eligible applicants shall receive
awards.
 c. Payment of awards. (1) Annual awards from state and local funds
provided for this purpose shall be paid by the board of education to the
award recipient. No award shall be made for less than one year of
service.
 (2) Allowable expenses. Awards may be used for the payment of expenses
incurred by the recipient for the following purposes:
 (i) tuition charged for test preparation workshops intended to prepare
recipients to pass teacher certification exams required for initial or
provisional teacher certification, which shall be provided by the board
of education either through a contract for such services or by providing
such services through employees of the board of education; and
 (ii) tuition charged for any additional coursework at an accredited
institution of higher education required of the recipient to receive
initial or provisional teacher certification, as determined by the
commissioner.
 (3) Certification stipends of two thousand dollars each may be
provided pursuant to this subdivision to award recipients. Fifty percent
of each award amount shall be payable from state funds provided to the
school district pursuant to this section and the remaining fifty percent
shall be payable by the board of education from other sources of
revenue, provided that if the board of education elects to provide the
services described in clause (i) of subparagraph two of this paragraph
then such remaining fifty percent share may be paid by the board through
in-kind direct services to the award recipient.
 (i) Awards shall be paid to award recipients upon proof of the
recipient's expenditure for allowable expenses as provided for in
clauses (i) and (ii) of subparagraph two of this paragraph.
 (ii) Such awards shall be in an amount of two thousand dollars per
award or the actual expenses incurred by the recipient, whichever is
less.
 (iii) No person shall be eligible for more than one award pursuant to
this subdivision.
 (4) The board of education shall develop and secure from the award
recipient a written agreement outlining the service obligation. Such
agreement shall include provisions for the recipient to repay the amount
of the award to the school district if the recipient fails to complete
their service obligation in any year where an award is granted, and such
repaid amounts shall be deducted from any grant amounts due to the
district from the state pursuant to this section. Upon a written appeal
by an award recipient, the board of education, in its discretion, may
provide a waiver of repayment provisions for an award recipient who
fails to complete his or her service requirement for documented reasons
of health or other severe hardship, as determined by the commissioner.
 d. Notification. The board of education shall notify both successful
and unsuccessful applicants by September first of any school year for
which an initial or renewed award is provided to teachers pursuant to
this subdivision.
 5. Teachers of tomorrow summer in the city internship program. City
school districts in cities with populations in excess of one hundred and
twenty-five thousand inhabitants shall be eligible to apply for funding
pursuant to this section for summer in the city student internships for
the purpose of attracting prospective teachers to opportunities in urban
education.
 a. Eligibility. To be eligible for an award pursuant to this
subdivision, a student shall:
 (1) have completed sixty or more hours of credit bearing college
courses, be in good academic standing as determined by the higher
education institution of attendance, have attended an accredited New
York state college or university full-time in the base year, be enrolled
in a registered program for the preparation of teachers at an accredited
New York state institution of higher education or have indicated a
desire to enter the teaching profession, and are recommended by their
college or university to participate in the program.
 (2) agree to a service obligation of the full duration of the
internship program, as determined by the board of education.
 b. Application and selection. (1) Boards of education in school
districts that are eligible for funding pursuant to this section shall
develop and distribute an application to the accredited colleges and
universities of the state which have approved teacher education
programs. Such application shall include at a minimum a description of
the program including:
 (i) the duration of the program which shall operate for at least five
or more weeks during the months of June through August generally;
 (ii) the amount of any stipend for the program;
 (iii) available housing for the program;
 (iv) the training and professional development opportunities afforded
to the student; and
 (v) the amount of time the student will spend in direct contact with
children participating in educational activities.
 (2) The board of education shall determine the application process for
students deemed eligible for the award, and shall in its discretion
select the number of eligible applicants who will receive an award
pursuant to this subdivision.
 (3) If the number of eligible applicants exceeds the number of awards
determined by the board pursuant to this subdivision then the board
shall use an objective competitive process based on educational
qualifications to determine which eligible applicants shall receive
awards.
 c. Payment of awards. (1) Annual awards from state funds provided for
this purpose shall be paid by the board of education to the award
recipient. No award shall be made for less than the duration of the
program, as determined by the board of education. Nothing shall prohibit
a board of education from allowing an eligible applicant from
participating in the program more than once, provided the eligible
applicant provided satisfactory service in any prior year as determined
by the board of education.
 (2) Allowable expenses. Districts may expend funds pursuant to this
subdivision for:
 (i) stipends of up to two thousand dollars per student;
 (ii) housing for a portion of the students participating in the
program, which shall include provisions for the students to pay a
portion of the housing costs and to pay a refundable security deposit on
such housing;
 (iii) orientation, training and professional development of the
students participating in the program; and
 (iv) other expenses appropriate to the operation of the program, as
approved by the commissioner.
 (3) The board of education shall develop and secure from the award
recipient a written agreement outlining the service obligation. Such
agreement shall include provisions for the recipient to repay the amount
of any stipend provided pursuant to this subdivision to the school
district if the recipient fails to complete their service obligation for
any year where an award is granted, and such repaid amounts shall be
deducted from any grant amounts due to the district from the state
pursuant to this section. Upon a written appeal by an award recipient,
the board of education, in its discretion, may provide a waiver of
repayment provisions for an award recipient who fails to complete his or
her service requirement for documented reasons of health or other severe
hardship, as determined by the commissioner.
 d. Colleges and universities may provide credit for the summer in the
city program and may charge a fee for such credit or provide the credit
free of charge. Participation in the summer in the city program shall
qualify as a field experience for purposes of any graduation or
certification requirement. Students eligible for the program shall
submit their application to the board of education by the date
determined by the board of education.
 e. Notification. The board of education shall inform eligible
applicants of their selection for the program by a date determined by
the board of education.
 6. New York state master teacher program. a. New York state master
teacher awards may be available to teachers pursuant to the provisions
of this subdivision to attract highly qualified, experienced, expert
teachers to low performing schools.
 b. The commissioner shall establish and maintain a list of persons
eligible to serve as master teachers for the purposes of this
subdivision.
 c. School districts eligible to participate in this program are those
districts which contain a school building that has been designated as a
low performing school.
 d. Such school districts, upon notification of eligibility by the
commissioner, may apply for funding pursuant to this section to obtain
master teachers to serve in low performing school buildings.
 e. Eligibility. A person shall be eligible to serve as a master
teacher if he or she meets the following criteria:
 (1) he or she has received national board certification from the
National Board for Professional Teaching Standards.
 (2) he or she is to be employed full-time for the school year by a
public school designated as a low performing school.
 (3) he or she agrees to a service obligation of three years of service
in a low performing school as a condition of receiving awards pursuant
to this subdivision.
 f. Application and selection. (1) The board of education shall
determine the form of the application and the application process for
teachers deemed eligible for the award, and shall in its discretion
select the number of eligible applicants who will receive an award
pursuant to this subdivision.
 (2) If the number of eligible applicants exceeds the number of awards
determined by the board pursuant to this subdivision then the board
shall use an objective competitive process based on educational
qualifications to determine which eligible applicants shall receive
awards.
 g. Payment of awards. (1) Annual awards from state funds provided for
this purpose shall be paid by the board of education to the award
recipient.
 (2) The initial annual award shall be ten thousand dollars, and such
initial annual award may be renewable each year, for two additional
years, provided that the recipient has provided satisfactory service in
any prior year in which an initial or renewed annual award was granted
to the recipient and the recipient continues to fulfill his or her
service obligation. No annual awards shall be made for less than one
year of service and provided further that the sum of any initial and
renewed annual awards shall not exceed thirty thousand dollars.
 (3) The board of education shall develop and secure from the award
recipient a written agreement outlining the service obligation. Such
agreement shall include provisions for the recipient to repay the amount
of the annual award to the school district if the recipient fails to
complete a year of service in any year where an initial or renewed award
is granted, and such repaid amounts shall be deducted from any grant
amounts due to the district from the state pursuant to this section.
Upon a written appeal by an award recipient, the board of education, in
its discretion, may provide a waiver of repayment provisions for an
award recipient who fails to complete his or her service requirement for
documented reasons of health or other severe hardship, as determined by
the commissioner.
 h. Each board of education and particular master teacher shall agree
to a three-year term in an eligible school building for each master
teacher appointment and each master teacher shall be assigned partner
classroom teachers. In addition to assigned teaching duties, activities
to be undertaken by the master teacher shall include, but are not
limited to, engaging in daily and long-term planning and assessment with
partner teachers, modeling teaching techniques and strategies, and
serving as classroom experts who provide ongoing support to teachers and
children.
 i. Upon completion of such master teacher's term of participation in
the program, the master teacher shall have the right to return to the
position he or she held immediately prior to appointment as a master
teacher without loss of tenure, seniority or other employment rights.
 j. Notification. The board of education shall inform eligible
applicants of their selection for the program by a date determined by
the board of education.
 7. Teacher recruitment tuition reimbursement program. A tuition
reimbursement program may be available to teachers pursuant to the
provisions of this subdivision, as an incentive to attract qualified
teachers to teacher shortage areas.
 a. Definition. The term "approved course" shall mean a course in a
registered program for the preparation of teachers at an accredited New
York state institution of higher education which is taken towards
meeting requirements for permanent certification to teach in the public
schools of the state.
 b. Eligibility. A person shall be eligible for a tuition reimbursement
award if he or she meets the following criteria:
 (1) has received initial or provisional certification to teach in the
public schools of the state and does not hold any permanent or
professional certification to teach in the public schools of the state;
 (2) he or she is employed full-time for the school year by a public
school designated as a teacher shortage area; and
 (3) he or she agrees to a service obligation of one year of service in
a teacher shortage area as a condition of receiving the award.
 c. Application and selection. (1) The board of education shall
determine the form of the application and the application process for
teachers deemed eligible for the award, and shall in its discretion
select the number of eligible applicants who will receive an award
pursuant to this subdivision.
 (2) If the number of eligible applicants exceeds the number of awards
determined by the board pursuant to this subdivision then the board
shall use an objective competitive process based on educational
qualifications to determine which eligible applicants shall receive
awards.
 d. Payment of awards. (1) Annual awards from state funds provided for
this purpose shall be paid by the board of education to the award
recipient.
 (2) The initial reimbursement award shall be seven hundred dollars or
the actual cost of one approved course, whichever is less, provided that
a recipient shall be eligible to receive three initial reimbursement
awards in the school year. Such initial award shall be renewable for up
to one additional year and such renewed reimbursement award shall be
seven hundred dollars or the actual cost of one approved course,
whichever is less, provided that a recipient shall be eligible to
receive three renewed reimbursement awards in the school year, and
provided further that such eligible teacher has provided satisfactory
service in the prior year as determined by the board of education to be
eligible for any initial or renewed reimbursement awards. In no case
shall the sum of any initial and renewed reimbursement awards exceed
four thousand two hundred dollars.
 (3) The board of education shall develop and secure from the award
recipient a written agreement outlining the service obligation. Such
agreement shall include provisions for the recipient to repay the amount
of any reimbursement awards received to the school district if the
recipient fails to complete a year of service in any year where any
initial or renewed awards are granted, and such repaid amounts shall be
deducted from any grant amounts due to the district from the state
pursuant to this section. Upon a written appeal by an award recipient,
the board of education, in its discretion, may provide a waiver of
repayment provisions for an award recipient who fails to complete his or
her service requirement for documented reasons of health or other severe
hardship, as determined by the commissioner.
 e. After February first, two thousand four, any course for which
tuition reimbursement is made shall not be counted toward any continuing
education required of persons certified to teach in the public schools
of the state.
 f. Notification. The board of education shall inform eligible
applicants of their selection for the program by a date determined by
the board of education.
 8. Summer teacher training program. In a city school district with a
population of one million or more, intensive summer teacher training may
be provided pursuant to this subdivision to certified teachers teaching
in a teacher shortage area that will be employed for the first time in
the city school district as a certified teacher.
 a. Eligibility and selection. Such training may be provided to
teachers who hold initial, provisional, permanent or professional
certification to teach in the public schools of the state who will be
employed for the first time in the city school district. The board of
education shall establish a selection process by which new teachers are
chosen to participate in this program. Such process at a minimum shall
include:
 (1) proof that the applicant has received, or is eligible to receive,
initial, provisional, permanent or professional certification to teach
in the public schools of the state; and
 (2) proof that the applicant will be employed for the first time in
the city school district as a certified teacher in a teacher shortage
area.
 b. Allowable expenses. Funds provided for summer teacher training may
be used for the payment of expenses incurred by the district for
training and orientation of certified teachers employed by the district
for the first time including team teaching with cooperating teachers,
observing summer school classes, and training on meeting new standards
and assessments provided such expenditures from state funds for this
purpose shall not exceed one thousand dollars per eligible participant.
Nothing in this subdivision shall limit the expenditure of local funds
for the purposes of this subdivision.
 9. Science, mathematics and bilingual education tuition reimbursement
program. Of the amount appropriated for purposes of this section for
grants to school districts for the two thousand seven--two thousand
eight school year and thereafter, five million dollars ($5,000,000)
shall be made available for a science, mathematics and bilingual
education tuition reimbursement program developed by the commissioner to
attract qualified teachers who have received or will receive a
transitional teaching certificate, to teach mathematics, science, or
bilingual education in a low-performing school.
 10. Reporting. By November first following the completion of each
school year, the commissioner shall report to the governor and the
legislature regarding the teachers of tomorrow teacher recruitment and
retention program. Such report shall list the amount of each school
district's total grant pursuant to this section, the uses of the grant
by each eligible category of expense, the number of awards granted by
type pursuant to this section and, if applicable, the number of persons
receiving more than one award of a single type or more than one type of
award and the number of such awards for these individuals, as well as an
analysis of the effectiveness of the program in recruiting and retaining
teachers in the public schools of the state designated as teacher
shortage areas.
 § 3613. School district reorganizations and real property tax rates.
1. When two or more school districts propose to reorganize pursuant to
sections fifteen hundred eleven through fifteen hundred thirteen,
fifteen hundred twenty-four, fifteen hundred twenty-six, seventeen
hundred five, or eighteen hundred one through eighteen hundred three of
this chapter, and under the law that would otherwise be applicable, the
reorganization would have an impact upon the school tax rates within the
areas served by the school districts that existed prior to the
reorganization, notwithstanding any other provision of law to the
contrary, the boards of education or trustees of all the school
districts participating in the proposed reorganization may opt to have
that impact deferred for a one-year period and/or phased-in over a
period as may be determined by the boards of education or trustees of
all participating school districts in the manner prescribed by this
section but which shall not exceed a ten-year period. To exercise such
option, the boards of education or trustees of all participating school
districts, after conducting a public hearing, may adopt a resolution at
least forty-five days prior to the special district meeting at which the
reorganization vote will be held, to defer and/or phase-in the impact as
provided herein. If the board of education or trustees of any
participating school district does not approve such a resolution opting
for a common phase-in period, the provisions of this section shall not
apply.
 2. During the one-year deferral period, the tax rate for each portion
of the school district shall be calculated in the following manner:
 (a) Determine the assessed value tax rate that applied for the school
year immediately preceding the school year in which the reorganization
took effect.
 (b) Multiply that assessed value tax rate by the state equalization
rate applicable to the portion for the school year immediately preceding
the school year in which the reorganization took effect.
 (c) Divide the product so determined by the state equalization rate
applicable to the portion for the first school year of the reorganized
school district. The quotient is the assessed value tax rate for the
portion for that school year. Provided, that if the sum of the real
property tax levies in all of the portions in the school district, using
the assessed value tax rates computed pursuant to this subdivision,
would yield a real property tax levy that is above or below the total
real property tax levy specified in the school district budget for the
current school year, the assessed value tax rates shall all be decreased
or increased proportionately so as to yield the specified real property
tax levy amount.
 3. During each year of a phase-in period, whose duration up to ten
years shall have been determined by the boards of education or trustees
of the constituent school districts, the tax rate for each portion of
the reorganized school district shall be calculated in the following
manner:
 (a) Determine the assessed value tax rate that applied for the school
year immediately preceding the school year in which the reorganization
took effect.
 (b) Multiply that assessed value tax rate by the state equalization
rate applicable to the portion for the school year immediately preceding
the school year in which the reorganization took effect. The result is
the base full value tax rate of the portion.
 (c) Determine the assessed value tax rate that would have applied in
the portion but for the provisions of this section.
 (d) Multiply that assessed value tax rate by the state equalization
rate that would have applied for the current school year but for the
provisions of this section. The result is the target full value tax rate
for the portion.
 (e) Determine the difference between the target full value tax rate
and the base full value tax rate for the portion.
 (f) Divide the difference so determined by the total number of years
in the phase-in period applicable to the school district.
 (g) Multiply the quotient so determined by the number of years from
the beginning of the phase-in period up to and including the year for
which the tax rate is being determined.
 (h) Add the product so determined to the base full value tax rate.
 (i) Divide the sum so determined by the applicable equalization rate.
The quotient is the assessed value tax rate for the portion for the
current school year. Provided, that if the sum of the real property tax
levies in all of the portions in the school district, using the assessed
value tax rates computed pursuant to this subdivision, would yield a
real property tax levy that is above or below the total real property
tax levy specified in the school district budget for the current school
year, the assessed value tax rates shall all be decreased or increased
proportionately so as to yield the specified real property tax levy
amount.
 4. As used herein the term "portion" means that part of an assessing
unit located within a school district.
 PART II
 AIDABLE TRANSPORTATION EXPENSE
Section 3620. Application.
 3621. Definitions.
 3622. Routes.
 3622-a. Aidable regular transportation.
 3623. School buses.
 3623-a. Allowable transportation expense.
 3624. Drivers.
 3625. Contracts.
 3626. Data for administration.
 3627. Transportation after 5pm.
 3628. Excess expenditures.
 § 3620. Application. Part two of this article applies to all school
districts which receive a quota for the transportation of pupils. It is
not intended by any provision in part two of this article to change or
modify in any manner the provisions of this chapter providing and
granting transportation to all children irrespective of the school they
legally attend.
 § 3621. Definitions. As used in this part and subdivision seven of
section thirty-six hundred two of this article:
 1. "School district" means common school districts, to the extent that
they provide transportation of students in grades seven through twelve
to a school outside the district, consolidated school districts, central
school districts, central high school districts, union free school
districts, except special act school districts as defined in section
four thousand one of this chapter, and city school districts.
Notwithstanding any provision contained in this chapter to the contrary,
the transportation aid provided, pursuant to subdivision seven of
section thirty-six hundred two of this article and this part shall not
be apportioned and paid to any school district not maintaining a home
school, or to a common school for pupils in kindergarten through grade
six.
 2. a. "Pupil" means a child for whom transportation aid is paid and
who lives more than one and one-half miles from the school which he or
she attends, measured by the nearest available road to such school, or a
child who lives more than one mile from an approved route, measured by
the nearest available road to such route, and also lives more than one
and one-half miles from the school which he or she attends. Nothing
contained in this subdivision shall be deemed to require a school
district to furnish transportation to a child who, if a student in an
elementary grade, lives less than two miles or, if a student in an
academic grade, lives less than three miles from the school which he or
she attends, measured by the nearest available road. "Pupil" also means
a child living more than one and one-half miles from the school which he
or she attends who is transported between home and school by a regional
or joint transportation system. "Pupil" also means a child of a pupil
legally attending an elementary or secondary school who receives
transportation pursuant to paragraph f of subdivision one of section
thirty-six hundred thirty-five of this article and who lives more than
one and one-half miles from the school which his or her parent attends,
measured by the nearest available road to such school, or such a child
who lives more than one mile from an approved route, measured by the
nearest available road to such route, and also lives more than one and
one-half miles from the school which his or her parent legally attends.
 b. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph a of this subdivision,
any school district which provides transportation pursuant to an order
of the commissioner, dated the fourth day of August, nineteen hundred
seventy-eight, for pupils attending grades kindergarten through four who
live more than eight-tenths of a mile but less than one and one-half
miles from the school they legally attend shall be entitled to an
apportionment on the cost of such transportation pursuant to subdivision
seven of section thirty-six hundred two of this article.
 c. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph a of this subdivision,
any school district which provides transportation pursuant to an order
of the commissioner, dated the nineteenth day of August, nineteen
hundred seventy-seven, for elementary pupils who live more than
eight-tenths of a mile but less than one and one-half miles from the
school they legally attend, or such other distance as the board of
education may establish with the prior approval of the commissioner,
shall be entitled to an apportionment on the cost of such transportation
pursuant to subdivision seven of section thirty-six hundred two of this
article.
 3. "Route" means a highway or highways over and upon which a school
bus regularly travels in accordance with a schedule maintained for the
transportation of pupils from their homes to school.
 4. "Total annual mileage" means the actual mileage for all purposes
attributable to district-owned school buses for the school year period
of July first through June thirtieth, based on odometer readings,
including mileage for school buses disposed of during the July first
through June thirtieth period.
 5. "Total annual allowable mileage" means the actual mileage for
transporting pupils to and from school once daily over scheduled routes
attributable to district-owned or leased school buses for the school
year period of July first through June thirtieth, based odometer
readings, including mileage for school buses disposed of during the July
first through June thirtieth period.
 6. "School bus" means any vehicle or other means of conveyance used
for the purpose of transporting pupils.
 7. "Storage" means any school bus garage facilities or sites which may
be approved by the commissioner.
 8. "Regional or joint transportation system" means a transportation
system in which a school district participates pursuant to a contract
executed in accordance with paragraph h of subdivision twenty-five of
section seventeen hundred nine of this chapter.
 9. "District share of the cost of regional or joint transportation
systems" shall mean the share of the cost of such transportation
prorated among all the school district or districts and board or boards
of cooperative educational services participating in the regional or
joint transportation, as determined in accordance with regulations
promulgated by the commissioner, provided that in no case shall there be
any deduction made in determining transportation aid on the basis of bus
mileage travelled in transporting children pursuant to a contract
executed in accordance with paragraph h of subdivision twenty-five of
section seventeen hundred nine of this chapter and provided that
transportation aid for jointly operated transportation system shall be
determined in the same manner as for individual school districts.
 10. School bus stop-arm. The term "school bus stop-arm" means an
auxiliary device conforming to the standards established by the
commissioner pursuant to subdivision twenty-one-c of section three
hundred seventy-five of the vehicle and traffic law.
 11. School bus back up beeper. The term "school bus back up beeper"
means an auxiliary device conforming to the standards established by the
commissioner pursuant to subdivision twenty-one-d of section three
hundred seventy-five of the vehicle and traffic law.
 12. School bus front crossing arm. The term "school bus front crossing
arm" means an auxiliary device conforming to the standards established
by the commissioner pursuant to subdivision twenty-one-e of section
three hundred seventy-five of the vehicle and traffic law.
 13. School bus safety sensor device. The term "school bus safety
sensor device" means an auxiliary device conforming to the standards
established by the commissioner pursuant to subdivision twenty-one-f of
section three hundred seventy-five of the vehicle and traffic law.
 14. "Exterior reflective markings" shall mean the exterior reflective
marking required to be attached to school buses pursuant to subdivision
twenty-one-h of section three hundred seventy-five of the vehicle and
traffic law.
 15. School bus engine fire suppression system. The term "school bus
engine fire suppression system" shall mean an auxiliary device required
to be installed pursuant to subdivision twenty-one-i of section three
hundred seventy-five of the vehicle and traffic law and which conforms
to standards established by the commissioner of transportation pursuant
to such subdivision.
 § 3622. Routes. The board of education or trustees shall plan each
school transportation route, as defined in subdivision three of section
thirty-six hundred twenty-one of this article, in such manner as to
promote maximum efficiency in the operation of a school bus on such
route. Whenever practicable each route shall be planned to operate
within the boundary of a school district. If any or all pupils of a
school district receive instruction in a school or schools beyond the
boundary of such district, the board shall plan a route or routes beyond
the boundary of such district to such school or schools for such pupils.
 § 3622-a. Aidable regular transportation. For the computation of
transportation aid pursuant to the requirements of subdivision seven of
section thirty-six hundred two of this article and this part, aidable
regular transportation shall include the following, provided that the
school district shall have voted to furnish such transportation, as
provided by law, or that the commissioner shall have directed that such
transportation be furnished; and provided further that transportation
aid shall not be paid in a case where the provision made for
transportation is inadequate and is disapproved by the commissioner:
 1. Transportation of pupils to and from school once daily, provided,
however, in no case shall there be any deduction made in determining
aidable regular transportation on the basis of bus mileage travelled in
transporting children as part of a regional or joint transportation
system;
 2. For school districts that do not maintain a high school,
transportation for its pupils who have completed the work of the sixth
grade and are receiving instruction in another district;
 3. Out-of-district transportation designed to relieve temporary
overcrowding, subject to the approval of the commissioner;
 4. Out-of-district transportation to nonpublic elementary or high
schools;
 5. Transportation of pupils during the school day to and from programs
at a board of cooperative educational services or to or from approved
shared programs at other school districts, which programs may lead to a
diploma or a high school equivalency diploma or to or from career
education programs operated within the district;
 6. Transportation of pupils to and from approved summer school
programs operated by a school district in the two thousand--two thousand
one school year and thereafter, provided, however, that if the total
statewide apportionment attributable to allowable transportation
expenses incurred pursuant to this subdivision exceeds five million
dollars ($5,000,000), individual school district allocations shall be
prorated to ensure that the apportionment for such summer transportation
does not exceed five million dollars ($5,000,000), provided that such
prorated apportionment computed and payable as of September one of the
school year immediately following the school year for which such aid is
claimed shall be deemed final and not subject to change;
 7. Transportation provided pursuant to section thirty-six hundred
thirty-five-b of this article;
 8. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of law, transportation
provided in the two thousand nineteen--two thousand twenty school year
during the state disaster emergency declared pursuant to executive order
202 of 2020, provided that transportation was provided during the time
period of school building closures ordered pursuant to executive order
202 of 2020. Such aidable transportation shall include transportation of
meals, educational materials and supplies to students, and
transportation to provide students with internet access; and
 9. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of law, expenditures
made for transportation during the period between the issuance of
executive order 202.4 on March sixteenth, two thousand twenty and the
issuance of executive order 202.28 on May seventh, two thousand twenty,
without regard to whether such transportation was provided.
 § 3623. School buses. 1. a. The commissioner of transportation in
consultation with the commissioner shall adopt, promulgate and enforce
rules, standards and specifications regulating and controlling the
efficiency and equipment of school buses used to transport pupils, with
particular regard to the safety and convenience of such pupils and the
suitability and adaptability of such school buses to the requirements of
the school district. No school bus shall be purchased by a school
district or used for the transportation of pupils unless and until it
has been approved by the commissioner of transportation as complying
with the rules, standards and specifications relating thereto.
 b. No bus manufactured after January first, nineteen hundred
seventy-four shall be used to transport pupils under any contract with a
school district or board of cooperative educational services unless it
has been similarly approved by the commissioner of transportation,
except that no such approval shall be required for buses used to
transport pupils and also used to serve the general public under a
certificate of public convenience for the operation of a bus line,
granted pursuant to the transportation law or for buses used to
transport pupils, teachers and other persons acting in a supervisory
capacity to and from school activities and which bus does not receive or
discharge passengers on or along the public highways on regularly
scheduled routes and is operating under a permit as a contract carrier
of passengers granted pursuant to the transportation law or by the
interstate commerce commission. School buses manufactured or assembled
prior to April first, nineteen hundred seventy-seven may not be used to
transport pupils, teachers and other persons acting in a supervisory
capacity to and from school activities.
 c. The commissioner shall establish and provide for the enforcement of
rules and regulations requiring instruction on the use of seat safety
belts as specified in subdivision five of section three hundred
eighty-three of the vehicle and traffic law and section thirty-six
hundred thirty-five-a of this chapter, drills in safe boarding and
exiting procedures and emergency drills to be conducted on all school
buses and shall emphasize specific hazards encountered by children
during snow, ice, rain and other inclement weather. All such drills
shall include instruction in the importance of orderly conduct by all
school bus passengers. A minimum of three such drills shall be had on
each school bus during the school year, the first to be conducted during
the first seven days of session of the fall term.
 2. The commissioner shall, after public hearing, promulgate rules and
regulations requiring drills on school buses for those pupils who do not
participate in such drills required by subdivision one of this section,
and the commissioner may provide by such rules and regulations for
instructional alternatives to carry out the purposes of this
subdivision.
 § 3623-a. Allowable transportation expense. For the computation of
transportation aid pursuant to the requirements of subdivision seven of
section thirty-six hundred two of this article and this part, allowable
transportation expense shall include expenditures for aidable regular
transportation as defined in section thirty-six hundred twenty-two-a of
this part, provided that such expense shall be limited to expenditure
items listed in subdivision one of this section as transportation
operating expense and in subdivision two of this section as
transportation capital, debt service and lease expense.
 1. Transportation operating expense shall include base year
expenditures for the following, provided that such transportation
operating expense shall meet the requirements set forth in subdivision
three of this section:
 a. Computerized bus routing services;
 b. Contracting for the transportation of any or all of the pupils
attending school in such school district, other than a contract with a
public service facility for such transportation operated on routes under
franchise;
 c. The use of public service facilities on routes operated under
franchise or by a municipality or public authority for any or all of the
pupils in the district, provided that the allowance for each pupil using
such facilities shall not exceed two single fares a day for such pupil
multiplied by the number of days which such pupil attends school;
 d. The school district's share of the cost of a regional or joint
transportation system;
 e. The following expenses for district operated transportation
systems, including operation of district owned or district leased school
buses:
 (1) salaries and retirement benefits related to transportation, except
salaries and retirement benefits for assistant drivers on buses
transporting nondisabled pupils;
 (2) employers' social security contributions for transportation
personnel for whom salaries are allowable;
 (3) health, life and other insurance premiums for transportation
personnel for whom salaries are allowable;
 (4) premiums for collision and other insurance coverage for school
buses;
 (5) uniforms for transportation personnel for whom salaries are
allowable;
 (6) costs incurred by the employer for qualifying criminal history,
drivers license, or other required testing attributable to special
requirements for drivers of school buses pursuant to state or federal
law including pre-employment and random drug and alcohol testing as
required under subdivision six of section five hundred nine-g of the
vehicle and traffic law;
 (7) fuel, oil, tires, chains, maintenance and repairs for school
buses, provided that for purposes of this article, fuel shall include
electricity used to charge or hydrogen used to refuel zero-emission
school buses for the aidable transportation of pupils, but shall not
include electricity or hydrogen used for other purposes;
 (8) bridge tolls;
 (9) transportation by boat or airplane, because of the location of the
school district in relation to the school which the children of the
district attend, or required room and board in connection therewith
necessitated because of impassable waters or adverse weather conditions,
which has been approved by the commissioner;
 (10) the consideration for the contract or contracts made for the
purpose of providing transportation by horse-drawn vehicle or vehicles,
if any school district shall be required to provide such transportation;
and
 (11) other expenses for district operated transportation systems, as
approved pursuant to regulations of the commissioner.
 f. Other transportation operating expenses as approved pursuant to
regulations of the commissioner.
 2. Allowable transportation capital, debt service and lease expense
shall include base year expenditures as described in this subdivision,
net of revenue received with the express purpose of funding such
expenditures as prescribed by the commissioner, except as provided in
paragraph d of subdivision three of this section.
 a. The purchase of school buses as approved by the commissioner;
 b. The lease, as approved by the commissioner, of a school bus by a
school district from another school district, board of cooperative
educational services or a county vocational education and extension
board, or any school bus leased by a school district from any other
source under emergency conditions, as determined by the commissioner, or
any school bus leased by a school district from any other source as
otherwise authorized by this chapter;
 c. The purchase of equipment deemed a proper school district expense,
including: (i) the purchase of two-way radios to be used on old and new
school buses, (ii) the purchase of stop-arms, to be used on old and new
school buses, (iii) the purchase and installation of seat safety belts
on school buses in accordance with the provisions of section thirty-six
hundred thirty-five-a of this article, (iv) the purchase of school bus
back up beepers, (v) the purchase of school bus front crossing arms,
(vi) the purchase of school bus safety sensor devices, (vii) the
purchase and installation of exterior reflective marking on school
buses, (viii) the purchase of automatic engine fire extinguishing
systems for school buses used to transport students who use wheelchairs
or other assistive mobility devices, and (ix) the purchase of other
equipment as prescribed in the regulations of the commissioner;
 d. Other transportation capital, debt service and lease expense, as
approved pursuant to regulations of the commissioner;
 e. Any approved cost of construction, reconstruction, lease or
purchase of a transportation storage facility or site in the amount of
ten thousand dollars or more shall be aidable in accordance with
subdivision six of section thirty-six hundred two of this article and
shall not be aidable as transportation expense; and
 f. Approved costs relating to the lease, purchase, construction, or
installation of zero-emission school bus electric charging or hydrogen
fueling stations. For the purposes of this section, a zero-emission
school bus electric charging station is a station that delivers
electricity from a source outside a zero-emission school bus into one or
more zero-emission school buses. An electric school bus charging station
may include several charge points simultaneously connecting several
zero-emission school buses to the station and any related equipment
needed to facilitate charging plug-in zero-emission school buses. Any
work related to the construction or installation of zero-emission school
bus electric charging or hydrogen fueling stations under this paragraph
shall be considered public work and shall be subject to prevailing wage
requirements in accordance with section two hundred twenty and two
hundred twenty-b of the labor law.
 3. a. The transportation operating expense for any school district
furnishing transportation for pupils attending a school within such
district shall be reduced by any moneys received for transportation.
 b. If a district transports nonresident pupils, moneys received for
such transportation shall also be deducted in calculating transportation
aid, provided that in no case shall there be any deduction made in
determining transportation aid on the basis of bus mileage travelled in
transporting children pursuant to a contract executed in accordance with
paragraph h of subdivision twenty-five of section seventeen hundred nine
of this chapter.
 c. Where a school district contracts for the transportation of its
pupils with a contractor and such contract results in the joint use of
one or more school buses with another district or districts contracting,
independently, with the same contractor, the transportation operating
expense applicable to such bus or buses for such route or routes shall
be prorated to each district. The total transportation operating expense
for all districts that are parties to such contract shall not exceed the
consideration of the contract.
 d. (1) For aid payable in the two thousand twenty-four--two thousand
twenty-five school year and thereafter, notwithstanding any provision of
law to the contrary, approved transportation capital, debt service, and
lease expenses for apportionments to school districts under subdivision
seven of section thirty-six hundred two of this article shall include
the final value of any vouchers paid on behalf of a school district,
payments, and grants authorized pursuant to section 58-0701 of the
environmental conservation law for costs associated with the purchase of
or conversion to zero-emission school buses and supporting
infrastructure.
 (2) (i) In the case of allowable expenses for transportation capital,
debt service, or leases which are related to costs associated with the
purchase of or conversion to zero-emission school buses and supporting
infrastructure and which are supported in whole or in part by vouchers,
payments, or grants authorized under section 58-0701 of the
environmental conservation law, such allowable expenses at the time in
which the expense is claimed for aid shall be reduced by the quotient of
(A) the positive difference, if any, of the maximum state support less
allowable expenses, divided by (B) the transportation aid ratio
calculated pursuant to subdivision seven of section thirty-six hundred
two of this article, provided that allowable expenses after such
reduction, if any, shall be greater than zero.
 (ii) For purposes of this subparagraph "maximum state support" shall
be equal to the sum of (A) the product of the transportation aid ratio
calculated pursuant to subdivision seven of section thirty-six hundred
two of this article multiplied by allowable expenses, plus (B) the final
value of any such vouchers paid on behalf of a school district,
payments, and grants authorized under section 58-0701 of the
environmental conservation law.
 (3) The entity authorized to provide state assistance payments or
grants pursuant to subdivision two of section 58-0703 of the
environmental conservation law shall provide to the commissioner a list
of grants awarded and payments to each school district or vouchers paid
on behalf of a school district for the purchase of or conversion to
zero-emission school buses and supporting infrastructure no later than
one month prior to the end of each calendar year and each school year.
This list shall include the type and number of zero-emission school
buses to be funded by these payments or grants, the supporting
infrastructure to be funded by these payments or grants, the award
amounts of each payment or grant, the direct recipient of each payment
or grant, the district receiving such payment or grant or that
benefitted from such voucher, the date on which the payment or grant was
received, and any other information necessary for the calculation of aid
pursuant to subdivision seven of section thirty-six hundred two of this
article.
 4. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section or any other
provision of law to the contrary, for the computation of transportation
aid pursuant to the requirements of subdivision seven of section
thirty-six hundred two of this article, allowable transportation
expenses shall also include transportation operating expenses described
in subdivision one of this section and transportation capital, debt
service and lease expenses described in subdivision two of this section
incurred in the two thousand nineteen--two thousand twenty school year:
(i) during the state disaster emergency declared pursuant to executive
order 202 of 2020 in the case of expenses pursuant to subdivision eight
of section thirty-six hundred twenty-two-a of this part; and (ii) during
the period between the issuance of executive order 202.4 on March
sixteenth, two thousand twenty and the issuance of executive order
202.28 on May seventh, two thousand twenty in the case of expenses
pursuant to subdivision nine of section thirty-six hundred twenty-two-a
of this part. Such expenses shall be allowable transportation expenses
even where aidable regular transportation as defined in section
thirty-six hundred twenty-two-a of this part of transportation after
four pm pursuant to section thirty-six hundred twenty-seven of this part
was not provided.
 § 3624. Drivers, monitors and attendants. The commissioner shall
determine and define the qualifications of drivers, monitors and
attendants and shall make the rules and regulations governing the
operation of all transportation facilities used by pupils which rules
and regulations shall include, but not be limited to, a maximum speed of
fifty-five miles per hour for school vehicles engaged in pupil
transportation that are operated on roads, interstates or other
highways, parkways or bridges or portions thereof that have posted speed
limits in excess of fifty-five miles per hour, prohibitions relating to
smoking, eating and drinking and any and all other acts or conduct which
would otherwise impair the safe operation of such transportation
facilities while actually being used for the transport of pupils. The
employment of each driver, monitor and attendant shall be approved by
the chief school administrator of a school district for each school bus
operated within his or her district. For the purpose of determining his
or her physical fitness, each driver, monitor and attendant may be
examined on order of the chief school administrator by a duly licensed
physician within two weeks prior to the beginning of service in each
school year as a school bus driver, monitor or attendant. The report of
the physician, in writing, shall be considered by the chief school
administrator in determining the fitness of the driver to operate or
continue to operate any transportation facilities used by pupils and in
determining the fitness of any monitor or attendant to carry out his or
her functions on such transportation facilities. Nothing in this section
shall prohibit a school district from imposing a more restrictive speed
limit policy for the operation of school vehicles engaged in pupil
transportation than the speed limit policy established by the
commissioner.
 § 3625. Contracts. 1. Form of transportation contracts. Every
contract for transportation of school children shall be in writing or in
an electronic form approved by the commissioner when available, and
before such contract is filed with the department as required by
subdivision two of this section, the same shall be submitted for
approval to the superintendent of schools of said district and such
contract shall not be approved and filed by such superintendent unless
he or she shall first investigate the same with particular reference to
the type of conveyance, the character and ability of the driver, the
routes over which the conveyances shall travel, the time schedule, and
such other matters as in the judgement of the superintendent are
necessary for the comfort and protection of the children while being
transported to and from school. Every such contract for transportation
of children shall contain an agreement upon the part of the contractor
that the vehicle shall come to a full stop before crossing the track or
tracks of any railroad and before crossing any state highway.
 2. Filing of transportation contracts. Every transportation contract
shall be filed with the department within one hundred twenty days of the
commencement of service under such contract. No transportation expense
shall be allowed for a period greater than one hundred twenty days prior
to the filing of any contract for the transportation of pupils with the
education department. No contract shall be considered filed unless it
bears an original signature, in the case of a written document, or a
certification, in the case of an approved electronic form, of the
superintendent of a school district or the designee of the
superintendent and the sole trustee or president of the board of
education of the school district. The final approval of any such
contract by the commissioner shall not, however, obligate the state to
allow transportation expense in an amount greater than the amount that
would be allowed under the provisions of this part. The state, acting
through the department of audit and control, may examine any and all
accounts of the contractor in connection with a contract for the
transportation of pupils, and every such contract shall contain the
following provision: "The contractor hereby consents to an audit of any
and all financial records relating to this contract by the department of
audit and control."
 3. Allowable expense for transportation contracts. The allowable
transportation expense for any school district contracting for the use
of a bus or buses for the transportation of any or all the pupils
attending school in such school district, other than a contract with a
public service facility for such transportation operated on routes under
franchise or operated by a municipality or public authority, shall be
determined in the same manner as though such bus or buses were district
owned, except that the amount computed for such bus or buses used in the
computation of the transportation expense may not exceed the amount of
the contract or contracts for such bus or buses.
 4. No transportation aid or other public moneys shall be apportioned
and paid as provided in this chapter to any district furnishing
transportation for pupils until the contract for transportation shall
also have been approved by the commissioner. In defraying any expense
incurred in providing transportation of any pupils or children under any
provision of this chapter, public moneys apportioned to the district in
which such pupils or children reside may be used therefor.
 5. Transportation contract penalties. a. All acts done and proceedings
heretofore had and taken, or caused to be had and taken, by school
districts and by all its officers or agents relating to or in connection
with a transportation contract, to be filed with the department, where
such contract was not timely executed and/or filed within one hundred
twenty days of the commencement of service under such contract pursuant
to subdivision two of this section and/or where the advertisement for
bids for such contract did not meet the requirements set forth in
paragraph a of subdivision fourteen of section three hundred five of
this chapter, and all acts incidental hereto are hereby legalized,
validated, ratified and confirmed, notwithstanding any failure to comply
with such filing and/or advertising provision or provisions, provided
that the conditions in subparagraphs one, two, three, and four of
paragraph b of this subdivision are met.
 b. The department is hereby directed to consider the aforementioned
contracts for transportation aid as valid and proper obligations and
shall not recover from such school districts any penalty arising from
the failure to execute and/or file a transportation contract in a timely
manner and/or meet such advertisement requirements, provided that any
amounts already so recovered shall be deemed a payment of moneys due for
prior years pursuant to paragraph c of subdivision five of section
thirty-six hundred four of this article and shall be paid to the school
district pursuant to such provision, provided that:
 (1) such school district submitted the contract to the commissioner
and such contract is for services in the two thousand twelve--two
thousand thirteen school year or thereafter;
 (2) such contract is approved by the commissioner;
 (3) all state funds expended by the school district were properly
expended for such transportation as approved by the commissioner; and
 (4) the failure to execute or file such contract in a timely manner
and/or meet such advertisement requirements was an inadvertent
administrative or ministerial oversight by the school district or due to
extenuating circumstances, and there is no evidence of any fraudulent or
other improper intent by such district, as determined by the
commissioner.
 § 3626. Data for administration. The commissioner may require the
clerk of the board of education or the trustee of any school district
entitled to transportation aid to file any data deemed necessary for the
proper and efficient administration of this part and subdivision seven
of section thirty-six hundred two of this article.
 § 3627. Transportation after 4pm. 1. Notwithstanding any other
provisions of this section to the contrary, for the two thousand
thirteen--two thousand fourteen and two thousand fourteen--two thousand
fifteen school year and thereafter, a city school district located in a
city having a population of one million or more providing transportation
pursuant to this chapter shall be responsible for:
 (a) providing transportation for those children attending public and
nonpublic schools in grades kindergarten through six who remain at the
same school for which they are enrolled for regularly scheduled academic
classes from half-past nine o'clock in the morning or earlier until four
o'clock in the afternoon or later, on weekdays, and reside at least one
mile from their school of attendance for grades three through six, and
at least one-half mile from their school of attendance for grades
kindergarten through two or
 (b) reimbursing the cost incurred by licensed transportation carriers
pursuant to contracts with such school district for providing
transportation for those children attending public and nonpublic schools
in grades kindergarten through six who remain at the same school for
which they are enrolled for regularly scheduled academic classes from
half-past nine o'clock in the morning or earlier until four o'clock in
the afternoon or later, on weekdays, and reside at least one mile from
their school of attendance for grades three through six, and at least
one-half mile from their school of attendance for grades kindergarten
through two.
 2. Nothing herein shall prohibit the school district from reimbursing
for costs incurred for contracts between the school district and any
entity providing or contracting for such transportation service.
 3. A district shall not be deemed to have satisfied its obligation
under this section by providing public service transportation.
 4. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, any
expenditures for transportation provided pursuant to this section in the
two thousand thirteen--two thousand fourteen school year and thereafter
and otherwise eligible for transportation aid pursuant to subdivision
seven of section thirty-six hundred two of this article shall be
considered approved transportation expenses eligible for transportation
aid, provided further that for the two thousand thirteen--two thousand
fourteen school year such aid shall be limited to eight million one
hundred thousand dollars and for the two thousand fourteen--two thousand
fifteen school year such aid shall be limited to the sum of twelve
million six hundred thousand dollars plus the base amount and for the
two thousand fifteen--two thousand sixteen school year through two
thousand eighteen--two thousand nineteen school year such aid shall be
limited to the sum of eighteen million eight hundred fifty thousand
dollars plus the base amount and for the two thousand nineteen--two
thousand twenty school year such aid shall be limited to the sum of
nineteen million three hundred fifty thousand dollars plus the base
amount and for the two thousand twenty--two thousand twenty-one school
year such aid shall be limited to the sum of nineteen million eight
hundred fifty thousand dollars plus the base amount and for the two
thousand twenty-two--two thousand twenty-three school year such aid
shall be limited to the sum of twenty-two million three hundred fifty
thousand dollars plus the base amount and for the two thousand
twenty-three--two thousand twenty-four school year such aid shall be
limited to the sum of twenty-four million eight hundred fifty thousand
dollars plus the base amount and for the two thousand twenty-four--two
thousand twenty-five school year such aid shall be limited to the sum of
twenty-nine million eight hundred fifty thousand dollars plus the base
amount and for the two thousand twenty-five--two thousand twenty-six
school year and thereafter such aid shall be limited to the product of
(i) the maximum amount of aid authorized by this subdivision for the
base year, and (ii) the sum of one plus the product of (a) two and
one-half multiplied by (b) the percentage increase in the consumer price
index as defined in paragraph hh of subdivision one of section
thirty-six hundred two of this article. For purposes of this
subdivision, "base amount" means the amount of transportation aid paid
to the school district for expenditures incurred in the two thousand
twelve--two thousand thirteen school year for transportation that would
have been eligible for aid pursuant to this section had this section
been in effect in such school year, except that subdivision six of this
section shall be deemed not to have been in effect. And provided further
that the school district shall continue to annually expend for the
transportation described in subdivision one of this section at least the
expenditures used for the base amount.
 5. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section to the
contrary, in no event shall such city school district, in order to
comply with the requirements of this section, be required to incur any
costs in excess of the amount eligible for transportation aid pursuant
to subdivision four of this section. In the event such amount is
insufficient, the city school district of New York shall provide
transportation services within such amount on an equitable basis, until
such apportionment is exhausted.
 6. The chancellor of such school district, in consultation with the
commissioner, shall prescribe the most cost effective system for
implementing the requirements of this section, taking into
consideration: (a) the costs associated with paragraphs (a) and (b) of
subdivision one of this section, and (b) policies that attempt to
maximize student safety for the student to be transported, which for
purposes of this section shall include whether the pick up or drop off
site of the transportation is:
 (i) not further than 600 feet from the student's residence; and/or
 (ii) at the same locations for any family that have children at the
same residence who attend two or more different schools.
 7. (a) In the event the chancellor has not satisfied a district's
obligation under this section, a parent or guardian or any
representative authorized by such parent or guardian of a child eligible
to receive transportation under this section may request the
commissioner to arrange for the provision of the transportation to so
satisfy the requirements of this section.
 (b) If within sixty days of receiving a request from such a parent or
guardian or any representative authorized by such parent or guardian,
the commissioner determines that the chancellor has not satisfied a
district's obligation under this section, then the commissioner shall
immediately direct the chancellor to contract with a licensed
transportation carrier to provide the transportation required pursuant
to this section.
 (c) In the event the chancellor is directed by the commissioner to
contract with a licensed transportation carrier to provide the
transportation required pursuant to this section, the chancellor shall
provide the commissioner with a copy of such proposed contract, before
it becomes effective, and the commissioner shall have the power to
approve, disapprove or require amendments to such contract before it
shall become effective.
 (d) A district, determined by the commissioner to not be in compliance
with the requirements of this section, shall be responsible for the cost
of any transportation contract awarded by the chancellor.
 8. The parent or guardian, or any representative authorized by such
parent or guardian, may submit a written request for transportation
under this section, in the same manner and upon the same dates as are
required for a request for transportation pursuant to subdivision two of
section thirty-six hundred thirty-five of this article.
 § 3628. Excess expenditures. Unless otherwise provided in this part,
any expenditure for transportation in excess of the allowable
transportation expense as determined according to the provisions of this
part shall not be used in determining the amount of any other form of
state aid.
 PART III
 TRANSPORTATION SERVICES
Section 3635. Transportation.
 3635-a. Safety belt usage.
 3635-b. Authorization to provide pupil transportation in child
 safety zones.
 3635-c. Standing passengers prohibited.
 3636. Passage of school buses across railroad crossings.
 3637. Idling school buses on school grounds.
 3638. Zero-emission school buses.
 § 3635. Transportation. 1. a. Sufficient transportation facilities
(including the operation and maintenance of motor vehicles) shall be
provided by the school district for all the children residing within the
school district to and from the school they legally attend, who are in
need of such transportation because of the remoteness of the school to
the child or for the promotion of the best interest of such children.
Such transportation shall be provided for all children attending grades
kindergarten through eight who live more than two miles from the school
which they legally attend and for all children attending grades nine
through twelve who live more than three miles from the school which they
legally attend and shall be provided for each such child up to a
distance of fifteen miles, the distances in each case being measured by
the nearest available route from home to school. The cost of providing
such transportation between two or three miles, as the case may be, and
fifteen miles shall be considered for the purposes of this chapter to be
a charge upon the district and an ordinary contingent expense of the
district. Transportation for a lesser distance than two miles in the
case of children attending grades kindergarten through eight or three
miles in the case of children attending grades nine through twelve and
for a greater distance than fifteen miles may be provided by the
district with the approval of the qualified voters, and, if provided,
shall be offered equally to all children in like circumstances residing
in the district; provided, however, that this requirement shall not
apply to transportation offered pursuant to section thirty-six hundred
thirty-five-b of this article.
 b. (i) School districts providing transportation to a nonpublic school
for pupils living within a specified distance from such school shall
designate one or more public schools as centralized pick-up points and
shall provide transportation between such points and such nonpublic
schools for students residing in the district who live too far from such
nonpublic schools to qualify for transportation between home and school.
The district shall not be responsible for the provision of
transportation for pupils between their home and such pick-up points.
The district may provide school bus transportation to a pupil if the
residence of the pupil is located on an established route for the
transportation of pupils to the centralized pick-up point provided such
transportation does not result in additional costs to the district. The
cost of providing transportation between such pick-up points and such
nonpublic schools shall be an ordinary contingent expense.
 (ii) A board of education may, at its discretion, provide
transportation for pupils residing within the district to a nonpublic
school located more than fifteen miles from the home of any such pupil
provided that such transportation has been provided to such nonpublic
school pursuant to this subdivision in at least one of the immediately
preceding three school years and such transportation is provided from
one or more centralized pick-up points designated pursuant to this
paragraph and that the distance from such pick-up points to the
nonpublic school is not more than fifteen miles. The district shall not
be responsible for the provision of transportation for pupils between
pupils homes and such pick-up points. The cost of providing
transportation between such pick-up points and such nonpublic schools
shall be an ordinary contingent expense.
 c. The foregoing provisions of this subdivision shall not require
transportation to be provided for children residing within a city school
district, but if provided by such district pursuant to other provisions
of this chapter, such transportation shall be offered equally to all
such children in like circumstances; provided further that in city
school districts in cities having a population of one hundred
twenty-five thousand inhabitants or less such transportation, if
provided, shall be subject to the mileage limitations prescribed in
paragraph a of this subdivision or such greater or lesser limitations as
are approved by the board of education prior to July first, nineteen
hundred ninety-six or as otherwise authorized in subdivision twelve of
section twenty-five hundred three of this chapter. City school districts
with a population of more than two hundred twenty-five thousand and less
than three hundred thousand, according to the nineteen hundred eighty
federal census, which elect to provide transportation shall do so in
accord with the grade and distance provisions of this subdivision
including transportation outside the city limits.
 d. Nothing contained in this subdivision, however, shall be deemed to
require a school district to furnish transportation to a child directly
to or from his or her home.
 e. In lieu of the transportation provided pursuant to the foregoing
provisions of this subdivision, a board of education may, at its
discretion, provide transportation to any child attending grades
kindergarten through eight between the school such child legally attends
and before-and/or-after-school child care locations. For the purposes of
this subdivision, a before-and/or-after-school child care location shall
mean a place, other than the child's home, where care for less than
twenty-four hours a day is provided on a regular basis for a child who
attends school within the school district, provided that such place is
situated within the school district. This definition includes, but is
not limited to, a variety of child care services such as day care
centers, family day care homes and in-home care by non-relatives. Such
transportation may be provided for children attending grades
kindergarten through eight where the distance between the school they
legally attend and before-and/or-after-school child care locations is
more than two miles, and may be provided for up to a distance of fifteen
miles, the distance in each case being measured by the nearest available
route from before-and/or-after-school child care locations to the school
they legally attend, except that transportation for a lesser distance
than two miles or a greater distance than fifteen miles may be provided
if transportation for such distances is provided to students between
home and school. Where a child receives transportation from a
before-school child care location to the school he or she legally
attends, such child shall be entitled to receive transportation from the
school he or she legally attends to his or her home or to an
after-school child care location in accordance with this subdivision.
Where a child receives transportation from the school he or she legally
attends to an after-school child care location, such child shall be
entitled to receive transportation from home to the school he or she
legally attends in accordance with this subdivision. Transportation may
be provided to any child attending grades kindergarten through eight
between the school the child legally attends and
before-and/or-after-school child care locations upon written request of
the parent or legal guardian submitted not later than the first day of
April preceding the next school year, provided, however, a parent or
guardian of a child not residing in the district on such date shall
submit a written request within thirty days after establishing residence
in the district and provided further that in order to be considered
eligible for such transportation in the nineteen hundred
eighty-seven--eighty-eight school year, such request must be submitted
by August first, nineteen hundred eighty-seven. The provision of
transportation to or from before-and/or-after-school child care
locations, if provided, shall be offered equally to all children in like
circumstances residing in the district, provided that a board of
education furnishing transportation pursuant to this paragraph may limit
the provision of such transportation to child care locations located
within the attendance zone of the school the child attends, and to child
day care centers and school age child care programs licensed or
registered pursuant to section three hundred ninety of the social
services law located anywhere within the school district. The cost of
providing such transportation between two or three miles, as the case
may be, and fifteen miles shall be considered for the purposes of this
chapter to be a charge upon the district. Such substitute transportation
expense shall be eligible for state aid in accordance with clause one of
paragraph b of subdivision seven of section thirty-six hundred two of
this chapter. Nothing in this subdivision shall be construed to impose a
duty upon boards of education to provide transportation to or from
before-and/or-after-school child care locations. Nothing in this
subdivision shall be construed to authorize boards of education to
provide to any child transportation between a before-and/or-after-school
day care location and that child's home.
 f. A board of education may, in its discretion, provide transportation
pursuant to this subdivision to a child of less than school age residing
within the school district to and from the school which his or her
parent legally attends; provided that such child is accompanied by such
parent, that such parent is under twenty-one years of age and has not
received a high school diploma, and that such transportation is
furnished for the purpose of allowing the child to receive child care
services and/or attend a nursery school, pre-school, or parenting
program. For all purposes under this chapter, a child receiving such
transportation shall be deemed a pupil legally attending the school
which his or her parent legally attends. The cost of providing such
transportation shall be considered for the purposes of this chapter to
be a charge upon the district and an ordinary contingent expense of the
district. Such transportation expense shall be eligible for state aid in
accordance with subparagraph (i) of paragraph b of subdivision seven of
section thirty-six hundred two of this article.
 g. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the
trustees or board of education of any school district may, in its
discretion, provide transportation for students attending a universal
pre-kindergarten program in addition to transportation funded by such
program or transportation for students attending another district
sponsored or district-run pre-kindergarten program, within mileage
limits established by the school district; if provided such
transportation shall be offered equally to all children in like
circumstances residing in the district. The cost of providing such
transportation shall be a charge upon the district and for purposes of
subdivision seven of section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter,
such pupils shall be considered non allowable pupils and the costs of
their transportation shall not be aidable.
 2. A parent or guardian of a child residing in any school district, or
any representative authorized by such parent or guardian, who desires
for a child during the next school year any transportation authorized or
directed by this chapter shall submit a written request therefor to the
school trustees or board of education of such district not later than
the first day of April preceding the next school year, provided,
however, that a parent or guardian of a child not residing in the
district on such date shall submit a written request within thirty days
after establishing residence in the district. No late request of a
parent or guardian for transportation shall be denied where a reasonable
explanation is provided for the delay. If the voters, school trustees,
or board of education fail to provide the transportation authorized or
directed by this chapter after receiving such a request, such parent,
guardian or representative, or any taxpayer residing in the district,
may appeal to the commissioner of education, as provided in section
three hundred ten of this chapter. Except as hereinbefore provided, the
commissioner of education shall not require that such parent, guardian
or representative present a request for such transportation to any
meeting of the voters, school trustees or board of education in order to
appeal. Upon such appeal, the commissioner of education shall make such
order as is required to effect compliance with the provisions of this
chapter and this section.
 2-a. The superintendent of each city school district, in a city having
a population in excess of one million, shall prepare a public school
calendar and shall notify officials of nonpublic schools to which
transportation has been requested not later than the first day of June
in each year, of the days on which the public schools will be in session
in the following school year. Such school district which provides
transportation to nonpublic schools shall provide such transportation
for the same number of days as the public schools are open but shall not
provide transportation services for more than one hundred eighty days.
Officials of each nonpublic school to which transportation is provided
by a city school district of a city having a population in excess of one
million may notify such district, not later than the first day of July
of each school year, of a maximum of five days, exclusive of Saturdays,
Sundays or legal holidays upon which public schools are required to be
closed, on which the public schools are scheduled to be closed, except
that in any year in which the first or last day of Passover and Easter
Sunday are separated by more than seven days, such officials may notify
the district of a maximum of ten days, but such school district will be
required to provide for transportation to such nonpublic school provided
that such five or ten additional days, whichever is applicable, are
limited to the following: the Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday
after Labor Day, Rosh Hashanah, Yom Kippur, the week in which public
schools are closed for spring recess, December twenty-fourth and the
week between Christmas day and New Year's day, the Tuesday, Wednesday,
Thursday and Friday after the observance of Washington's birthday, the
first day of the second lunar month after the winter solstice in the
preceding calendar year, known as Asian Lunar New Year, the fifteenth
day of the eighth month of the Indian calendar in each year, known as
Diwali, and, in the boroughs of Brooklyn and Queens only, Anniversary
Day as designated in section twenty-five hundred eighty-six of this
chapter.
 3. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, rule or regulation to
the contrary, in cities with a population of one million or more, the
requirement of paragraph c of subdivision one of this section, requiring
that a city school district providing transportation for children
residing within such district offer such transportation equally to all
such children in like circumstances, shall not apply to the use of
existing contract bus service provided for children in elementary grades
by pupils in grades seven and eight, but only where such use is a
reinstatement of a service provided in the school year beginning in
September, two thousand nine and ending in June two thousand ten.
 5. For the purpose of affording the greatest possible protection to
school children, drive-off places on public highways may be designated
by the appropriate board of education or district superintendent to
permit school busses to be driven off the highway to receive or
discharge school children, and the state or municipality having
jurisdiction of such highway, is authorized to provide construction and
maintenance of such designated drive-offs.
 6. In the event that the expenses entailed by the phase-out of
omnibuses required by paragraph (k) of subdivision twenty of section
three hundred seventy-five of the vehicle and traffic law are not
otherwise provided for, such expenses shall be an ordinary contingent
expense of a school district.
 7. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, rule or regulation,
where a child is permitted by a school district or board of education to
attend a public school other than the school to which they would
normally be assigned, a parent of such child may agree to waive
provision of transportation which would otherwise be required under this
section and no such transportation shall be required. Any agreement to
waive transportation must be renewed annually in writing.
 * 8. a. The trustees or board of education of a school district may,
at its discretion, provide student transportation based upon patterns of
actual ridership. The actual ridership shall be determined by a school
district based upon documented history and experience that yields a
consistent pattern of eligible pupils not using district transportation;
or modeling of future ridership; or the sharing of transportation
regionally; or other criteria approved by the commissioner; provided
however that any methodology shall require an additional ten percent in
seating capacity above the number of seats derived using such
methodology which shall be available in case of unanticipated riders.
 Nothing in this subdivision shall be construed to reduce or relieve
school districts from the responsibility of providing transportation to
students otherwise eligible for such transportation. Nothing in this
subdivision shall be construed to authorize a school district to have
standing passengers in violation of section thirty-six hundred
thirty-five-c of this article, and unanticipated ridership shall not be
deemed an unforeseen occurrence for purposes of subdivision two of such
section after the first day in which such unanticipated ridership
occurs.
 Any school district that, at its discretion, has elected to provide
student transportation based upon patterns of actual ridership shall
place such plans on the school district's website, if one exists, on or
before August fifteenth of the school year in which the transportation
plan will be implemented and shall be required to have a back up plan as
part of their emergency management practices for pupil transportation in
the event that a bus is filled beyond capacity.
 b. The commissioner shall evaluate the effectiveness of this
subdivision including the methodologies used by school districts to
determine the patterns of actual ridership and whether such
methodologies ensure that all students otherwise eligible receive
transportation and that student safety is assured.
 * NB Repealed June 30, 2029
 § 3635-a. Safety belt usage. 1. A board of education or board of
trustees may, in its discretion, following a public hearing for the
purpose of determining whether a resolution shall be adopted, provide
for the use of seat safety belts on such school buses, in accordance
with regulations and standards established by the commissioner under
subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred thirty-eight of this
chapter.
 2. Such public hearing, conducted upon reasonable notice, shall be
held to consider: (a) whether the district shall install seat safety
belts on buses purchased and/or contracted for prior to the effective
date of this section and require their use; (b) when such installation
shall be provided, and (c) whether use of seat safety belts shall be
required on all school buses within the district so equipped after a
date to be determined by the board of education or board of trustees.
 3. Such hearings shall consider the effect of seat safety belts
installation on the total number of students that can be transported on
such buses.
 4. Within twenty days after the public hearing, the board of education
or board of trustees shall, by resolution, determine whether to require
installation and use of seat safety belts on some or all school buses.
 5. This section shall apply only to vehicles owned or leased by school
districts and nonpublic schools, and to vehicles used to perform
contracts with such school districts and nonpublic schools for the
purpose of transporting school children for hire.
 6. Nothing in this section shall be construed to impose a duty upon
boards of education or boards of trustees to provide seat safety belts
on school buses purchased or contracted for prior to the effective date
of this section, nor shall any board of education or board of trustees
be held liable for failure to provide seat safety belts pursuant to this
section. A school board member or trustee shall have immunity from any
civil or criminal liability that might otherwise be incurred or imposed
as a result of the provisions of this section provided that such person
shall have acted in good faith. For the purpose of any proceeding, civil
or criminal, the good faith of any such person shall be presumed.
 7. The provisions of this section shall not apply to school districts
which are using safety belts on school buses or have installed or have
contracted for the installation of seat safety belts prior to the
effective date of this section.
 § 3635-b. Authorization to provide pupil transportation in child
safety zones. 1. This section shall apply where the board of education
or trustees of a common, central, central high school, union free school
district, or city school district of a city with less than one hundred
twenty-five thousand inhabitants adopts a resolution to make
transportation in child safety zones available to resident pupils for a
particular school year. Such resolution shall continue in effect for
subsequent school years until the board adopts a resolution providing
otherwise.
 2. A board of education or board of trustees is authorized to adopt a
resolution providing for pupil transportation in child safety zones,
where applicable, of a proposition to expend money for such
transportation presented pursuant to the provisions of subdivision
nineteen of section two thousand twenty-one and section two thousand
twenty-two of this chapter. Such transportation may be provided without
regard to like circumstances based solely upon the fact that the pupil
resides within two miles, in the case of a pupil in grade kindergarten
through eight, and within three miles, in the case of a pupil in grade
nine through twelve, from the school such pupil legally attends,
notwithstanding the provisions of section thirty-six hundred thirty-five
of this article. Such transportation may be provided upon the
determination by the board that a hazardous zone exists which in the
opinion of the board would be reasonably alleviated by the establishment
of a child safety zone. For purposes of this section, child safety zone
means a designated area of a school district, including at least one
personal residence, within which children who reside at a lesser
distance from the school they legally attend than the minimum
transportation limit of the district will be provided transportation on
the basis that their most direct walking route to school will traverse a
hazardous zone.
 3. The commissioner of transportation shall establish regulations for
determination of a hazardous zone including, but not limited to, such
factors as the existence or nonexistence of sidewalks or walkways, the
type of road surface, width of road, footpath or sidewalk, the volume
and average speed of traffic, density of population, violent crime
statistics, density of vacant buildings or structures, the commercial,
industrial or residential character of the area and the existence or
nonexistence of traffic safety features such as traffic lights, street
lights and traffic patrols. In preparing such regulations, the
commissioner of transportation shall consult with the commissioners of
education and motor vehicles and representatives from the state police
who have traffic safety responsibilities. Such regulations shall be used
by boards of education in determining whether a hazardous zone exists.
 4. The board of education of any school district shall, upon written
petition of a parent or other person in parental relation of a child
residing within such district or of any representative authorized by
such parent or other person in parental relation, signed by twenty-five
qualified voters of the district or five percent of the number of voters
who voted in the previous annual election of the members of the board of
education, whichever is greater, make an investigation to determine
whether a hazardous zone exists requiring the establishment of a child
safety zone. Petitions shall specify the geographic boundaries
comprising the proposed hazardous zone and any child safety zone
requested. Petitions and/or additional written requests from individual
parents or persons in parental relation requesting designation of an
area as a child safety zone in conjunction with any proposed or existing
hazardous zone may be submitted provided that such petitions and/or
requests shall not be submitted later than the first day of March
preceding the school year for which transportation is requested. The
school board shall make its determination before the board presents the
budget for the school year for which transportation is requested. The
parent or other person in parental relation of a child not residing in
the district on the first day of March may submit a request within
thirty days after establishing residence in the district, but in no
event later than the first day of July of the school year for which
transportation is requested and the board shall make its determination
within thirty days of receipt of such request.
 5. The board of education or board of trustees of any school district
may directly, or by appointment of an advisory committee, make an
investigation to determine if a hazardous zone exists within such
district. Such investigation shall be made pursuant to the regulations
of the commissioner of transportation and shall include consultation
with state or local transportation authorities and the investigation of
other, less costly, reasonable alternatives to the creation of a child
safety zone. If, after such investigation, the board shall determine
that a hazardous zone exists which can be reasonably alleviated, in the
opinion of the board, only by establishing a child safety zone and
providing transportation in and through such child safety zone, and that
no reasonable, less costly alternatives to such transportation exist to
alleviate the situation, the board may adopt a separate resolution to
expend money for transportation in child safety zones at the annual
district meeting.
 6. Where the trustees or board of education determines after the
annual district meeting is held that the designation of a new hazardous
safety zone is needed as a result of a change in circumstances that was
unknown to the board and not reasonably foreseeable at the time of the
annual meeting, the trustees or board of education may call a special
district meeting to vote on a proposition to expend money for
transportation in child safety zones. The trustees or board of education
shall establish procedures for submission of petitions and requests by
individual parents or persons in parental relation for the designation
of child safety zones in conjunction with the proposed hazardous zone.
 7. Whenever a school board determines that a hazardous safety zone
exists or that a child safety zone should be established, it shall
notify the petitioner, each requestor of a child safety zone and any
state or local entity with jurisdiction over roadways or property within
such zone.
 8. The board of education or board of trustees shall conduct a public
hearing with appropriate public notice, upon the board's determination
that a hazardous zone no longer exists or that the need for continuation
of a child safety zone has been alleviated and that such designation is
to be rescinded. Within twenty days after the public hearing, the board
shall, by resolution, determine that a hazardous zone continues to exist
or no longer exists and that the need for continuation of a child safety
zone has or has not been alleviated and that the designation is or is
not rescinded.
 9. In the event that the school board determines that a hazardous zone
does not exist, or that other, less costly, reasonable alternatives to
the establishment of a child safety zone exist and may be used to
alleviate the situation, it shall fully state the reasons for such
determination in writing to the petitioner.
 10. The cost of providing transportation, pursuant to the provisions
of this section, shall be an ordinary contingent expense and shall be
included as an item of expense for purposes of determining the
transportation quota of such district.
 12. Nothing in this section shall be construed to impose a duty upon
school boards to provide transportation services pursuant to this
section nor shall any board of education or board of trustees be held
liable for failure to provide transportation pursuant to this section.
The determination that a hazardous zone exists or that a child safety
zone has been established, and the petitions, investigatory materials
and decision making documents created or reviewed in making such
determination, shall not be admissible as evidence or used in civil
litigation or any suit or action for damages, nor shall any school board
members, school board trustee, school employee, governmental official or
any other individual be compelled or permitted, whether by subpoena or
other process, to testify in any such civil litigation regarding such
determination. A school board member, trustee, school officer or
employee shall have immunity from any civil or criminal liability that
might otherwise be incurred or imposed as a result of the provisions of
this section provided that such person shall have acted in good faith.
For the purpose of any proceeding, civil or criminal, the good faith of
any such person shall be presumed.
 13. The commissioner shall submit a report on the status of pupil
transportation in child safety zones to the governor, the speaker of the
assembly, the temporary president of the senate, and the chairs of the
assembly and senate standing education committees, prior to January
first, two thousand one. The report shall, at a minimum, include the
number of child safety zones established across the state and the total
number of pupils transported per zone. The report shall also include the
commissioner's recommendations for modification of the child safety zone
provisions, including, but not limited to, the granting of state
transportation aid for pupil transportation within such zones and the
process by which child safety zones are established.
 § 3635-c. Standing passengers prohibited. Standing passengers shall
not be carried on school buses owned by or contracted to a school
district while such vehicles are employed exclusively for the
transportation of pupils under the age of twenty-one and teachers and
other persons acting in a supervisory capacity to or from school or
school activities, except as provided in subdivision one or two of this
section:
 1. Standing passengers may be permitted on such a school bus provided
that the number of standing passengers does not exceed the limit
established in the following schedule for the applicable time period:
 Period: Not more than:
Through June 30, 2001 20% of approved seating capacity
Between July 1, 2001 and 15% of approved seating capacity
 June 30, 2002
Between July 1, 2002 and 10% of approved seating capacity
 June 30, 2003
Between July 1, 2003 and 5% of approved seating capacity
 June 30, 2004
 2. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section to the
contrary, standing passengers may be permitted without limitation as to
number during the first ten days of session in each school year, and in
circumstances where a breakdown, accident, or other unforeseen
occurrence necessitates the transportation of standing passengers.
 3. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to restrict
the power of a city with a population of one million or more to adopt
and enforce local laws that comply with at least the minimum applicable
standards set forth in this section.
 § 3636. Passage of school buses across railroad crossings. 1. No
school bus transporting pupils between home and school or between
schools which such pupils regularly attend either within or outside the
district which operates or contracts for the operation of such bus, or
transporting pupils for any purpose within such district, shall cross
railroad tracks at grade except at a guarded railroad crossing, unless
the governing body of the school district which operates the bus or
contracts for the operation of the bus shall have adopted, at a regular
meeting after a public hearing thereon, a resolution by which it shall
have determined that the use of a route which would avoid an unguarded
railroad crossing by the school bus would be impracticable.
 A copy of any resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of this
section shall be filed with the department of education and the
department of transportation at their respective offices in the city of
Albany.
 2. For the purpose of this section, a guarded railroad crossing shall
be defined as follows:
 a. Any railroad crossing having automatic electrically operated gates
that meet the specifications for such gates in the rules and regulations
promulgated by the department of transporation.
 b. Any railroad crossing where a member of the approaching train's
crew disembarks from the train which has stopped before the crossing and
positions himself at the crossing to halt traffic while the train
passes. Such procedure must be in accordance with the rules and
regulations promulgated by the department of transportation.
 c. Any railroad crossing protected by an automatic warning signal
which meets the specifications in the rules and regulations as
promulgated by the department of transportation.
 d. Any railroad crossing protected by one or more persons serving as a
railroad crossing guard.
 3. Each school district shall prepare and maintain a map indicating
the intersection with any unguarded railroad crossing of each route used
by a school bus transporting students to and from school either within
or outside the district, or for any purpose within the district, and
shall make such map available for inspection by any resident of the
district at a place designated by the governing body of the district.
 4. The commissioner of education shall have the authority to
promulgate such regulations as he shall deem appropriate to implement
the provisions of this section.
 * § 3637. Idling school buses on school grounds. 1. On or before July
first, two thousand eight, the commissioner shall promulgate regulations
requiring school districts to minimize, to the extent practicable, the
idling of the engine of any school bus, as defined in section one
hundred forty-two of the vehicle and traffic law, and other vehicles
owned or leased by the school district while such bus or vehicle is
parked or standing on school grounds, or in front of any school. Such
regulations shall apply to school districts identified by the
commissioner, in consultation with the department of health, with a
significant number of children with asthma and those other school
districts deemed by the commissioner as appropriate.
 2. Such regulations shall include, but not be limited to, a
requirement that the engines of all school buses and vehicles owned or
leased by the school district be turned off while waiting for passengers
to load or off load on school grounds. When necessary for heating,
mechanical or emergency circumstances, the regulations may allow idling
to the extent necessary to achieve such purpose. Provided, however, that
such regulations shall not conflict with applicable state regulations
and local laws.
 3. School districts shall be required to annually provide their school
personnel with notice of the provisions of this section, and the
regulations promulgated pursuant to this section by the commissioner.
The commissioner shall provide such notice for school districts to
disseminate.
 * NB Repealed June 30, 2029
 § 3638. Zero-emission school buses. 1. For the purposes of this
section "zero-emission school bus" shall mean a school bus that: is
propelled by an electric motor and associated power electronics which
provide acceleration torque to the drive wheels during normal vehicle
operations and draws electricity from a hydrogen fuel cell or battery;
or otherwise operates without direct emission of atmospheric pollutants.
 2. (a) No later than July first, two thousand twenty-seven, every
school district shall:
 (i) only purchase or lease zero-emission school buses when purchasing
or leasing new buses;
 (ii) include requirements in any procurement for school transportation
services that any contractors providing transportation services for the
school district must only purchase or lease zero-emission school buses
when purchasing or leasing new school buses; and
 (iii) include requirements in any procurement for the manufacturing or
retrofitting of a zero-emission school bus and charging or fueling
infrastructure that the components and parts used or supplied in the
performance of the contract or any subcontract thereto shall be produced
or made in whole or substantial part in the United States, its
territories or possessions and that final assembly of the zero-emission
school bus and charging or fueling infrastructure shall occur in the
United States, its territories or possessions.
 (b) The commissioner, in consultation with the New York state energy
research and development authority and office of general services, may
waive the contracting requirements set forth in subparagraph (iii) of
paragraph (a) of this subdivision if the commissioner determines that
the requirements would not be in the public interest, would result in
unreasonable costs, or that obtaining such zero-emission school buses
and charging or fueling infrastructure components and parts in the
United States would increase the cost of a school district's contract
for zero-emission school buses and charging or fueling infrastructure by
an unreasonable amount, or such zero-emission school busses and charging
or fueling infrastructure components and parts cannot be produced, made,
or assembled in the United States in sufficient and reasonably available
quantities or of satisfactory quality. Such determination must be made
on an annual basis no later than December thirty-first, after providing
notice and an opportunity for public comment, and be made publicly
available, in writing, on the department's website with a detailed
explanation of the findings leading to such determination. If the
commissioner has issued determinations for three consecutive years that
no such waiver is warranted pursuant to this paragraph, then the
commissioner shall no longer be required to provide the annual
determinations required by this paragraph.
 3. No later than July first, two thousand thirty-five, every school
district shall:
 (a) only operate and maintain zero-emission school buses; and
 (b) include requirements in any procurement for school transportation
services that any contractors providing transportation services for the
school district must only operate zero-emission school buses when
providing such transportation services to the school district.
 4. (a) A school district may apply to the commissioner, and the
department may grant a maximum of two extensions of up to twenty-four
months each to comply with the requirements of subdivision two of this
section. The commissioner shall consider a school district's effort to
meet the requirements of subdivision two of this section and any other
factors outside of the control of the district when granting an
extension, including but not limited to, procurement efforts made by the
school district, applications for state or federal funds, changes needed
to school district operations to meet the requirements of this section,
employee training, receipt of technical assistance, market availability
of zero-emission school buses or supporting infrastructure, and
availability of state or federal funds. In order to receive a second
extension pursuant to this paragraph, a school district must have at
least engaged with the New York state energy research and development
authority in the initiation and development of a fleet electrification
plan.
 The commissioner shall provide written notification to a school
district where such school district is granted an extension and shall
detail the grounds for granting such extension.
 (b) The commissioner shall notify the New York state energy research
and development authority when the first extension is granted to a
school district pursuant to paragraph (a) of this subdivision. The New
York state energy research and development authority or its designee
shall meet with the school district at least annually during the
extension period to provide technical assistance to address the grounds
detailed in the extension.
 (c) The New York state energy research and development authority shall
make a recommendation to the commissioner if they determine a school
district has the capacity to fulfill the requirements of subdivision two
of this section based on the fleet electrification technical assessment
and shall notify the education department and the school district of
such recommendation in writing. No school district may be granted an
extension pursuant to paragraph (a) of this subdivision where the New
York state energy research and development authority has notified the
commissioner of their recommendation that such school district has the
capacity to fulfill the requirements of subdivision two of this section.
 (d) The commissioner shall publish on the department's website no
later than December thirty-first, two thousand twenty-five the
application school districts must use to apply for extensions pursuant
to paragraph (a) of this subdivision and the requirements school
districts must meet to qualify for such extensions.
 5. (a) Nothing in this section shall alter the rights or benefits, and
privileges, including, but not limited to terms and conditions of
employment, civil service status, and collective bargaining unit
membership, of any current employees of school districts or any entity
contracted to provide pupil transportation services, or services
attendant thereto, including but not limited to drivers, attendants,
dispatchers, and mechanics.
 (b) Nothing in this section shall result in: (i) the discharge,
displacement, or loss of position, including partial displacement such
as a reduction in the hours of non-overtime work, wages, or employment
benefits; (ii) the impairment of existing collective bargaining
agreements; (iii) the transfer of existing duties and functions; or (iv)
the transfer of future duties and functions, of any currently employed
worker impacted by the proposed purchase or lease who agrees to be
retrained.
 (c) Prior to the beginning of the procurement process for new
zero-emission school buses, omnibuses, vehicles, charging infrastructure
or equipment, fueling infrastructure or equipment, or other equipment,
the school district, private school bus company, or other employer whose
workers provide pupil transportation services or services attendant
thereto, shall create and implement a workforce development report that:
(i) estimates the number of current positions that would be eliminated
or substantially changed as a result of the purchase or lease, and the
number of positions expected to be created at the school district,
private school bus company or other employer whose workers provide pupil
transportation services or services attendant thereto by the proposed
purchase or lease over the intended life of the proposed purchase or
lease; (ii) identifies gaps in skills of its current workforce that are
needed to operate and maintain zero-emission school buses, omnibuses,
vehicles, charging infrastructure or equipment, fueling infrastructure
or equipment, or other equipment; (iii) includes a comprehensive plan to
transition, train, or retrain employees that are impacted by the
proposed purchase or lease; and (iv) contains an estimated budget to
transition, train, or retrain employees that are impacted by the
proposed purchase or lease.
 (d) Nothing in this section shall: (i) limit rights of employees
pursuant to a collective bargaining agreement, or (ii) alter the
existing representational relationships among collective bargaining
representatives or the bargaining relationships between the employer and
any collective bargaining representative. Employees of public entities
serving in positions in newly created titles shall be assigned to the
appropriate bargaining unit.
 (e) Prior to beginning the procurement process for zero-emission
school buses, omnibuses, vehicles, charging infrastructure or equipment,
fueling infrastructure or equipment, or other equipment, any employer of
workers covered by this section shall inform its employees' collective
bargaining representative of any potential impact on its members or
unit, including positions that may be affected, altered, or eliminated
as a result of the purchase.
 6. When purchasing zero-emission school buses and charging or fueling
infrastructure, school districts are encouraged to utilize the
centralized contracts for zero emission school buses and charging or
fueling infrastructure established by the office of general services.
 * 7. Beginning in the two thousand twenty-four--two thousand
twenty-five school year, every school district shall annually submit to
the commissioner a progress report on the implementation of
zero-emission school buses as required under this section in a format
prescribed by the commissioner and approved by the director of the
budget. The report shall include, but not be limited to, (i) sufficiency
of the school district's electric infrastructure to support anticipated
electrical needs, (ii) the availability and installation of charging or
fueling stations and other components and capital infrastructure
required to support the transition to and full implementation of
zero-emission school buses, (iii) whether the workforce development
report pursuant to paragraph (c) of subdivision five of this section has
been created and implemented, (iv) the number and proportion of
zero-emission school buses the school district or any contractor
providing transportation services is utilizing in the current school
year, and (v) the number and proportion of zero-emission school buses
purchased or leased by the school district or any contractor providing
transportation services in the current school year and the total
anticipated number for the next two years. The progress report shall be
due on or before August first of each year. Beginning October first, two
thousand twenty-four, the commissioner shall annually submit a report to
the governor, the temporary president of the senate and the speaker of
the assembly on the progress of implementation of zero-emission school
buses as reported by the school districts.
 * NB Repealed June 30, 2036
 PART IV--SPECIAL APPORTIONMENTS AND GRANTS-IN-AID
Section 3640. Application.
 3641. Special apportionments and grants-in-aid to school
 districts.
 3641-a. Excelsior scholars program for grade seven mathematics
 and science students.
 3641-b. Grants for summer institutes for mathematics and science
 teachers.
 3642. Severability.
 § 3640. Application. Part IV of this article shall apply to the
apportionment of public moneys for certain special apportionments and
grants-in-aid to school districts that are payable to the special aid
fund of the school district, and for certain grants-in-aid to other
entities.
 § 3641. Special apportionments and grants-in-aid to school districts.
1. General provisions. a. The commissioner shall be authorized to
provide funds for the programs included in this section only to the
extent that an appropriation is available for the purpose of the
specific program.
 b. The payment schedule set forth in section thirty-six hundred nine-a
of this article shall not apply to special apportionments or
grants-in-aid included in this section. Except where a specific payment
schedule is set forth in this section, the commissioner is authorized to
pay up to seventy percent of the sum appropriated for any program
included in this section prior to April first of the school year for
which such moneys are available, with the remainder payable on or after
such date.
 2. Full-day kindergarten transition and pre-kindergarten planning
grants. Within the amount appropriated for such purpose, the
commissioner is hereby authorized to award grants to: (i) school
districts that operated half-day kindergarten programs in the two
thousand six--two thousand seven school year and will continue to
operate such half-day programs in the two thousand seven--two thousand
eight school year to plan for conversion to full-day kindergartens only
in the school year next following the school year in which the planning
grant is received, but no later than the two thousand ten--two thousand
eleven school year, and (ii) school districts for planning grants for
the implementation or expansion of universal prekindergarten programs.
The commissioner shall prescribe the procedures and criteria for the
award of such grants, which shall be available to school districts to
defray their additional costs for planning time, the cost of classroom
materials, equipment, furniture and supplies not eligible for aid
pursuant to subdivisions six, six-a, six-b, six-c or six-f of section
thirty-six hundred two of this article, where such additional costs are
incurred in planning for the facilities and staffing that will be needed
for such conversion, implementation or expansion. No school district may
receive more than one planning grant pursuant to this subdivision for
conversion to full-day kindergarten. The commissioner shall be
authorized to adopt regulations to implement the provisions of this
subdivision.
 3. Supplemental valuation impact grants. a. In addition to
apportionments otherwise provided by section thirty-six hundred two of
this article, for aid payable in the two thousand eight--two thousand
nine and two thousand nine--two thousand ten school years, the amounts
specified in paragraphs c and d of this subdivision shall be paid for
the purpose of providing additional funding for school districts which
have experienced a significant financial hardship caused by an
extraordinary change in the taxable property valuation or extraordinary
judgments resulting from tax certiorari proceedings.
 b. The purpose of this subdivision is to provide financial assistance
to school districts which have experienced a significant reduction in
the taxable full value of the school district or extraordinary tax
certiorari judgments. The legislature finds that school districts for
which a judgment was made resulting from a tax certiorari proceeding
which is larger than the total budget of the school district for school
year two thousand seven--two thousand eight or for school districts
which have observed a reduction of taxable real property of more than
seventy-five percent between school year two thousand five--two thousand
six and school year two thousand eight--two thousand nine may benefit
from temporary additional assistance.
 c. To the Barker central school district, there shall be paid one
million three hundred thousand dollars ($1,300,000). Such grant shall be
payable to the Barker central school district in accordance with the
payment schedules contained in section thirty-six hundred nine-a of this
article, notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary.
 d. To the Haverstraw-Stony Point central school district, there shall
be paid two million five hundred thousand dollars ($2,500,000). Such
grant shall be payable to the Haverstraw-Stony Point central school
district in accordance with the payment schedules contained in section
thirty-six hundred nine-a of this article, notwithstanding any provision
of law to the contrary.
 4. Building condition survey services. a. Purpose. The purpose of this
subdivision is to assess the need of routine maintenance, repairs, minor
alterations, and operational improvements in order to safeguard and
promote the health, safety and welfare of both pupils and staff. The
legislature further finds that the existing aid formula does not provide
for local assistance for such building condition surveys and that,
therefore, additional funding is necessary to assist local public school
districts with such necessary building condition survey activities.
 b. Building condition surveys. To be eligible for aid pursuant to
subdivision six-e of section thirty-six hundred two of this article,
building condition surveys shall be conducted by a licensed architect or
licensed professional engineer performing under a state contract entered
into pursuant to paragraph c of this subdivision, shall assess the
condition of all major building systems of a school building, and shall
be in the form and contain the information prescribed by the
commissioner. For purposes of this paragraph, "major building systems"
shall mean the electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilation and air
conditioning systems, and the roof and other major structural elements
of a school building.
 c. Powers and duties of the commissioner. (1) The commissioner shall
develop a building condition survey matrix which would be used to assist
public school districts to develop long range facilities plans in a
consistent format.
 (1-a) Commencing no sooner than the first day in January, two thousand
twenty, the commissioner shall require school districts to conduct
building condition surveys every five years in accordance with
regulations of the commissioner. Such regulations shall prescribe the
date or dates by which such surveys must be completed and submitted to
the department and shall provide for staggered implementation so that
such surveys are distributed as evenly as possible throughout the
five-year period based on the number of public school buildings,
provided that such implementation schedule shall ensure that no region
of the state is overrepresented in a given scheduled year and shall to
the extent practicable prioritize assigning to the first two years of
such schedule those school districts with the greatest proportions of
buildings which previously received relatively low overall condition
ratings.
 (2) The commissioner is hereby authorized to enter into the necessary
contractual agreements with architects and/or engineers to state-wide
contracts to provide building construction surveys on a regional basis
for a fixed fee per square foot. Such building condition surveys shall
be used to assist school districts with the development of their
five-year capital facilities plan.
 5. School district management efficiency awards program. a. Within the
amount appropriated for such purpose, subject to a plan developed in
consultation with the secretary of state and approved by the director of
the budget, the commissioner shall award competitive grants pursuant to
this subdivision for achieving school district management efficiencies.
 (1) Such plan shall include but not be limited to: the process by
which a request for proposals is developed; the scoring rubric by which
such proposals will be evaluated; the form and manner by which
applications will be submitted; the manner by which calculation of the
amount of the award was determined, including establishing benchmarks
based on actual cost savings that must be met before any awards are
paid; and the timeline for the issuance and review of applications to
ensure that grants will be first awarded within one hundred and twenty
days following the end of the two thousand eleven--two thousand twelve
school year.
 (2) The commissioner shall be authorized, consistent with the plan
required by this paragraph, to promulgate rules and regulations
necessary for the implementation of this subdivision.
 b. A response to a request for proposals issued pursuant to this
subdivision may be submitted by a school district or jointly by two or
more school districts who have demonstrated to the satisfaction of the
commissioner that:
 (1) one or more long term efficiencies in school district management,
operations, procurement practices or other cost savings measures that
have not and will not result in an increase in cost to the state or
locality have been implemented;
 (2) such efficiencies have been implemented within two years prior to
a response to a request for proposals issued pursuant to this
subdivision or will be implemented during the current school year;
 (3) such efficiencies have resulted or will result in a significant
reduction in total operating expenses compared to the prior year, in the
administrative component, or the equivalent, of the school district
budget, in transportation operating expenses, in transportation capital
expenses, and/or in other non-personal service costs included in the
program component of the school district budget, or the equivalent,
compared to the prior year; and
 (4) such efficiencies are expected to result in substantial and
sustainable cost savings in future years; and
 (5) if two or more school districts are applying jointly, and have
entered a shared services agreement as authorized by law, that
significant savings would result from such shared services; provided
that in no event shall districts that have entered into an aidable
cooperative educational services agreement for any such services with a
board of cooperative educational services pursuant to section nineteen
hundred fifty of this chapter be eligible for an award pursuant to this
subdivision for the same purpose, but may be eligible for an award
pursuant to this subdivision for another shared long term efficiency or
cost saving measure. Provided however, a district which has received an
award pursuant to the local government efficiency grant program
authorized by subdivision ten of section fifty-four of the state finance
law, shall not be eligible to receive an award pursuant to this
subdivision for the same purpose, but may be eligible for an award
pursuant to this subdivision for another long term efficiency or cost
savings measure.
 c. The commissioner shall grant priority to applications that have
demonstrated that the long term efficiencies that have been implemented:
(1) are innovative in the manner that the management or organizational
structure may be changed to generate significant savings while
maintaining or improving student achievement; (2) have the participation
of the teachers, parents and/or other stakeholders in the school
district; (3) are measures or strategies that other school districts can
replicate; or (4) have the greatest quantifiable savings that will be
sustainable.
 d. A school district that submits documentation that has been approved
by the commissioner by September first, two thousand twelve
demonstrating that it has fully implemented new standards and procedures
for conducting annual professional performance reviews of classroom
teachers and building principals to determine teacher and principal
effectiveness, shall receive bonus points in the scoring of its grant
application.
 e. A school district or school districts seeking a grant shall submit
an application to the commissioner in a form and manner and by a date as
prescribed by the commissioner. The commissioner may consult with any
other state agency about such grants and each such agency shall
cooperate in assisting in the analysis of grant applications.
 f. The amount of the grant award, including the maximum grant amount
available to any district or districts, shall be determined by the
commissioner, consistent with the plan developed pursuant to paragraph a
of this subdivision provided that the amount of such awards shall be
based upon the size of the district or school districts measured by
public school enrollment of the district or districts, except that no
single district receiving a grant and no group of districts receiving a
grant jointly may be awarded more than forty percent of the total amount
of grant awards made pursuant to this subdivision; and provided further
that such amount may be adjusted based upon measures of district need.
 g. For the two thousand thirteen--two thousand fourteen state fiscal
year and thereafter, in addition to the competitive awards amount as
defined in paragraph ee of subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred
two of this article, a minimum of thirty-seven million five hundred
thousand dollars shall be available for this purpose in each state
fiscal year.
 6. School district performance improvement awards grant. a. Within the
amounts appropriated for such purpose, the commissioner shall award
competitive grants to eligible school districts pursuant to this
subdivision that have demonstrated the most improved academic
achievement gains and student outcomes, as well as having implemented
strategies that have the most potential for continued improvements in
student performance, narrowing student achievement gaps and increasing
academic performance in traditionally underserved student groups.
 b. The commissioner shall:
 (1) develop a competitive request for proposals, which shall be
approved by the director of the budget, to be issued on or before
October first, two thousand eleven and shall ensure that grants will
first be awarded pursuant to this subdivision during the two thousand
eleven-two thousand twelve school year.
 (2) create a peer review panel and process and a scoring rubric to be
used in the evaluation of applications during such process. Such scoring
rubric shall give priority to those eligible school districts that have
the most significant measurable improvements in academic achievement and
student outcomes; and have (A) implemented rigorous programs to improve
middle school student performance; (B) newly established or expanded
participation in college level or early college programs; (C)
significantly increased college admission rates; (D) exemplary career
and technical education programs with a record of successful student
outcomes; or (E) other innovative and replicable strategies for student
achievement. Provided further that such rubric shall grant priority to
those eligible districts whose programs benefit students having the
greatest educational needs, including but not limited to:
 (A) students within traditionally underserved student groups;
 (B) students who are English language learners;
 (C) students in poverty;
 (D) students with disabilities; and
 (E) students with low academic achievement.
 (3) be authorized to promulgate rules and regulations necessary for
the implementation of this subdivision.
 c. To be an eligible applicant, a school district must:
 (1) have a race to the top final scope of work that was approved by
the commissioner by February fifteenth, two thousand eleven; and/or
 (2) have demonstrated satisfactory progress, as determined by the
commissioner, towards implementation of elements such as high quality
student assessments, use of data to improve instruction and student
performance, provision of professional development to improve teacher
performance; and
 (3) be among the school districts showing the greatest gains in
student performance in its category of district in the prior school year
as reflected by increases in student outcome, as well as other measures
for closing the achievement gap, improving high school performance and
graduation rates, and increasing college attendance and retention rates
as compared to student performance in those areas in the applicable
baseline year.
 d. For purposes of this subdivision:
 (1) "category of district" means:
 (A) a high-need large city category consisting of city school
districts having a population of one hundred twenty-five thousand
inhabitants or more, provided that in the case of the city school
district of the city of New York the chancellor shall have the option of
applying on behalf of one or more community school districts and/or
district seventy-five in lieu of applying on a citywide basis;
 (B) a high-need urban-suburban category as defined by the commissioner
based upon the need/resource capacity index applicable to such school
districts;
 (C) a high-need rural category as defined by the commissioner based
upon the need/resource capacity index applicable to such school
districts;
 (D) an average need category as defined by the commissioner based upon
the need/resource capacity index applicable to such school districts;
and
 (E) a low need category as defined by the commissioner based upon the
need/resource capacity index applicable to such school districts.
 (2) The commissioner shall establish a methodology for determining
which districts in each category of district that have applied for a
performance improvement grant have shown the greatest achievement gains.
Provided, however, that where a school district does not have the
minimum number of students specified by the commissioner for
accountability purposes (minimum "n" size) in one or more of the five
subgroups, such district shall not be disqualified from receiving a
grant, but a preference shall be given to districts within each category
of district with the highest number of subgroups meeting such minimum
"n" size.
 e. The commissioner shall grant awards to the school districts, as
recommended by the peer review panel, among the various categories of
districts and determine the amount of the grant award for each eligible
school district based upon the public school enrollment of the district,
provided that no district receiving a grant may be awarded more than
forty percent of the total amount of grant awards made pursuant to this
subdivision; and provided further that such amount may be adjusted based
upon measures of district need.
 f. Any school district receiving an award pursuant to this subdivision
shall expend grant funds in accordance with a high-quality plan
submitted with its application in response to the request for proposals.
Such plan must specify how such funds will be used to enhance the
activities and strategies that have been or will be implemented that
have been demonstrated to be effective in, or show the most promise for,
increasing student performance, narrowing the student achievement gap,
and increasing academic performance in traditionally underserved student
groups.
 g. For the two thousand thirteen--two thousand fourteen state fiscal
year and thereafter, in addition to the competitive awards amount as
defined in paragraph ee of subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred
two of this article, a minimum of thirty-seven million five hundred
thousand dollars shall be available for this purpose in each state
fiscal year.
 6-a. Community school grants. a. Within the amount appropriated for
such purpose, subject to a plan developed by the state council on
children and families in coordination with the commissioner and approved
by the director of the budget, the commissioner shall award competitive
grants pursuant to this subdivision to eligible school districts or in a
city with a population of one million or more an eligible entity to
implement, beginning in the two thousand thirteen--two thousand fourteen
school year, a plan that targets school buildings as community hubs to
deliver co-located or school-linked academic, health, mental health,
nutrition, counseling, legal and/or other services to students and their
families in a manner that will lead to improved educational and other
outcomes. In a city with a population of one million or more, eligible
entities shall mean the city school district of the city of New York, or
not-for-profit organizations, which shall include not-for-profit
community based organizations. An eligible entity that is a
not-for-profit may apply for a community school grant provided that it
collaborates with the city school district of the city of New York and
receives the approval of the chancellor of the city school district of
the city of New York.
 (1) Such plan shall include, but not be limited to:
 (i) The process by which a request for proposals will be developed;
 (ii) The scoring rubric by which such proposals will be evaluated,
provided that such grants shall be awarded based on factors including,
but not limited to: measures of school district need; measures of the
need of students to be served by each of the school districts; the
school district's proposal to target the highest need schools and
students; the sustainability of the proposed community schools program;
and proposal quality;
 (iii) The form and manner by which applications will be submitted;
 (iv) The manner by which calculation of the amount of the award will
be determined;
 (v) The timeline for the issuance and review of applications; and
 (vi) Program implementation phases that will trigger payment of set
percentages of the total award.
 (2) In assessing proposal quality, the commissioner shall take into
account factors including, but not limited to:
 (i) The extent to which the school district's proposal would provide
such community services through partnerships with local governments and
non-profit organizations;
 (ii) The extent to which the proposal would provide for delivery of
such services directly in school buildings;
 (iii) The extent to which the proposal articulates how such services
would facilitate measurable improvement in student and family outcomes;
 (iv) The extent to which the proposal articulates and identifies how
existing funding streams and programs would be used to provide such
community services; and
 (v) the extent to which the proposal ensures the safety of all
students, staff and community members in school buildings used as
community hubs.
 b. A response to a request for proposals issued pursuant to this
subdivision may be submitted by a single school district or jointly by a
consortium of two or more school districts, or in a city with a
population of one million or more, an eligible entity.
 c. The amount of the grant award shall be determined by the
commissioner, consistent with the plan developed pursuant to paragraph a
of this subdivision, except that no single district may be awarded more
than forty percent of the total amount of grant awards made pursuant to
this subdivision; and provided further that the maximum award to any
individual community school site shall be five hundred thousand dollars;
and provided further that the amount awarded will be paid out in set
percentages over time upon successful implementation of each phase of a
school district's approved proposal set forth pursuant to paragraph a of
this subdivision; and provided further that none of the grants awarded
pursuant to this subdivision may be used to supplant existing funding.
 6-b. Extended learning grants. a. Within the amount appropriated for
such purpose, subject to a plan that is developed by the commissioner,
and approved by the director of the budget, the commissioner shall award
competitive planning and implementation grants pursuant to this
subdivision to eligible school districts or school districts in
collaboration with not-for-profit community based organizations that put
forward a proposal to improve student outcomes by adding at least
twenty-five percent more time to the academic calendar by extending the
school day, school year, or some combination thereof, either
district-wide or in selected school buildings.
 (1) Such plan shall include, but not be limited to:
 (i) The process by which a request for proposals will be developed;
 (ii) The scoring rubric by which such proposals will be evaluated,
provided that priority shall be given to applicants based upon the
school district's proposal to target the schools and students with the
greatest need and upon proposal quality;
 (iii) The form and manner by which applications will be submitted;
 (iv) The timeline for the issuance and review of applications; and
 (v) A requirement that school districts awarded grants under this
subdivision submit to an annual evaluation of performance and impact as
required by the commissioner.
 (2) In assessing proposal quality in order to award implementation
grant funding, the commissioner shall take into account factors
including, but not limited to:
 (i) the extent to which the school district's proposal would maximize
the use of the additional learning time through a comprehensive
restructuring of the school day and/or year;
 (ii) how the additional learning time would be utilized, including but
not limited to additional time spent on core academics; and
 (iii) the extent to which the proposal would provide additional
learning time for students in grades six through eight.
 b. A school district's school-wide extended learning implementation
grant award shall equal its average daily attendance in the school-wide
extended learning program multiplied by the expected cost per pupil of
the additional learning time. For purposes of this subdivision, the
expected cost per pupil of the additional learning time shall equal the
greater of fifteen hundred dollars or (1) the quotient of (i) the school
district's approved operating expense pursuant to paragraph t of
subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this article for
the year prior to the base year divided by (ii) the district's public
school district enrollment pursuant to subparagraph two of paragraph n
of such subdivision for the year prior to the base year multiplied by
(2) ten percent (0.10), multiplied by (3) the quotient of (i) the
average of the national consumer price indexes determined by the United
States department of labor for the twelve month period preceding January
first of the base year, divided by (ii) the average of the national
consumer price indexes determined by the United States department of
labor for the twelve month period preceding January first of the year
two years prior to the base year.
 c. In extraordinary cases, the commissioner may award a grant that
exceeds the per pupil limit calculated pursuant to paragraph b of this
subdivision.
 d. No district shall receive a grant in excess of the total actual
grant expenditures incurred by the district in the current year as
approved by the commissioner.
 e. No single district may be awarded more than forty percent of the
total amount of grant awards made pursuant to this subdivision.
 6-c. Teacher excellence fund. a. Within the amount appropriated for
such purpose, subject to a request for proposals developed by the
commissioner and approved by the director of the budget, the
commissioner shall award teacher excellence fund grants pursuant to this
subdivision to eligible school districts, beginning in the two thousand
fourteen--two thousand fifteen school year, to provide teacher
excellence fund performance awards to highly effective teachers.
 (1) Teacher excellence fund performance awards shall be allocated in
an annual amount of up to twenty thousand dollars to eligible teachers
rated as "highly effective" based on the most recent annual professional
performance review, in accordance with the requirements of section three
thousand twelve-c of this chapter and regulations of the commissioner.
 (2) On an annual basis, eligible school districts may submit an
application to the commissioner, in a form and manner prescribed by the
commissioner, to request funding pursuant to this subdivision.
 (3) The commissioner shall make available such application on or
before May fifteenth of the preceding school year and the commissioner
shall issue preliminary teacher excellence fund grant awards on or
before October fifteenth of the school year in which the eligible
teacher shall receive a teacher excellence fund performance award.
 (4) Applications submitted by eligible school districts shall include
information required by the commissioner including, but not limited to,
the extent to which the school district's plan is intended to recognize
and reward highly-effective teachers: (i) in school buildings with the
greatest academic need; (ii) in difficult-to-staff subject or
certification areas and/or grade levels; and (iii) at critical points in
a teacher's career in order to encourage highly effective teachers to
remain in the classroom.
 (5) The commissioner shall prioritize applications submitted by
eligible school districts based on factors including, but not limited
to, the factors described in subparagraph four of this paragraph and the
quality of the proposal.
 (6) Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the
teacher excellence fund performance awards provided by this subdivision
shall be in addition to, and shall not be considered part of, a
teacher's basic annual salary, and shall not be included as compensation
for retirement purposes. Teacher excellence fund performance awards
shall supplement and shall not supplant compensation from sources
exclusive of this subdivision agreed to as part of a collective
bargaining agreement.
 b. For the purpose of this subdivision:
 (1) The term "eligible school district" shall mean a common, union
free, central, central high school, city, or special act school district
that has entered into an agreement with the collective bargaining
representatives of certified teachers consistent with the provisions of
the application submitted by the school district pursuant to paragraph a
of this subdivision.
 (2) The term "eligible teacher" shall mean a teacher who (i) holds an
initial, provisional, transitional, permanent or professional state
teaching certificate appropriate to the teaching positions, including
the subject area if applicable, in which he or she is employed; (ii) is
a classroom teacher subject to the annual professional performance
review requirements of section three thousand twelve-c of this chapter;
and (iii) is rated "highly effective" based on his or her most recent
annual professional performance review, in accordance with the
requirements of section three thousand twelve-c of this chapter and
regulations of the commissioner.
 7. Small government assistance. a. In addition to apportionments
otherwise provided by section thirty-six hundred two of this article for
payable in the two thousand eleven--two thousand twelve school year and
thereafter the amounts specified in paragraph b of this subdivision
shall be paid to school districts for small government assistance.
 b. To school districts that received small government assistance in
the state fiscal year two thousand ten--two thousand eleven, such
apportionment in the same amount shall be apportioned to school
districts on or before March thirty-first of the school year upon audit
and warrant of the comptroller.
 8. Supplemental educational improvement grants. a. In addition to
apportionments otherwise provided by section thirty-six hundred two of
this article, for aid payable in the two thousand seven--two thousand
eight school year and thereafter, the amounts specified in paragraph b
of this subdivision shall be paid for the purpose of providing
additional funding for the costs of educational improvement plans
required as a result of a court-ordered settlement in a school
desegregation case to which the state was a party. Grant funds awarded
pursuant to this subdivision shall be used exclusively for services and
expenses incurred by the school district to implement such educational
improvement plans.
 b. To the Yonkers city school district there shall be paid seventeen
million five hundred thousand dollars ($17,500,000) on an annual basis.
Such grant shall be payable from funds appropriated for such purpose and
shall be apportioned to the Yonkers city school district in accordance
with the payment schedules contained in section thirty-six hundred
nine-a of this article, notwithstanding any provision of law to the
contrary.
 9. Targeted instructional staff development grants. a. In the nineteen
hundred ninety-eight--ninety-nine school year and thereafter, within the
amount appropriated for such purpose, the commissioner shall provide
grants pursuant to this subdivision to: (1) school districts, and (2)
school districts working in collaboration with institutions of higher
education and/or teacher resource and computer resource centers, and (3)
providers of pre-kindergarten services which are receiving funding
pursuant to section three thousand six hundred two-e of this article,
for services and expenses related to targeted instructional staff
development grants.
 b. School districts and providers of pre-kindergarten services seeking
a grant pursuant to this subdivision shall submit a plan for approval of
the commissioner that details how the school district will use the grant
funds to provide effective and grade-level appropriate staff development
programs that are targeted on one or more of the instructional areas
specified in paragraph c of this subdivision. Such plan shall be in a
form prescribed by the commissioner and shall include, but not be
limited to, a proposed budget, and a description of:
 (1) the program, including, but not limited to, its purpose and target
population;
 (2) how the new program shall be integrated with, and will supplement,
the district's existing in-service staff development program;
 (3) when the staff development program shall be offered to teachers
and the arrangements made by the school district to assure that teachers
are able to attend, including, but not limited to, arrangements for
substitute teachers;
 (4) the local funds, if any, that will be made available to support
the new staff development program; and
 (5) a plan for evaluation of the effectiveness of the program, which
shall include, but need not be limited to, a survey of all participating
teachers.
 c. Staff development programs funded pursuant to this subdivision
shall be targeted for specialized in-service training in one or more of
the following areas:
 (i) understanding and implementing the new higher standards and
assessments as promulgated by the board of regents and the commissioner;
 (ii) effective use of technology in instruction;
 (iii) instruction of children who are participating in
pre-kindergarten programs approved pursuant to section three thousand
six hundred two-e of this article;
 (iv) instruction of children with disabilities within a regular
education setting;
 (v) instruction of nondisabled children who demonstrate the need for
increased academic attention; and
 (vi) other areas of need demonstrated by the district that relate
directly to student instruction and are approved by the commissioner.
 d. Grants shall be awarded on a competitive basis in accordance with
criteria established by the commissioner. Grant funds may be used for
the approved expenses of the staff development program as defined by the
commissioner, provided that such approved expenses shall include, but
need not be limited to, reasonable travel costs for instructors,
reasonable costs for the use of technology to provide staff development
programs at a distance, and the actual cost to the district of employing
substitute teachers for teachers participating in the program exclusive
of any state aid payable for such costs.
 e. The commissioner shall be authorized to adopt regulations to
implement the provisions of this subdivision.
 f. In the event the appropriation for purposes of this paragraph in
any year is insufficient to pay all claims received pursuant to this
paragraph, the commissioner shall pay such claims on a prorated basis
among all districts filing such claims until the appropriation is
exhausted. For aid payable in the nineteen hundred
ninety-eight--ninety-nine school year, the aid payable pursuant to this
paragraph shall not exceed one million five hundred thousand dollars
($1,500,000); for the nineteen hundred ninety-nine--two thousand school
year the aid payable pursuant to this paragraph shall not exceed five
million dollars ($5,000,000); and for the two thousand--two thousand one
school year and thereafter the aid payable pursuant to this paragraph
shall not exceed ten million dollars ($10,000,000).
 10. Aid for rebuilding schools to uphold education (RESCUE). In
addition to the apportionments made pursuant to subdivisions six, six-a,
and six-b and paragraph c of subdivision fourteen of section thirty-six
hundred two of this article, school districts shall be eligible for an
apportionment or apportionments pursuant to this subdivision for
eligible school construction projects. The payment of such apportionment
or apportionments shall be made in the manner provided for in paragraph
d of this subdivision. An apportionment for any such eligible project
shall initially be available in the state fiscal year commencing April
first, nineteen hundred ninety-nine, provided that applications for
approval of such eligible projects by the commissioner may be processed
hereunder prior to such date.
 a. Definitions. For purposes of this subdivision:
 (1) "Eligible school construction project", or "eligible project,"
means a project for the design, planning, construction, acquisition,
reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of a public school
building used primarily for instruction that is an accessibility
project, an educational technology project, a health and safety project,
and/or a physical capacity expansion project, that has been approved by
the voters of the school district or approved by the trustees or board
of education for school districts where voter approval is not required
on or after July first, nineteen hundred ninety-eight or before July
first, two thousand three; that such project is contained in the
district's five year facilities plan; and such project is a critical and
priority project as identified by such district's safety rating system
required by sections four hundred nine-d and four hundred nine-e of this
chapter, or, a construction emergency project.
 (2) "Eligible minor maintenance and repair project" means a project,
not otherwise eligible for an apportionment pursuant to subdivision six
of section thirty-six hundred two of this article, that is related to
maintaining and repairing public school buildings used primarily for
instruction, including expenditures for minor repair and improvement
activities performed to remedy existing minor maintenance deficiencies
and expenditures for periodic, scheduled maintenance activities intended
to mitigate the need for excessive capital renovation and rehabilitation
in the future as documented by a plan developed by the district and
submitted to the commissioner and which has been approved for funding on
or after July first, nineteen hundred ninety-eight, or before July
first, two thousand two by the commissioner.
 (3) "Approved project" means an eligible school construction project
that has been reviewed by the department and approved by the
commissioner pursuant to this subdivision on or after July first,
nineteen hundred ninety-eight and before July first, two thousand three
(except as otherwise provided in subparagraph one of paragraph c of this
subdivision) for funding disbursement by an apportionment or
apportionments made hereunder.
 (4) For the purposes of the expenditure of the maximum additional
apportionment defined in subparagraph 11, "Approved building aidable
project" means an approved project for which approved expenditures are
eligible for an apportionment pursuant to subdivisions six, six-a, six-b
and/or paragraph c of subdivision fourteen of section thirty-six hundred
two of this article and one or more of the following conditions have
been met:
 (i) Projects for which letters of intent are on file with the state
education department by August 1, 1999;
 (ii) Projects approved by the voters by January 15, 2000;
 (iii) In the case of a school district in a city with a population of
one million or more, projects specifically referenced in the five-year
educational facilities capital plan pursuant to section 2590-p of the
education law on file with the commissioner as of August 1, 1999; and
 (iv) Projects for which letters of intent are filed with the state
education department by July 1, 2000 that are determined to be priority
projects necessary to: address the safety or health of students and
staff including, but not limited to climate control; or to assure
accessibility of individuals with disabilities.
 (4-a) For the purposes of the expenditure of the maximum additional
apportionment defined in subparagraph 11-a, "Approved building aidable
project" means an approved eligible school construction project.
 (5) "Accessibility project" means an eligible school construction
project which, as a primary purpose, enhances accessibility to public
school buildings used primarily for instruction for individuals with
disabilities.
 (6) "Construction emergency project" means an eligible school
construction project to remediate emergency situations which arise in
public school buildings used primarily for instruction as a result of
significant damage caused by an unanticipated and sudden occurrence
which results in the necessity for immediate repair.
 (7) "Educational technology project" means an eligible school
construction project which, as a primary purpose, enhances the use of
technology in public school buildings used primarily for instruction,
including but not limited to, electrical upgrades, wiring, cabling
installations, fiber optics, conduits, raceways, telecommunication
systems and wireless options.
 (8) "Health and safety project" means an eligible school construction
project which, as a primary purpose, addresses the reduction or
elimination of the risk of personal injury or harm to occupants of
public school buildings used primarily for instruction, including but
not limited to environmental remediation, the eradication of fire and
health code violations, the provision of adequate ventilation, and the
rehabilitation and repair of existing facilities.
 (9) "Physical capacity expansion project" means an eligible school
construction project which, as a primary purpose, expands the
availability of adequate and appropriate instructional space in a public
school building used primarily for instruction, including but not
limited to expansions which provide for reduced class size.
 (10) "District sharing ratio" means the quotient obtained when the sum
of the resident public school district enrollment of a school district
as defined in subparagraph four of paragraph n of subdivision one of
section thirty-six hundred two of this article and its resident
nonpublic school enrollment for such school year as defined in
subparagraph five of such paragraph, is divided by the sum of such
enrollments for all school districts for such school year, with the
result expressed as a decimal carried to the sixth place without
rounding. For any maximum additional apportionment calculated pursuant
to subparagraph eleven of this paragraph, the resident public school
district enrollment and its resident nonpublic school enrollment for the
nineteen hundred ninety-eight--ninety-nine school year shall be used to
calculate the district sharing ratio. For any maximum additional
apportionment calculated pursuant to subparagraph eleven-a of this
paragraph, the resident public school district enrollment and its
resident nonpublic school enrollment for the nineteen hundred
ninety-nine--two thousand school year shall be used to calculate the
district sharing ratio.
 (11) "Maximum additional apportionment" for any appropriation first
made in support of this subdivision in the education, labor and family
assistance budget bill enacted for the nineteen hundred ninety-nine--two
thousand state fiscal year means the result calculated when one hundred
forty-five million dollars is multiplied by the district sharing ratio
for the school district provided, however, that such maximum additional
apportionment shall not be less than twenty thousand dollars and
provided further that in the event that the sum of the apportionments
calculated pursuant to this section exceeds one hundred forty-five
million dollars, all such apportionments in excess of twenty thousand
dollars shall be adjusted downward on a prorated basis as determined by
the commissioner, provided further that such adjustment shall not reduce
any such apportionment below twenty thousand dollars. The commissioner
shall notify each school district by September fifteenth, nineteen
hundred ninety-nine, of the amount of the maximum additional
apportionment available to it as calculated hereinabove. The maximum
additional apportionment for a school district shall be available to
such school district for the purpose of allowing the commissioner to
make an apportionment or apportionments of monies appropriated for such
purpose to fund expenditures and disbursements made for approved
projects of such school district for school years nineteen hundred
ninety-eight--nineteen hundred ninety-nine through and inclusive of two
thousand one--two thousand two, provided that an apportionment may be
made by the commissioner beyond June thirtieth, two thousand two for
certain approved projects as specifically authorized by subparagraph one
of paragraph c of this subdivision. An apportionment of monies for an
approved project which is an eligible school construction project
(including a construction emergency project) shall be subject to a
repayment being made to the comptroller by the dormitory authority as
more particularly provided for in paragraph d of this subdivision.
 (11-a) "Maximum additional apportionment" for any appropriation first
made in support of this subdivision in the education, labor and family
assistance budget bill enacted for the two thousand--two thousand one
state fiscal year means the result calculated when fifty million dollars
is multiplied by the district sharing ratio for the school district,
provided, however, that such maximum additional apportionment shall not
be less than twenty thousand dollars and provided further that in the
event that the sum of the apportionments calculated pursuant to this
section exceeds fifty million dollars, all such apportionments in excess
of twenty thousand dollars shall be adjusted downward on a prorated
basis as determined by the commissioner, provided further that such
adjustment shall not reduce any such apportionment below twenty thousand
dollars. The commissioner shall notify each school district by June
fifteenth, two thousand, of the amount of the maximum additional
apportionment available to it as calculated hereinabove. The maximum
additional apportionment for a school district shall be available to
such school district for the purpose of allowing the commissioner to
make an apportionment or apportionments of monies appropriated for such
purpose to fund expenditures and disbursements made for approved
projects of such school district for school years nineteen hundred
ninety-eight--nineteen hundred ninety-nine through and inclusive of two
thousand two--two thousand three, provided that an apportionment may be
made by the commissioner beyond June thirtieth, two thousand three for
certain approved projects as specifically authorized by subparagraph one
of paragraph c of this subdivision. An apportionment of monies for an
approved project which is an eligible school construction project
(including a construction emergency project) shall be subject to a
repayment being made to the comptroller by the dormitory authority as
more particularly provided for in paragraph d of this subdivision.
 b. Eligibility. All approved projects shall be eligible for an
apportionment or apportionments by the commissioner pursuant to this
subdivision in the nineteen hundred ninety-nine--two thousand through
two thousand two--two thousand three school years, provided however: (1)
notwithstanding any other provision of this subdivision, any school
district eligible for a maximum additional apportionment pursuant to
this subdivision in excess of one hundred thousand dollars applying to
the commissioner for approval of an eligible project for an
apportionment or apportionments pursuant to this subdivision shall
demonstrate: (i) that any eligible project for which such school
district is seeking funding is contained within its five year capital
facilities plan and is a critical priority project as indicated by the
district's safety rating system as required by sections four hundred
nine-d and four hundred nine-e of this chapter, or (ii) that such
project is considered a construction emergency as defined in
subparagraph six of paragraph a of this subdivision, or (iii) that such
project is an approved building aidable project; and (2) notwithstanding
any other provision of this subdivision, that for any school district
eligible for a maximum additional apportionment pursuant to this
subdivision, in an amount less than or equal to one hundred thousand
dollars, the requirements of clauses (i) - (iii) of subparagraph (1)
hereof shall not apply.
 c. Maximum additional apportionment. (1) A school district which has
an approved project or projects shall be entitled to an apportionment or
apportionments for such project or projects in an amount whether in the
aggregate or otherwise, not to exceed the maximum additional
apportionment calculated for such school district. Such maximum
additional apportionment shall be available to the school district for
expenditure for such approved projects in the school years nineteen
hundred ninety-nine--two thousand through two thousand two--two thousand
three, provided that expenditures for such approved project may be made
from such maximum additional apportionment on or after July first, two
thousand three and prior to June thirtieth, two thousand four if: (i)
such project is approved by the voters of the school district, or is
approved by the trustees or board of education for such school district
where voter approval is not required, prior to July first, two thousand
three; (ii) application is made to the commissioner for approval of such
eligible project as an approved project by August first, two thousand
three; and (iii) the commissioner approves such eligible project as an
approved project by October first, two thousand three. The maximum
additional apportionment may be expended in whole or in part in any of
such school years and beyond June thirtieth, two thousand three as
specifically authorized by the immediately preceding sentence. The
amount of such maximum additional apportionment not expended, disbursed
or encumbered for any such year shall be carried over for expenditure
and disbursement to the next succeeding school year, provided that for
the purposes of this subdivision a carryover shall not be authorized
beyond the school year two thousand two--two thousand three except as
otherwise authorized hereinabove in this subparagraph. Such maximum
additional apportionment may be used to supplement the apportionments
available pursuant to subdivisions six, six-a and six-b and paragraph c
of subdivision fourteen of section thirty-six hundred two and
subdivision twelve of this section for expenditures or disbursements for
approved building aidable projects, provided that, for any school
district with an enhanced building aid ratio computed pursuant to clause
(ii) of subparagraph two of paragraph b of subdivision six of section
thirty-six hundred two of this article that is less than nine-tenths the
total of such apportionments plus the apportionment payable pursuant to
this subdivision for the approved project costs of the total
apportionment for any approved building aidable project, as limited by
the cost allowances specified in paragraph a of subdivision six of
section thirty-six hundred two of this article, shall not exceed
ninety-five percent of such approved project costs, and that, for any
school district with an enhanced building aid ratio computed pursuant to
such clause (ii) that is equal to nine-tenths or more, the total of such
apportionments plus the apportionment payable pursuant to this
subdivision for such approved project costs of an approved building
aidable project shall not exceed ninety-eight percent of such approved
project costs, provided further that the apportionment provided pursuant
to this subdivision shall not otherwise reduce the apportionments
payable for approved project costs pursuant to subdivisions six, six-a
and six-b and paragraph c of subdivision fourteen of section thirty-six
hundred two and subdivision twelve of this section and may be used by an
eligible school district to fund the principal amount of any costs that
are in excess of the costs approved for an apportionment pursuant to
such subdivisions six, six-a or six-b of section thirty-six hundred two
or subdivision twelve of this section. Except as authorized in this
paragraph, expenditures from the maximum additional apportionment shall
not be eligible for aid under any other provision of this chapter.
 (2) The commissioner shall report to the governor and to the
legislature by February first, two thousand three concerning the amount
of any maximum additional apportionment available to each school
district, whether in total or in part, that has not been applied for by
any such school district by January first, two thousand three. If the
total amount of such maximum additional apportionment has not been
applied for and approved by the commissioner by July first, two thousand
three, or, at the latest, applied for by August first, two thousand
three and approved by the commissioner by October first, two thousand
three as expressly limited by subparagraph one of this paragraph, the
commissioner shall report to the governor and to the legislature and
notify all districts by November first, two thousand three the total
remaining aggregate amount of maximum additional apportionments for all
school districts which remain uncommitted by such school districts as of
such date, which such total remaining aggregate amount shall then be
distributed on a competitive basis established by the commissioner, with
priority given to districts with outstanding needs as defined by the
district's five year facility plan and approved by the voters of the
school district, or approved by the trustees or board of education of a
school district where voter approval is not required.
 d. It is the intent of the legislature that school districts receive
funding for approved projects in a timely manner. The payment of all
apportionments to be made for approved projects pursuant to this
subdivision shall be made from funds annually appropriated by the
legislature for such purpose. An apportionment so made to a school
district from appropriated funds by the commissioner for an approved
project which is an eligible school construction project shall be repaid
to the state comptroller by the dormitory authority from bond proceeds
made available for such purpose pursuant to section sixteen hundred
eighty-nine-a of the public authorities law.
 e. Powers and duties of the commissioner. In administering the
provisions of this subdivision, the commissioner shall:
 (1) establish an application process for school districts which
request the approval of the commissioner for funding for an
apportionment or apportionments for eligible projects; and
 (2) provide that approved projects which receive an apportionment or
apportionments pursuant to this subdivision are designed, constructed
and maintained in the most cost-effective manner possible, which
minimizes waste and maximizes efficiency. The board of regents and the
commissioner shall impose a mechanism for establishing guidelines for
monitoring and documenting this process. The commissioner shall take
appropriate action to ensure a district's compliance with this
subparagraph.
 f. Maintenance of projects. In order to assure effective discharge of
state responsibility with respect to the implementation of this
subdivision, the board of regents and the commissioner shall provide
that no moneys shall be made available to a school district for an
eligible school construction project, exclusive of a construction
emergency project unless and until such school district has complied
with the requirements of sections four hundred nine-d and four hundred
nine-e of this chapter and has submitted to the commissioner its current
five year capital facilities plan required pursuant to subdivision six
of this section, section twenty-five hundred-p of this chapter or any
other provision of this chapter, detailing the district's infrastructure
needs. Notwithstanding the provisions of this paragraph any school
district receiving funds from the maximum additional apportionment shall
provide an assurance to the commissioner that all projects funded under
this subdivision will be maintained in good repair.
 g. Compliance with other laws. Funds provided pursuant to this
subdivision shall be subject to the applicable provisions of the state
finance law and all other applicable federal, state and local laws.
 11. Special academic improvement grants. a. In addition to
apportionments otherwise provided by section thirty-six hundred two of
this article, for aid payable in the school year two thousand one--two
thousand two and every year thereafter, the amounts specified in
paragraph b of this subdivision shall be paid for the sole purpose of
enhancement of the academic programs of school districts that have
become subject to removal of the board of education as a result of
failure of one or more schools to meet state school accountability
standards and serious financial problems that impact the ability of the
school district to support program improvements without endangering the
fiscal stability of the school district's residents and businesses.
Grant funds awarded pursuant to this subdivision shall be used
exclusively for services and expenses incurred by the school district to
support and maintain the improvement of the academic performance of the
schools of the school district, in accordance with a plan of expenditure
prepared at the direction of the commissioner and approved by the
commissioner.
 b. To the Roosevelt union free school district there shall be paid
twelve million dollars ($12,000,000) on an annual basis. For school
years commencing on July first, two thousand seven and thereafter, such
special academic improvement grant shall be payable from funds
appropriated for such purpose and shall be apportioned to the Roosevelt
union free school district in accordance with the payment schedules
contained in section three thousand six hundred nine-a of this article,
notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary.
 b-1. For the two thousand fourteen--two thousand fifteen school year,
six million dollars shall be paid pursuant to paragraph b of this
subdivision and the remaining six million dollars shall be paid after
the submission of an expenditure plan by the superintendent of the
Roosevelt union free school district to the speaker of the assembly, the
temporary president of the senate and the members of the legislature
representing such school district. Such plan shall focus on improving
academic performance.
 c. For the purposes of ensuring improvement in academic achievement
consistent with the provisions of this grant, in any year in which an
apportionment is provided pursuant to this section, the Roosevelt union
free school district shall:
 (1) Submit to the commissioner a five-year educational plan, in a
manner prescribed by the commissioner, and such plan shall include
specific courses of action that will be taken and details describing how
additional state and federal funds will be used to improve educational
outcomes for students and increase the quality of teachers and
principals. This five-year educational plan will be updated and
submitted to the commissioner by September first of each year.
 (2) Submit a five-year fiscal stabilization plan in a manner
prescribed by the commissioner, and aligned with the five-year
educational plan for approval by the commissioner or his designee by
September first of each year.
 (3) Provide a proposed annual budget to the commissioner by the first
business day of May of each year.
 (4) Provide an annual approved budget to the commissioner by July
first of each year.
 (5) Provide quarterly budget status reports including compliance with
the annual approved budget of the district.
 (6) Take any additional actions or submit additional documentation
identified by the commissioner deemed necessary to ensure the fiscal
integrity of the Roosevelt union free school district.
 12. Capital outlay transition grants. a. Capital outlay transition
grants. (1) The commissioner shall, upon application therefor, certify
to the dormitory authority of the state of New York the amounts to be
awarded as grants to school districts in the two thousand two--two
thousand three state fiscal year for reimbursement of approved
expenditures for capital outlays incurred in the two thousand one--two
thousand two school year, as calculated pursuant to subdivision six of
section thirty-six hundred two of this article and this subdivision.
 (2) School districts which would have been eligible for an
apportionment for base year approved expenditures for capital outlays
pursuant to subdivision six of section thirty-six hundred two of this
article in the two thousand two--two thousand three school year under
the provisions of such subdivision six in effect in the two thousand
one--two thousand two school year shall be eligible to apply for a grant
pursuant to this paragraph in lieu of an apportionment of aid for such
approved expenditures pursuant to subdivision six of section thirty-six
hundred two of this article. Application for such grant shall be made on
or before the first business day of September, two thousand two in such
form as the commissioner shall determine, and shall include
documentation of actual approved expenditures for capital outlays
incurred in the two thousand one--two thousand two school year.
 (3)(i) Upon approval of such application by the commissioner, the
district shall be eligible for a grant in an amount equal to the lesser
of: (1) the product of the amount of the district's base year approved
expenditures for capital outlays for school building purposes determined
pursuant to subdivision six of section thirty-six hundred two of this
article from its general fund, capital fund or from a reserve fund,
based on data on file with the commissioner on the first business day of
September, two thousand two, multiplied by the sum of the aid ratio
computed for such expenditures pursuant to the provisions of paragraph c
of subdivision six of section thirty-six hundred two of this article,
plus the incentive decimal, if any, calculated pursuant to subparagraph
two of paragraph b of such subdivision six, provided that the amount of
reimbursement attributable to approved expenditures for capital outlays
for joint facilities shall be determined pursuant to subparagraph four
of this paragraph, and (2) the amount set forth for such school district
in the school aid listing for the current year produced by the
commissioner in May two thousand two and entitled "SA0203".
 (ii) In the event that the sum of the grants calculated by the
commissioner for school districts pursuant to clause (i) of this
subparagraph is less than one hundred forty million dollars the
districts shall be eligible for an additional grant in an amount up to
the difference between (1) the product of the amount of the district's
base year approved expenditures for capital outlays for school building
purposes determined pursuant to subdivision six of section thirty-six
hundred two of this article from its general fund, capital fund or from
a reserve fund that was approved by the board of education in a city
with a population of more than one hundred twenty-five thousand as of
May fifteenth, two thousand two or by the voters in another school
district prior to July first, two thousand two, based on data on file
with the commissioner on the first business day of September, two
thousand two, multiplied by the sum of the aid ratio computed for such
expenditures pursuant to the provisions of paragraph c of subdivision
six of section thirty-six hundred two of this article, plus the
incentive decimal, if any, calculated pursuant to subparagraph two of
paragraph b of such subdivision six, provided that the amount of
reimbursement attributable to approved expenditures for capital outlays
for joint facilities shall be determined pursuant to subparagraph four
of this paragraph, minus, (2) the amount calculated pursuant to clause
(i) of this subparagraph. Such additional grants shall be approved in
the order of the date of receipt of the district's application by the
commissioner, up to the total amount of the appropriation; provided that
in the even that two or more school districts submit application on the
same day and full payment of the amounts so requested exceed such
appropriation, the commissioner shall adjust the grant amounts to
conform to such appropriation. In no event shall any grant not be
awarded due to an inability of the commissioner to make a full award of
the amount on the application.
 (4) In the case of two or more school districts eligible for operating
aid pursuant to section thirty-six hundred two of this article that have
entered into an agreement in accordance with section one hundred
nineteen-o of the general municipal law and subdivision six-b of section
thirty-six hundred two of this article for approved expenditures for the
construction or reconstruction of one or more single site joint
facilities where the general contract for the project shall have been
awarded on or after July first, nineteen hundred ninety-three, and the
project and joint agreement shall have been approved by the commissioner
and, for participating school districts in which the school budget is
subject to voter approval, the joint agreement has been approved by the
voters of the district, the lead district shall be eligible for the
product of such base year approved expenditures for capital outlays for
school building purposes, multiplied by the sum of (i) the product for
each of the participating districts of the district's aid ratio computed
for such expenditures pursuant to the provisions of paragraph c of
subdivision six of section thirty-six hundred two of this article
multiplied by the district's share of the use of the facility, plus (ii)
the incentive decimal, if any, calculated pursuant to subparagraph two
of paragraph b of such subdivision six.
 (5) Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, the
amounts payable pursuant to this paragraph shall be certified by the
commissioner in accordance with section sixteen hundred eighty-nine-f of
the public authorities law and shall be paid to school districts by the
dormitory authority of the state of New York, within the amounts
appropriated for such purpose, from the proceeds of bonds and notes
issued pursuant to such section sixteen hundred eighty-nine-f. Such
payment shall fulfill any obligation of the state or the commissioner to
apportion funds pursuant to this paragraph, and whenever a school
district has been apportioned more money pursuant to this paragraph than
that to which it is entitled, the commissioner may deduct such amount
from the next apportionment to be made to such school district.
 b. Excess capital outlay transition grants. (1) For aid payable in the
two thousand three--two thousand four school year, the commissioner
shall, within the amounts appropriated for such purpose, provide grants
to school districts in the amount of any excess of the product of the
amount of such school district's approved expenditures incurred in the
two thousand one--two thousand two school year for capital outlays for
school building purposes determined pursuant to subdivision six of
section thirty-six hundred two of this article from its general fund,
capital fund or from a reserve fund, multiplied by the sum of the aid
ratio selected for use in the two thousand two--two thousand three
school year for such expenditures pursuant to the provisions of
paragraph c of subdivision six of section thirty-six hundred two of this
article, plus the incentive decimal, if any, calculated for the two
thousand two--two thousand three school year pursuant to subparagraph
two of paragraph b of such subdivision six, provided that the amount of
reimbursement attributable to approved expenditures for capital outlays
for joint facilities shall be determined pursuant to subparagraph four
of paragraph a of this subdivision, based on data on file on the first
business day of September, two thousand three, over the amount
reimbursed as capital outlay transition grants pursuant to the
provisions of paragraph a of this subdivision.
 (2) A school district which was eligible for a grant pursuant to
paragraph a of this subdivision and where the product of the amount of
such school district's approved expenditures incurred in the two
thousand one--two thousand two school year for capital outlays for
school building purposes determined pursuant to subdivision six of
section thirty-six hundred two of this article from its general fund,
capital fund or from a reserve fund, multiplied by the sum of the aid
ratio selected for use in the two thousand two--two thousand three
school year for such expenditures pursuant to the provisions of
paragraph c of subdivision six of section thirty-six hundred two of this
article, plus the incentive decimal, if any, calculated for the two
thousand two--two thousand three school year pursuant to subparagraph
two of paragraph b of such subdivision six, provided that the amount of
reimbursement attributable to approved expenditures for capital outlays
for joint facilities shall be determined pursuant to subparagraph four
of paragraph a of this subdivision, is in excess of the amount it
received under paragraph a of this subdivision shall be eligible to
apply for a grant pursuant to this subdivision in lieu of an
apportionment of aid for such approved expenditures pursuant to
subdivision six of section thirty-six hundred two of this article.
Application for such grant shall be made on or before the first business
day of September, two thousand three in such form as the commissioner
shall determine, and shall include documentation of actual approved
expenditures for capital outlays incurred in the two thousand one--two
thousand two school year.
 (3) Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, grants
awarded pursuant to this paragraph shall be payable from funds
appropriated for such purpose and shall be apportioned in accordance
with the payment schedule contained in section thirty-six hundred nine-a
of this article.
 c. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary,
approved expenditures for capital outlays incurred in the two thousand
one--two thousand two school year shall not be eligible for an
apportionment pursuant to subdivision six of section thirty-six hundred
two of this article, provided that nothing in this subdivision shall be
construed to limit the eligibility of a school district for
reorganization incentive building aid in the two thousand two--two
thousand three school year based on computations pursuant to subdivision
six of section thirty-six hundred two of this article. Expenditures
incurred for lease or other annual payments under the provisions of
section four hundred three-b, subdivision eight of section twenty-five
hundred three or subdivision six of section twenty-five hundred
fifty-four of this chapter, other than payments under a lease-purchase
agreement or an equivalent agreement, and expenditures aidable pursuant
to subdivisions six-c, six-d, or six-e of section thirty-six hundred two
of this article, shall not be deemed capital outlay for purposes of this
subdivision.
 13. Transportation capital expense transition grants. a. The
commissioner shall, upon application therefor, certify to the authorized
issuer established pursuant to subdivision (b) of section sixty-one of
the chapter of the laws of two thousand four which added this
subdivision the amounts to be awarded as grants to school districts in
the two thousand four--two thousand five state fiscal year for
reimbursement of approved expenses for transportation capital, debt
service and leases for the two thousand three--two thousand four school
year, as calculated pursuant to subdivision seven of section thirty-six
hundred two of this article and this subdivision.
 b. School districts which would have been eligible for an
apportionment for base year approved expenses for transportation
capital, debt service and leases, as defined in subdivision two of
section thirty-six hundred twenty-three-a of this article, pursuant to
subdivision seven of section thirty-six hundred two of this article in
the two thousand four--two thousand five school year under the
provisions of such subdivision seven in effect in the two thousand
three--two thousand four school year shall be eligible to apply for a
grant pursuant to this paragraph in lieu of an apportionment of aid for
such approved expenses pursuant to subdivision seven of section
thirty-six hundred two of this article. Application for such grant
shall be made on or before the first business day of November, two
thousand four in such form as the commissioner shall determine, and
shall include documentation of actual approved transportation capital,
debt service and/or lease expense incurred in the two thousand
three--two thousand four school year or that would otherwise have been
eligible for an apportionment in the two thousand four--two thousand
five school year pursuant to subdivision seven of section thirty-six
hundred two of this article as it existed in the two thousand three--two
thousand four school year.
 c. Upon approval of such application by the commissioner, the district
shall be eligible for a grant in an amount equal to the apportionment
computed pursuant to subdivision seven of section thirty-six hundred two
of this article on its approved expenses for transportation capital,
debt service and leases, as if such expenses continued to be aidable
under such subdivision seven, based on data on file with the
commissioner as of November first, two thousand four.
 d. Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, the
amounts payable pursuant to this paragraph shall be certified by the
commissioner in accordance with section sixty-one of the chapter of the
laws of two thousand four which added this subdivision and shall be paid
to school districts by the authorized issuer established pursuant to
subdivision (b) of section fifty-four of the chapter of the laws of two
thousand four which added this subdivision from the proceeds of bonds
and notes issued pursuant to such section thirty-six. Such payment shall
fulfill any obligation of the state or the commissioner to apportion
funds pursuant to this paragraph or subdivision seven of section
thirty-six hundred two of this article for approved expenses for
transportation capital, debt service or leases, and whenever a school
district has been apportioned more money pursuant to this paragraph than
that to which it is entitled, the commissioner may deduct such amount
from the next apportionment to be made to such school district.
 14. Expanding our children's education and learning (EXCEL) a.
Establishment of the EXCEL program. There is hereby established the
expanding our children's education and learning (EXCEL) program to
provide project financing or assistance in the form of grants to
eligible school districts, in addition to, or in lieu of, the
apportionments made pursuant to subdivisions six, six-a, six-b, six-c,
six-d, six-e, six-f and paragraph c of subdivision fourteen of section
thirty-six hundred two of this article, and subdivisions ten and twelve
of this section, for the costs of EXCEL school facility projects. An
apportionment for any such project shall initially be available in the
state fiscal year commencing April first, two thousand six.
Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the dormitory
authority of the state of New York shall be authorized to issue bonds or
notes in an aggregate amount not to exceed two billion six hundred
million dollars for purposes of the EXCEL program.
 b. Definitions. The following terms, whenever used or referred to in
this subdivision, unless the context indicates otherwise, shall have the
following meanings:
 (1) "EXCEL project". An EXCEL project shall include, but not be
limited to, the acquisition, design, planning, construction,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, preservation, development, improvement
or modernization of an EXCEL school facility, where such project:
 (i) is (a) for a school district other than the city school district
of the city of New York, a construction project that has been reviewed
by the department and approved by the commissioner pursuant to this
subdivision, where a certification that a general construction contract
had been awarded for such project by or on behalf of the district was
not on file with the commissioner as of April first, two thousand six or
(b) for the city school district of the city of New York, a project
which is listed and contained in the five year capital plan, which has
been approved and adopted by the city council pursuant to section
twenty-five hundred ninety-p of this chapter, for the two thousand five
through two thousand nine fiscal years, and provided that such project
must commence, as close as practicable, according to the schedule set
forth in the five year capital plan as amended and approved by the city
council as of July, two thousand five, and
 (ii) falls within one or more of the following categories:
 (a) An education technology project which, as a primary purpose,
enhances the use of technology including but not limited to,
instructional content with video streaming, electrical upgrades, wiring,
cabling installations, internet connections, fiber optics, conduits,
raceways, telecommunication systems, hardware, electronic commerce and
wireless options;
 (b) A health and safety project which, as a primary purpose, addresses
the reduction or elimination of the risk of personal injury or harm to
occupants of public school buildings used primarily for instruction,
including but not limited to environmental remediation, the eradication
of fire and health code violations, the provisions of adequate
ventilation including heating, ventilation and air conditioning
equipment, and the rehabilitation and repair of existing facilities;
 (c) An accessibility project which, as a primary purpose, enhances
accessibility to public school buildings used primarily for instruction
for individuals with disabilities;
 (d) A physical capacity expansion project or school construction
project which, as a primary purpose, expands the availability of
adequate and appropriate instructional space in a public school building
used primarily for instruction, including but not limited to expansions
which provide for reduced class size and science laboratories; and
 (e) An energy project which, as a primary purpose, reduces energy
costs and/or energy consumption.
 (2) "EXCEL school facility". An EXCEL school facility shall mean an
existing or proposed facility or other property real and personal, and
other appurtenances thereto to be utilized by a school district for
education purposes.
 (3) "Eligible project costs". Eligible project costs, for purposes of
the EXCEL program shall mean any expenditures for an EXCEL project,
where such project is eligible for an apportionment pursuant to
subdivisions six, six-a, six-b, six-f and/or paragraph c of subdivision
fourteen of section thirty-six hundred two of this article.
 (4) "Eligible school district" means a school district eligible to
receive an apportionment in lieu of operating aid in the two thousand
six--two thousand seven school year, apportioned pursuant to section
thirty-six hundred two of this article, or eligible to receive an
apportionment of total foundation aid in the two thousand seven--two
thousand eight school year and thereafter, pursuant to such section
thirty-six hundred two of this article.
 (5) "Maximum additional apportionment" means the sum of the following
amounts:
 (i) For an eligible school district that is eligible for the high-need
supplemental building aid ratio pursuant to the provisions of clause (c)
of subparagraph two of paragraph c of subdivision six of section
thirty-six hundred two of this article, other than a city school
district in a city having a population of one million inhabitants or
more, an amount equal to the product of seven hundred seventy-eight
dollars and twenty-two cents ($778.22) multiplied by the public school
district enrollment of the district in the two thousand five--two
thousand six school year, as computed pursuant to subparagraph two of
paragraph n of subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this
article as based on data on file for the school aid computer listing
produced by the commissioner in support of the enacted budget for the
two thousand six--two thousand seven school year and entitled "SA060-7".
 (ii) For any other eligible school district, other than a city school
district in a city having a population of one million inhabitants or
more, an amount equal to the product of three hundred twenty dollars and
forty-six cents ($320.46) multiplied by the public school district
enrollment of the district in the two thousand five--two thousand six
school year, as computed pursuant to subparagraph two of paragraph n of
subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this article as
based on data on file for the school aid computer listing produced by
the commissioner of education in support of the enacted budget for the
two thousand six--two thousand seven school year and entitled "SA060-7".
 (iii) For an eligible city school district in a city having a
population of one million inhabitants or more one billion eight hundred
million dollars.
 c. EXCEL apportionment. (1) EXCEL apportionment for school
enhancement. Funds in an aggregate amount not to exceed eight hundred
million dollars shall be available for grants to eligible school
districts other than a city school district in a city having a
population of one million inhabitants or more. Each eligible school
district which has an EXCEL project or projects shall be entitled to a
grant or grants for such project or projects in an amount whether in the
aggregate or otherwise, not to exceed the maximum additional
apportionment calculated for such school district. The amount of such
maximum additional apportionment not expended, disbursed or encumbered
for any such year shall be carried over for expenditure and disbursement
to the next succeeding school year. Such maximum additional
apportionment may be used, at the option of the school district, in lieu
of, or to supplement, the apportionments available pursuant to
subdivisions six, six-a, six-b, six-c, six-d, six-e, six-f and paragraph
c of subdivision fourteen of section thirty-six hundred two of this
article, and subdivisions ten and twelve of this section, provided that
the total of such apportionments less any semiannual payments of
interest computed pursuant to subparagraph three of paragraph e of
subdivision six of section thirty-six hundred two of this article plus
the grant payable pursuant to this subdivision for the total project
costs of any EXCEL project shall not exceed such total project costs,
provided further that where the school district opts to use the EXCEL
apportionment provided pursuant to this subdivision to supplement the
apportionments payable for approved project costs pursuant to
subdivisions six, six-a, six-b, six-c, six-d, six-e, six-f and paragraph
c of subdivision fourteen of section thirty-six hundred two of this
article, and subdivisions ten and twelve of this section, such EXCEL
apportionment shall not otherwise reduce such apportionments. Except as
authorized in this paragraph, expenditures from the maximum additional
apportionment shall not be eligible for aid under any other provision of
this chapter.
 (2) EXCEL apportionment for city facilities enhancement. Funds in an
aggregate amount not to exceed one billion eight hundred million dollars
shall be available for grants to a city school district in a city having
a population of one million inhabitants or more. Such school district
shall be entitled to a grant or grants for each EXCEL project or
projects in an amount whether in the aggregate or otherwise, not to
exceed the maximum additional apportionment calculated for such school
district. The amount of such maximum additional apportionment not
expended, disbursed or encumbered for any such year shall be carried
over for expenditure and disbursement to the next succeeding school
year. Such maximum additional apportionment may be used, at the option
of the school district, in lieu of, or to supplement, the apportionments
available pursuant to subdivisions six, six-a, six-b, six-c, six-d,
six-e, six-f and paragraph c of subdivision fourteen of section
thirty-six hundred two of this article, and subdivisions ten and twelve
of this section, provided that the total of such apportionments less any
semiannual payments of interest computed pursuant to subparagraph two of
paragraph e of subdivision six of section thirty-six hundred two of this
article plus the grant payable pursuant to this subdivision for the
total project costs of any EXCEL project shall not exceed such total
project costs, provided further that where the school district opts to
use the EXCEL apportionment provided pursuant to this subdivision to
supplement the apportionments payable for approved project costs
pursuant to subdivisions six, six-a, six-b, six-c, six-d, six-e, six-f
and paragraph c of subdivision fourteen of section thirty-six hundred
two of this article, and subdivisions ten and twelve of this section,
such EXCEL apportionment shall not otherwise reduce such apportionments.
Except as authorized in this paragraph, expenditures from the maximum
additional apportionment shall not be eligible for aid under any other
provision of this chapter.
 (3) The commissioner shall, upon application therefor in such form as
the commissioner may require, determine the amounts to be awarded as
grants to school districts as calculated pursuant to this subdivision.
The amounts determined pursuant to this subdivision shall be certified
by the commissioner in accordance with subdivision six of section
sixteen hundred eighty-nine-i of the public authorities law. Upon the
issuance of bonds by the dormitory authority of the state of New York
pursuant to such section sixteen hundred eighty-nine-i, the amounts of
money so certified shall be paid to school districts by the dormitory
authority from the proceeds of such bonds, provided, however, that the
payment schedule set forth in subdivision one of this section shall not
apply to such payments. Such payment shall fulfill any obligation of the
state or the commissioner to apportion funds pursuant to this
subdivision, and whenever a school district has been apportioned more
money pursuant to this subdivision than that to which it is entitled,
the commissioner may deduct such amount from the next apportionment to
be made to such school district.
 15. Annual professional performance reviews transition grants. a. For
the two thousand eleven--two thousand twelve school year and/or the two
thousand twelve--two thousand thirteen school year provided, if a school
district has submitted a plan pursuant to paragraph k of subdivision two
of section three thousand twelve-c of this chapter before June
thirtieth, two thousand twelve and the commissioner finds that such plan
does not meet the requirements of section three thousand twelve-c of
this chapter under paragraph k of subdivision two of section three
thousand twelve-c of this chapter, and that the cost of implementing the
locally-developed components of an approved plan pursuant to paragraph k
of subdivision two of section three thousand twelve-c of this chapter
are more costly than the plan that is originally submitted, the
commissioner is authorized to award annual professional performance
reviews transition grants to eligible school districts pursuant to this
subdivision.
 b. Prior to the submission of the plan for approval under paragraph k
of subdivision two of section three thousand twelve-c of this chapter a
school district may submit for review to the commissioner prior to June
thirtieth, two thousand twelve locally developed components to meet the
requirements of section three thousand twelve-c of this chapter for the
two thousand eleven--two thousand twelve school year and/or the two
thousand twelve--two thousand thirteen school year. A school district
shall have the authority to submit locally developed components to the
commissioner only if successfully determined through collective
bargaining. The commissioner shall have the discretion and authority to
review such locally developed components and in such cases if the
commissioner determines that changes to the submitted locally developed
components are necessary to meet the requirements of section three
thousand twelve-c of this chapter and further the commissioner
determines such changes are more costly than the locally developed
components originally submitted under this paragraph, the commissioner
is authorized to award annual professional performance reviews
transition grants to eligible school districts pursuant to this
subdivision upon final approval of the plan under paragraph k of
subdivision two of section three thousand twelve-c of this chapter.
 c. The school district may provide a schedule of such additional
expenses, if any, on a form prescribed by the commissioner, that were
necessarily incurred by the school district in order to implement the
specific requirements of the commissioner contained in the approved
plan. The commissioner shall have the discretion and authority to
approve or disapprove such expenses from such schedule for grants under
this subdivision. The commissioner may require supporting documentation
from the school district in order to determine whether or not such
additional expenses were valid, reasonable, and essential to
implementing the specific requirements of the commissioner and to
determine whether or not such claim, or any part of such claim, be
approved. The commissioner may also consider the manner in which the
components of the plan were developed and if such requirements were not
met as a result of a lack of good faith.
 d. Approved additional expenses for annual professional performance
reviews transition grants pursuant to this subdivision for the two
thousand twelve--two thousand thirteen school year shall continue to be
eligible for reimbursement. Such approved expenses shall be eligible for
payment on or after September first following the end of the school year
in which such expenses were approved. In the event the appropriation for
purposes of this subdivision in any year is insufficient to pay all
approved claims pursuant to this subdivision, the commissioner shall pay
such claims on a prorated basis among all districts filing such claims
until the appropriation is exhausted. The commissioner shall promulgate
rules and regulations necessary to implement the provisions of this
subdivision within sixty days of the effective date of the chapter of
the laws of two thousand thirteen that amended this paragraph.
 16. Implementation of the smart schools bond act of 2014. a.
Definitions. The following terms, whenever used or referred to in this
subdivision, unless the context indicates otherwise, shall have the
following meanings:
 (1) "Bonds" shall mean general obligation bonds issued pursuant to the
"smart schools bond act of 2014" in accordance with article VII of the
New York state constitution and article five of the state finance law.
 (2) "Smart schools investment plan" shall mean a document prepared by
a school district setting forth the smart schools project or projects to
be undertaken with such district's smart schools allocation.
 (3) "Smart schools project" shall mean a capital project as set forth
and defined in subparagraphs four, five, six or seven of this paragraph.
 (4) "Pre-kindergarten or transportable classroom unit (TCU)
replacement project" shall mean a capital project which, as a primary
purpose, expands the availability of adequate and appropriate
instructional space for pre-kindergarten or provides for the expansion
or construction of adequate and appropriate instructional space to
replace TCUs.
 (5) "Community connectivity project" shall mean a capital project
which, as a primary purpose, expands high-speed broadband or wireless
internet connectivity in the local community, including school buildings
and campuses, for enhanced educational opportunity in the state.
 (6) "Classroom technology project" shall mean a capital project to
expand high-speed broadband or wireless internet connectivity solely for
school buildings and campuses, or to acquire learning technology
hardware for schools, classrooms, and student use, including but not
limited to whiteboards, computer servers, desktop computers, laptop
computers, and tablet computers.
 (7) "School safety and security technology project" shall mean a
capital project to install high-tech security features in school
buildings and on school campuses, including but not limited to video
surveillance, emergency notification systems and physical access
controls, for enhanced educational opportunity in the state.
 (8) "Selected school aid" shall mean the sum of the amounts set forth
as "FOUNDATION AID", "FULL DAY K CONVERSION", "BOCES", "SPECIAL
SERVICES", "HIGH COST EXCESS COST", "PRIVATE EXCESS COST", "HARDWARE &
TECHNOLOGY", "SOFTWARE, LIBRARY, TEXTBOOK", "TRANSPORTATION INCL
SUMMER", "OPERATING REORG INCENTIVE", "CHARTER SCHOOL TRANSITIONAL",
"ACADEMIC ENHANCEMENT", "HIGH TAX AID", and "SUPPLEMENTAL PUB EXCESS
COST" under the heading "2013-14 BASE YEAR AIDS" in the school aid
computer listing produced by the commissioner in support of the
executive budget proposal for the two thousand fourteen-fifteen school
year.
 (9) "Smart schools allocation" shall mean, for each school district,
the product of (i) two billion dollars ($2,000,000,000) multiplied by
(ii) the quotient of such school district's selected school aid divided
by the total selected school aid to all school districts.
 b. Smart schools investment plans. (1) Subject to the approval of the
director of the budget, the commissioner shall issue guidelines setting
forth required components and eligibility criteria for smart schools
investment plans to be submitted by school districts. Such guidelines
shall include but not be limited to: (i) a timeline for school district
submission of smart schools investment plans; (ii) any requirements for
the use of available state procurement options where applicable; (iii)
any limitations on the amount of a district's smart schools allocation
that may be used for assets with a short probable life; and (iv) the
loan of smart schools classroom technology pursuant to section seven
hundred fifty-five of this chapter.
 (2) No school district shall be entitled to a smart schools grant
until such district shall have submitted a smart schools investment plan
to the department and received the commissioner's approval of such
investment plan. In developing such investment plan, school districts
shall consult with parents, teachers, students, community members and
other stakeholders.
 (3) The commissioner shall review all smart schools investment plans
for compliance with all eligibility criteria and other requirements set
forth in the guidelines. The commissioner may approve or reject such
plans, or may return such plans to the school district for
modifications; provided that notwithstanding any inconsistent provision
of law, the commissioner shall approve no such plan first submitted to
the department on or after April fifteenth, two thousand seventeen,
unless such plan calculates the amount of classroom technology to be
loaned to students attending nonpublic schools pursuant to section seven
hundred fifty-five of this chapter in a manner that includes the amount
budgeted by the school district for servers, wireless access points and
other portable connectivity devices to be acquired as part of a school
connectivity project. Upon approval, the smart schools project or
projects described in the investment plan shall be eligible for smart
schools grants. A smart schools project included in a school district's
smart schools investment plan shall not require separate approval of the
commissioner unless it is part of a school construction project required
to be submitted for approval of the commissioner pursuant to section
four hundred eight of this chapter and/or subdivision six of section
thirty-six hundred two of this article. Any department, agency or public
authority shall provide the department with any information it requires
to fulfill its duties pursuant to this subdivision.
 (4) Any amendments or supplements to a smart schools investment plan
shall be submitted to the department for approval, and shall not take
effect until such approval is granted.
 c. Expenditure of money. (1) Smart schools grants. Each school
district which has an approved smart schools investment plan including a
smart schools project or projects shall be entitled to a grant or grants
for the smart schools project or projects included therein in an amount,
whether in the aggregate or otherwise, not to exceed the smart schools
allocation calculated for such school district. The amount of such
allocation not expended, disbursed or encumbered for any school year
shall be carried over for expenditure and disbursement to the next
succeeding school year. Expenditures from the smart schools allocation
shall not be eligible for aid under any other provision of this chapter.
 (2) The amounts determined pursuant to this subdivision to be paid to
school districts shall be certified by the commissioner in accordance
with this subdivision. If, upon the option of a school district, a smart
schools investment plan directs that an amount be transferred or
suballocated to a department, agency, or public authority to be spent on
behalf of the school district, such amounts shall be transferred or
suballocated, consistent with such plan, upon the approval of the
director of the budget. The amounts of money so certified or made
available shall be paid by the comptroller in accordance with
appropriations therefor, provided, however, that the payment schedule
set forth in subdivision one of this section shall not apply to such
payments. Such payment shall fulfill any obligation of the state or the
commissioner to apportion funds pursuant to this subdivision, and
whenever a school district has been apportioned more money pursuant to
this subdivision than that to which it is entitled, the commissioner may
deduct such amount from the next apportionment to be made to such school
district.
 d. Consistency with federal tax law. All actions taken pursuant to
this subdivision shall be reviewed for consistency with provisions of
the federal internal revenue code and regulations thereunder, in
accordance with procedures established in connection with the issuance
of any tax exempt bonds pursuant to this subdivision, to preserve the
tax exempt status of such bonds.
 e. Compliance with other law. Every recipient of funds to be made
available pursuant to this subdivision shall comply with all applicable
state, federal and local laws.
 17. Learning loss grants. a. For the two thousand twenty-one--two
thousand twenty-two school year, eligible school districts shall receive
grants in aid equal to the positive difference, if any, of the base ARPA
allocation less ninety percent of the funds from the elementary and
secondary school emergency relief fund made available to school
districts pursuant to the American rescue plan act of 2021, (P.L.
117-2), but not less than seven hundred thousand dollars ($700,000), and
not more than ten million dollars ($10,000,000) or ten percent (0.1) of
the total expenditures from the district's general fund for the two
thousand twenty--two thousand twenty-one school year, whichever is less.
School districts where the base ARPA allocation is less than or equal to
ninety percent of the funds from the elementary and secondary school
emergency relief fund made available to school districts pursuant to the
American rescue plan act of 2021, shall not be eligible for these
grants. Such grant funds shall remain available for obligation by such
school districts until the deadline therefor prescribed in federal law.
 b. The "base ARPA allocation" shall be equal to the product of the
adjusted per pupil amount multiplied by public school district
enrollment for the base year as computed pursuant to paragraph n of
subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this article. The
"adjusted per pupil amount" shall be equal to the product of: (1) four
thousand five hundred fifty dollars and twenty-six cents ($4,550.26);
multiplied by (2) the regional cost index calculated in two thousand
eighteen, reflecting an analysis of labor market costs based on median
salaries in professional occupations that require similar credentials to
those of positions in the education field, but not including those
occupations in the education field; multiplied by (3) the modified EN
index; and multiplied by (4) the learning loss wealth factor.
 (1) For purposes of this paragraph, the "learning loss wealth factor"
shall be equal to the positive difference, if any, of seventy-five
hundredths (0.75) less half of the combined wealth ratio computed
pursuant to subparagraph one of paragraph c of subdivision three of
section thirty-six hundred two of this article.
 (2) For purposes of this paragraph, the "modified EN index" shall be
equal to the modified EN percent divided by the statewide average
modified EN percent, provided that for the two thousand twenty-one--two
thousand twenty-two school year, the statewide average modified EN
percent shall be equal to five thousand five hundred sixty-five
ten-thousandths (0.5565).
 (3) For purposes of this paragraph, the "modified EN percent" shall be
equal to the modified EN count divided by public school district
enrollment for the base year computed pursuant to paragraph n of
subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this article.
 (4) For purposes of this paragraph, the "modified EN count" shall
equal the sum of (A) the product of fifty percent (0.5) multiplied by
the English language learner count computed pursuant to paragraph o of
subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this article, plus
(B) the sparsity count computed pursuant to paragraph r of subdivision
one of section thirty-six hundred two of this article, plus (C) the
product of sixty-five hundredths (0.65) multiplied by the three-year
average small area income and poverty estimate rate computed pursuant to
paragraph mm of subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of
this article and multiplied further by public school district enrollment
for the base year as computed pursuant to paragraph n of subdivision one
of section thirty-six hundred two of this article, plus (D) the product
of sixty-five hundredths (0.65) multiplied by the three-year average
economically disadvantaged rate defined pursuant to paragraph ll of
subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this article and
multiplied further by public school district enrollment for the base
year as computed pursuant to paragraph n of subdivision one of section
thirty-six hundred two of this article.
 c. Districts receiving learning loss grants shall use: (1) fourteen
and two hundred eighty-six thousandths percent (0.14286) of such grants
for implementation of evidence-based summer enrichment programs; (2)
fourteen and two hundred eighty-six thousandths percent (0.14286) for
implementation of evidence-based comprehensive afterschool programs; and
(3) the remaining funds for activities to address learning loss by
supporting the implementation of evidence-based interventions, such as
summer learning or summer enrichment, extended day, comprehensive
afterschool programs, or extended school year programs. School districts
shall ensure that such interventions respond to students' academic,
social, and emotional needs and address the disproportionate impact of
the coronavirus on low-income students, children with disabilities,
English learners, migrant students, students experiencing homelessness,
and children in foster care.
 § 3641-a. Excelsior scholars program for grade seven mathematics and
science students. The commissioner shall establish an excelsior scholars
program for grade seven mathematics and science students pursuant to
this section and regulations of the commissioner adopted for such
purpose. Within the amounts appropriated for this purpose, the
commissioner shall award grants on a competitive basis to public and
independent colleges and universities to conduct summer programs that
shall provide advanced coursework in mathematics and science to students
designated as excelsior scholars and, as funds permit, other
high-performing students who have completed seventh grade.
 1. Each year, the commissioner shall identify up to three thousand
high performing seventh grade students in mathematics and science from
students nominated by each public middle school, junior high school,
intermediate school or junior/senior high school, or kindergarten
through secondary school. The commissioner by regulation shall prescribe
the maximum number of students that may be nominated by each school,
which may vary based on the size of the school, which shall include
equal numbers of male and female students. After review by the
commissioner, qualified students shall be certified to the governor for
recognition as an excelsior scholar.
 2. The commissioner shall conduct a competitive process under which
financial grants are awarded to each college and university approved to
provide appropriate advanced coursework to excelsior scholars in the
summer months, subject to the availability of funds appropriated for
such purpose.
 3. The regulations of the commissioner shall provide for coordination
of the program with the seven centers for excellence in technology and
the programs offered by such centers, to the extent practicable.
 § 3641-b. Grants for summer institutes for mathematics and science
teachers. The commissioner shall establish a program of competitively
awarded grants within the amount appropriated for such purpose, to
public and independent colleges and universities offering teacher
education programs, in partnership with school districts, to conduct
summer institutes for teachers of science and mathematics in grades five
through eight in middle schools, junior high schools, intermediate
schools or junior/senior high schools with priority given as practicable
to teachers in schools identified as schools in need of improvement or
in corrective action or restructuring status, schools under registration
review or schools requiring academic progress. Such summer institutes
shall be designed to advance the content knowledge and pedagogy of
participating science and mathematics teachers and shall, to the extent
practicable, be aligned and integrated with programs offered to
excelsior scholars pursuant to section thirty-six hundred forty-one-a of
this article. Teachers shall be selected for participation by their
building principal.
 § 3642. Severability. If any clause, sentence, paragraph, or section
of this part shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be invalid and after exhaustion of all further judicial review, the
judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof,
but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence,
paragraph, or section of this part directly involved in the controversy
in which the judgment shall have been rendered. The provisions of this
section shall apply to all sections of this part except those sections
which are expressly subject to separate severability provisions
contained hereinbefore in this part.
 PART V
 COMPREHENSIVE SCHOOL BUS DRIVER SAFETY TRAINING PROGRAM
Section 3650. Comprehensive school bus driver safety training program.
 3650-a. State comprehensive school bus driver safety training
 council.
 3650-b. Drivers and instructors; training and safety.
 3650-c. Accident report data base.
 § 3650. Comprehensive school bus driver safety training program. 1.
The commissioner, in consultation with the state comprehensive school
bus driver safety training council and subject to appropriation by the
legislature, shall:
 a. Develop a uniform and comprehensive school bus driver safety
training program for school bus drivers transporting students to and
from school by school bus including instruction to such school bus
drivers concerning the latest safety techniques using the latest
instructional materials.
 b. Include within the safety training program the development of
curriculum and training materials including a school bus driver safety
training manual.
 c. Develop and conduct professional development school bus driver
safety training seminars statewide.
 d. Establish and maintain a data base containing data relative to
school bus accidents and fatalities reported within the state.
 e. Engage the services of consultants on a contract basis for
rendering professional and tactical assistance.
 f. Award and distribute grants, following appropriation by the
legislature which appropriation may include funds of the school bus
motorist education fund established pursuant to section eighty-nine-j of
the state finance law, for the study of issues involving the illegal
passing of stopped school buses, the development of proposals to reduce
the number of motorists passing school buses in violation of section
eleven hundred seventy-four of the vehicle and traffic law, and to
promote school bus safety.
 2. The commissioner, in consultation with the justice center for the
protection of people with special needs, shall promulgate rules and
regulations requiring every school bus driver operating a school bus
which has or will have one or more students with a disability as
passengers to receive training and instruction relating to the
understanding of, and attention to, the special needs of such students.
Such training and instruction may be included with the training and
instruction required pursuant to paragraph a of subdivision one of this
section and shall be provided at least once per year or more frequently
as determined by the commissioner in consultation with the state
comprehensive school bus driver safety training council. For the
purposes of this subdivision, the term "student with a disability" shall
have the same meaning as such term is defined in subdivision one of
section forty-four hundred one of this chapter. Any person employed as a
school bus driver on January first, two thousand nine who is subject to
the provisions of this subdivision shall comply with the requirements of
this subdivision by July first, two thousand nine. Any school bus driver
hired after January first, two thousand nine who is subject to the
requirements of this subdivision shall complete such training and
instruction prior to assuming his or her duties.
 § 3650-a. State comprehensive school bus driver safety training
council. 1. There is hereby created and established in the department of
education a council, to be known as the state comprehensive school bus
driver safety training council. The council shall advise and assist the
commissioner in the development and updating of the school bus driver
safety training program and such other related matters as the council
and commissioner shall deem appropriate. Such council shall consist of
the commissioner of education as chair, the superintendent of state
police, the commissioner of transportation and the commissioner of motor
vehicles and eight other members to be appointed by the governor
including the following:
 a. Two members to be appointed upon the recommendation of the speaker
of the assembly.
 b. Two members to be appointed upon the recommendation of the
temporary president of the senate.
 c. One member to be appointed upon the recommendation of the minority
leader of the assembly.
 d. One member to be appointed upon the recommendation of the minority
leader of the senate.
 2. The members of the council, other than the ex officio members,
shall serve for terms of two years. Such terms shall coincide with the
election of the members of the state legislature and shall commence on
the fifteenth day of January. Vacancies shall be filled for unexpired
terms in the same manner as the original appointments.
 3. The council shall meet at least semi-annually at the call of the
chair. Additional meetings may be called upon at least five days notice
by the chair or by petition of five members of the council.
 4. No member of the council shall be disqualified from holding any
other public office, nor shall employment be forfeited by reason of the
member's appointment hereunder, notwithstanding the provisions of any
general, special or local law, ordinance, county or city charter.
 5. Each member of the council shall receive reimbursement for actual
and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties.
 6. The council shall, during its first year, consider and may make
recommendations on the following issues:
 a. inclement weather procedures;
 b. emergency school bus evacuation techniques;
 c. safety equipment training;
 d. promotion of public safety;
 e. unauthorized boarding of buses; and
 f. services for students with disabilities.
 7. The council shall make, on or before January first of each year, an
annual report of its activities and such recommendations as it may deem
appropriate to the board of regents concerning school bus driver safety
training programs.
 § 3650-b. Drivers and instructors; training and safety. 1. The
commissioner shall establish training and safety technique requirements
for school bus drivers and school bus safety training instructors and
shall make rules and regulations implementing such requirements on a
statewide basis.
 2. The commissioner shall prepare and distribute school bus driver
safety training manuals to each school district. Such manual shall be
periodically updated and shall provide the framework for continuing
school bus safety education programs for school districts.
 3. Every school district shall certify to the commissioner that its
school bus drivers have successfully completed the school bus driver
safety training program established pursuant to the provisions of this
article and shall make an annual report to the commissioner on the
implementation and effectiveness of the program. Each school district
shall have the option of having its employees certified as school bus
driver safety training instructors or contracting with certified
instructors to provide such training to the district.
 4. The commissioner, in consultation with the commissioner of motor
vehicles, shall establish a certification program for school bus driver
safety training instructors.
 § 3650-c. Accident report data base. The commissioner, in consultation
with the commissioner of motor vehicles, shall establish an electronic
data file containing accident reports relating to school buses.
 ARTICLE 74
 RESERVE FUNDS
Section 3651. Reserve fund.
 3652. Investment of moneys in reserve funds.
 3653. Insurance reserve funds.
 3653*2. Reserves funded by resolution.
 § 3651. Reserve fund. 1. A reserve fund may be established by the
school authorities of any school district, provided, however, that no
such fund shall be established (a) until approved by a majority vote of
the qualified voters of the district voting on a proposition therefor
submitted at a regular or special school district meeting, or in school
districts which do not have such meetings, at an election called for
such purpose, and (b) unless the notice of such meeting or election
shall have stated that a proposition to establish a reserve fund would
be so submitted, the purpose of the fund, the ultimate amount thereof,
its probable term and the source from which the funds would be obtained.
Such reserve fund may be established for financing, in whole or in part,
the cost of any object or purpose for which bonds may be issued by, or
for the objects or purposes of, the school district pursuant to the
local finance law. The proposition shall specify the purpose for which
the fund is established, the ultimate amount, the probable term and the
source from which the funds are to be obtained. There shall be paid into
any such fund an annual amount sufficient to meet the requirements of
the proposition. In addition, the voters may from time to time direct
the school authorities to pay into such fund moneys derived from any
other source.
 1-a. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision one of this
section, any school district may establish a reserve fund for the
payment of judgments and claims in tax certiorari proceedings in
accordance with article seven of the real property tax law, without
approval by the qualified voters of the district, provided, however,
that the total of the monies held in such reserve fund shall not exceed
that amount which might reasonably be deemed necessary to meet
anticipated judgments and claims arising out of such tax certiorari
proceedings. Any monies deposited to such reserve fund which are not
expended for the payment of judgments or claims arising out of such tax
certiorari proceedings for the tax roll in the year such monies are
deposited to the said fund and/or which will not reasonably be required
to pay any such judgment or claim shall be returned to the general fund
on or before the first day of the fourth fiscal year following the
deposit of such monies to said reserve fund. For purposes of this
subdivision, such monies shall be deemed reasonably required to pay any
such judgment or claim if the proceeding or claim has not been finally
determined or otherwise terminated or disposed of after the exhaustion
of all appeals.
 1-b. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision one of this
section, where the city or county is not required to pay to the
treasurer of a city school district unpaid taxes during the fiscal year
for which such real property taxes are levied, the board of education of
such city school district may establish a reserve for uncollected taxes
without approval of the qualified voters of the school district,
provided that the ratio of the amount of such reserve to the total
principal amount of the district's tax levy for such fiscal year shall
not be less than the ratio of the principal amount of the school
district taxes as levied by the school district for the last completed
fiscal year but not received by the district before the end of such
fiscal year to the total principal amount of the tax levy for such last
completed fiscal year. If the city or county is not required to pay to
the treasurer of a city school district unpaid taxes pursuant to section
thirteen hundred thirty-two of the real property tax law, the board of
education of the city school district shall establish a reserve pursuant
to this subdivision, provided that such reserve shall not be less than
the amount of taxes for the fiscal year for which such budget is being
prepared which are estimated to be unpaid during such fiscal year under
the aforesaid provisions of the real property tax law.
 2. The moneys in each such fund shall be deposited in one or more of
the banks or trust companies designated as depositories of the funds of
such school district and shall be known as the "________reserve fund" of
such district. The school authorities may direct the treasurer of such
school district to invest the moneys in each such fund in the manner
provided in section thirty-six hundred fifty-two of this article. Any
interest earned or capital gains realized on the money so deposited or
so invested shall accrue to and become a part of each such fund. The
separate identity of each such fund shall be maintained whether its
assets consist of cash or investments or both.
 3. An expenditure shall be made from a reserve fund only by
authorization of the voters and for the specific purpose specified in
the proposition.
 3-a. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision three of this
section, any school district which establishes a reserve fund in
accordance with subdivision one-a of this section may make expenditures
from such fund for the purposes specified in such subdivision without
authorization of the voters.
 4. The voters may authorize the transfer of all or any part of any
reserve fund to any other reserve fund established pursuant to this
section.
 5. Whenever the voters shall determine that the original purpose for
which a reserve fund has been established is no longer desirable, the
school authorities may liquidate the fund by first applying its proceeds
to any outstanding bonded indebtedness and applying the balance, if any,
to the annual tax levy, provided, however, that the amount so applied in
any one year shall not be greater than the amount which will reduce the
tax rate for school purposes below five mills on actual valuation;
provided, however, that the school authorities in any school district
having no outstanding bonded indebtedness may, in any year in which no
state aid is payable thereto under the provisions of this chapter,
liquidate such fund by applying the balance thereof to the annual tax
levy, regardless of the tax rate for school purposes, subject to the
approval of a majority of the qualified electors of the district voting
on a proposition therefor submitted at a regular or special school
district meeting, or in school districts which do not have such
meetings, at an election called for such purpose.
 6. The school authorities shall cause a separate account to be kept of
each fund established. Such account shall show:
 a. The date and amount of each sum paid into the fund.
 b. The interest earned by such fund.
 c. The capital gains or losses resulting from the sale of investments
of the fund.
 d. The interest or capital gains which have accrued to the fund.
 e. The amount and date of each withdrawal from the fund.
 f. The assets of the fund indicating the cash balance therein and a
schedule of the amounts invested in federal or state obligations.
 7. The school authorities shall render annually a detailed report of
the operation and conditions of each of such funds. Copy of such report
shall be filed with the commissioner of education.
 8. a. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, if in
any city any taxes raised on real estate for the purposes of the school
district must be included in computing the amount which the city may
raise by tax on real estate for city purposes pursuant to the provisions
of section ten of article eight of the constitution, the establishment
of a reserve fund by the school authorities of the school district shall
be subject to the consent of the legislative body of the city.
 b. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, in any
school district which is wholly or partly in the Adirondack park and has
within its boundaries state lands subject to taxation assessed at more
than thirty per centum of the aggregate taxable assessed valuation of
the real property within the bounds of such school district, the school
district shall not establish a reserve fund unless, on the
recommendation of the commissioner of education, the state comptroller,
on behalf of the state, shall consent thereto. Upon the expiration of
fifteen days from the date of the filing in his office of the
application for such consent, together with the recommendation of the
commissioner of education, and upon reaching a determination, the state
comptroller shall make an order, in triplicate, granting or denying such
consent. One copy of such order shall be filed in the office of the
state department of audit and control at Albany, New York, another in
the state department of education at Albany, New York, and the third in
the office of the clerk of such school district.
 9. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, in a city
school district in a city having a population of one hundred twenty-five
thousand inhabitants or more, such a reserve fund may be established,
expenditures may be made therefrom, moneys may be paid into such fund,
all or any part of such fund may be transferred to any other reserve
fund established under this section, and such reserve fund may be
liquidated, all pursuant to the provisions of this section, except that
any such action may be authorized or taken by the board of education of
such city school district, without approval or authorization of the
qualified voters of such district.
 § 3652. Investment of moneys in reserve funds. The school authorities
of any school district or the district treasurer or other officer having
custody of the moneys, if the school authorities shall delegate such
duty to him, may invest moneys in any fund established pursuant to this
article in the manner provided by section eleven of the general
municipal law.
 * § 3653. Insurance reserve funds. In addition to the provisions of
this article and to the provisions of section six-n of the general
municipal law, any school district that establishes and maintains an
insurance reserve fund to make expenditures from such reserve fund for
any loss, claim, action, or judgment for which the school district is
authorized or required to purchase or maintain insurance for the kinds
of risks for which insurance is authorized pursuant to paragraph three
of subsection (a) of section eleven hundred thirteen of the insurance
law, pursuant to section six-n of the general municipal law or any other
chapter of law, shall make all reserve fund transactions transparent to
the public by adopting a written insurance reserve fund policy, to be
posted on the school district's website, that includes: the purpose of
the reserve fund, the optimal amount of funding of the reserve fund, its
intended duration, the conditions under which reserve fund assets will
be used or replenished, a periodic analysis by the school board of the
reserve fund balances to determine if reserves are at reasonable and
appropriate levels, how the school authorities should reduce reserve
funds to reasonable levels when conditions warrant, how school
authorities will discontinue the reserve fund if no longer needed and
any additional policies that the school authorities deem appropriate.
 * NB There are 2 § 3653's
 * § 3653. Reserves funded by resolution. In addition to any other
requirements, no monies shall be paid or transferred into any reserve
fund, established pursuant to this chapter or any other chapter of law,
for the purpose of increasing the funding of such reserve fund, unless
expressly authorized by a resolution of the board of education or
trustees of a school district.
 * NB There are 2 § 3653's
 ARTICLE 75
 TRUSTS FOR SCHOOLS; GOSPEL AND SCHOOL LOTS
Section 3701. Property to be held in trust for public schools.
 3702. Control and supervision of trusts for public schools.
 3703. Report of trusts to commissioner of education.
 3704. Report of supervisor regarding gospel or school lots.
 3705. Apportionment of gospel funds.
 3706. Authorization of apportionment of gospel funds.
 3707. Payment of apportionment of gospel funds.
 3708. Bond required of collector or treasurer.
 3709. Penalties of certain bonds.
 3710. Application of moneys.
 3711. Sale of gospel or school lots on division of town.
 3712. State agency for surplus property.
 3712-a. Transfer of gospel funds to general fund of town.
 3713. Acceptance of funds appropriated by federal government.
 § 3701. Property to be held in trust for public schools. Real and
personal estate may be granted, conveyed, devised, bequeathed and given
in trust and in perpetuity or otherwise, to the state, or to the regents
or to the commissioner of education for the support or benefit of the
public schools, within the state, or within any part or portion of it,
or of any particular public schools within it; and to any county, or the
district superintendents of any county, or to any city or any board of
officers thereof, or to any supervisory district or its superintendent,
or to any town, or supervisor of a town, or to any school district or
its trustees or board of education, for the support and benefit of
public schools within such county, city, supervisory district, town or
school district, or within any part or portion thereof respectively, or
for the support and benefit of any particular public schools therein.
No such grant, conveyance, devise or bequest shall be held void for the
want of a named or competent trustee or donee, but where no trustee or
donee, or an incompetent one is named, the title and trust shall vest in
the people of the state, subject to its acceptance by the legislature,
but such acceptance shall be presumed.
 § 3702. Control and supervision of trusts for public schools. The
legislature may control and regulate the execution of all such trusts;
and the commissioner of education shall supervise and advise the
trustees, and hold them to a regular accounting for the trust property
and its income and interest at such times, in such forms, and with such
authentications, as he shall, from time to time, prescribe.
 § 3703. Report of trusts to commissioner of education. The common
council or other legislative body of every city, the board of
supervisors or other governing elective body of every county, the
trustees of every village, the supervisor of every town, the trustees or
board of education of every school district, and every other officer or
person who shall be required to do so by the commissioner of education
shall report to him whether any, and if any, what trusts are held by
them respectively, or by any other body, officer or person to their
information or belief, for school purposes, and shall transmit,
therewith, an authenticated copy of every will, conveyance, instrument
or paper embodying or creating the trust; and shall, in like manner,
forthwith report to him the creation and terms of every such trust
thereafter created.
 § 3704. Report of supervisor regarding gospel or school lots. Every
supervisor of a town shall report to the commissioner of education
whether there be, within the town, any gospel or school lot, and, if
any, shall describe the same, and state to what use, if any, it is put
by the town; and whether it be leased, and, if so, to whom, for what
term and upon what rents; and whether the town holds or is entitled to
any land, moneys or securities arising from any sale of such gospel or
school lot, and the investment of the proceeds thereof, or of the rents
and income of such lots and investments, and shall report a full
statement and account of such lands, moneys and securities.
 § 3705. Apportionment of gospel funds. It shall be lawful for the
supervisor of any town having money arising from the sale of gospel
lands, and known as gospel funds, to apportion such funds among the
several school districts of his respective town when authorized under
the provisions of section thirty-seven hundred six.
 § 3706. Authorization of apportionment of gospel funds. 1. The town
board of any town having a gospel fund of five hundred dollars or less
may authorize the supervisor of the town to apportion such fund among
the several school districts of the town.
 2. The voters of any town having a gospel fund of more than five
hundred dollars may at any regular or special town election authorize
the supervisor of the town to apportion such fund among the several
school districts of the town.
 § 3707. Payment of apportionment of gospel funds. 1. When such
apportionment is authorized the supervisor shall pay to the collector,
or if the district has a treasurer to the treasurer, of the several
school districts of his town its pro rata share according to the
aggregate school attendance of each school district in the preceding
year.
 2. In the event that any of the school districts of the town shall
have been included in any central school district the pro rata share
belonging to such district shall be paid to the treasurer of the central
school district, to be used for school purposes of such central
district.
 § 3708. Bond required of collector or treasurer. The collector or the
treasurer, if the district has a treasurer, of each of such school
districts shall execute and file with the supervisor of such town a bond
of twice the amount of such apportionment with sufficient sureties, to
be approved by such supervisor.
 § 3709. Penalties of certain bonds. Whenever a school district
officer is required to furnish a bond under the provisions of section
thirty-seven hundred eight in the penalty of double the amount of moneys
apportioned or to be received, and such district officer furnishes the
bond of a surety or bonding company authorized by law to transact
business in this state and to execute such bond, the penalty thereof may
be fixed at the amount of moneys so apportioned or to be received, in
lieu of the double penalty prescribed in such section.
 § 3710. Application of moneys. Such moneys shall be held by such
collector or treasurer and paid upon the written order of the trustee or
board of education of the district for such purposes as the annual or a
special meeting of the district shall direct.
 § 3711. Sale of gospel or school lots on division of town. 1.
Whenever a town having lands assigned to it for the support of the
gospel or of schools, shall be divided into two or more towns, or shall
be altered in its limits by the annexing of a part of its territory to
other towns, such lands shall be sold by the supervisor of the town, in
which such lands were included immediately before such division or
alteration; and the proceeds thereof shall be apportioned between the
towns interested therein, in the same manner as the other public moneys
of towns, so divided or altered, are apportioned.
 2. The shares of such moneys, to which the towns shall be respectively
entitled, shall be paid to the supervisors of the respective towns, and
shall thereafter be subject to the provisions of section twenty-one
hundred forty-two.
 § 3712. State agency for surplus property. The commissioner of
education, or such other state officer as may, from time to time, be
designated by the governor, shall be the state agency for surplus
property and is hereby authorized and empowered (1) to acquire from the
United States of America under and in conformance with the provisions of
section two hundred three (j) of the federal property and administrative
services act of nineteen hundred forty-nine as amended, such property
including equipment, materials, books, or other supplies under the
control of any department or agency of the United States of America as
may be usable and necessary for purposes of education, public health or
civil defense, including research for any such purpose, and for such
other purposes as may now or hereafter be authorized by federal law; (2)
to warehouse such property; and (3) to distribute such property within
the state to tax-supported medical institutions, hospitals, clinics,
health centers, school systems, schools, colleges, and universities
within the state, to other nonprofit medical institutions, hospitals,
clinics, health centers, schools, colleges and universities which are
exempt from taxation under section five hundred one (c) (3) of the
United States internal revenue code of nineteen hundred fifty-four, to
civil defense organizations of the state, or political subdivisions and
instrumentalities thereof, which are established pursuant to state law,
and to such other types of institutions or activities as may now be or
hereafter become eligible under federal law to acquire such property.
The commissioner of education, or such other state officer as may be
designated by the governor, is hereby authorized to appoint advisory
board or committees and to do any and all acts necessary to carry out
the foregoing duties of such agency for surplus property in accordance
with such federal property and administrative services act of nineteen
hundred forty-nine as amended and the rules and regulations of any of
the departments or agencies of the United States of America duly adopted
in accordance therewith.
 § 3712-a. Transfer of gospel funds to general fund of town. In lieu
of the apportionment and payment of gospel funds as otherwise authorized
by this article, the town board of any town may, by resolution duly
adopted by it and approved by the voters of such town at any regular or
special town meeting, authorize the supervisor thereof to transfer such
funds to the general fund of the town, to be expended for any lawful
town purpose.
 § 3713. Acceptance of funds appropriated by federal government. 1.
The state, any school district or its trustees or board of education is
hereby authorized and empowered to accept the provisions of any law of
the United States making appropriations for the purpose of defraying the
cost of providing the public education, the cost of planning and
constructing public school facilities or any other educational purpose.
 2. The commissioner of education, hereby designated as the state
educational agency, is authorized and empowered to cooperate with such
agency as the federal government shall designate to carry out the
provisions of such law.
 3. The commissioner of taxation and finance and the state comptroller
are appointed as joint custodians of all money given to the state by the
United States under the authority of such law, and such money shall be
paid out in the manner provided by such act for the purposes therein
specified.
 ARTICLE 77
 FINES, PENALTIES, FORFEITURES AND COSTS
Section 3801. Disposition of fines for benefit of common schools.
 3802. Disposition of fines for benefit of schools of town,
 district or city.
 3803. Disposition of fines in case of joint district.
 3804. Report and payment of fines.
 3805. Penalty for falsely claiming to represent commissioner of
 education, regents or other school officer.
 3806. Penalty for failure to render an account or pay over any
 balance.
 3807. Penalty for false reports and misapplication of public
 funds.
 3808. Forfeiture of amount of penalty where suit is neglected.
 3809. Forfeiture of amount of moneys lost by neglect.
 3810. No costs to plaintiffs in certain cases.
 3811. Costs, expenses and damages a district charge in certain
 cases.
 3812. Payment of costs, charges and expenses by vote of district
 meeting.
 3813. Presentation of claims against the governing body of any
 school district or certain state supported schools.
 3814. Appeal to county judge.
 3815. Hearing before county judge.
 3816. Duty of trustees or board of education to carry out order.
 § 3801. Disposition of fines for benefit of common schools. Whenever,
by any statute, a penalty or fine is imposed for the benefit of common
schools, and not expressly of the common schools of a town or school
district, it shall be taken to be for the benefit of the common schools
of the county within which the conviction is had; and the fine or
penalty, when paid or collected, shall be paid forthwith into the county
treasury, and the treasurer shall credit the same as school moneys of
the county, unless the county comprise a city, in which case he shall
report it to the commissioner of education, who shall apportion it upon
the basis of population by the last census, between the city and the
residue of the county, and the portion belonging to the city shall be
paid into its treasury.
 § 3802. Disposition of fines for benefit of schools of town, district
or city. Whenever a fine or penalty is inflicted or imposed for the
benefit of the common schools of a town or school district, the
magistrate, constable or other officer collecting or receiving the same
shall forthwith pay the same to the county treasurer of the county in
which the schoolhouse is located, who shall credit the same to the town
or district for whose benefit it is collected. If the fine or penalty
be inflicted or imposed for the benefit of the common schools of a city,
or of any part or district of a city, it shall be paid into the city
treasury.
 § 3803. Disposition of fines in case of joint district. Whenever a
penalty or fine is imposed upon any school district officer for a
violation or omission of official duty, or upon any person for any act
or omission within a school district, or touching property or the peace
and good order of the district, and such penalty or fine is declared to
be for the use or benefit of the common schools of the town or of the
county, and such school district lies in two or more towns or counties,
the town or county intended by the act shall be taken to be the one in
which the schoolhouse, or the schoolhouse longest owned or held by the
district is at the time of such violation, act or omission.
 § 3804. Report and payment of fines. Every district attorney shall
report, annually, to the board of supervisors or other governing
elective body, all such fines and penalties imposed in any prosecution
conducted by him during the previous year; and all moneys collected or
received by him or by the sheriff, or any other officer, for or on
account of such fines or penalties, shall be immediately paid into the
county treasury, and the receipt of the county treasurer shall be a
sufficient and the only voucher for such money.
 § 3805. Penalty for falsely claiming to represent commissioner of
education, regents or other school officer. It shall be a misdemeanor
for any employee, agent or representative of a firm, company or
corporation engaged in selling, publishing or manufacturing papers,
periodicals, books, maps, charts, school supplies, apparatus or
furniture, or any other person engaged or employed in such business to
falsely represent to a board of trustees or board of education of a
school district or to a teacher employed in a public school in this
state or to a superintendent of schools or other school officer that he
is an agent, employee, or representative of the commissioner of
education, the state education department, the regents, or of any other
school officer.
 § 3806. Penalty for failure to render an account or pay over any
balance. Every school officer in the city of New York who shall refuse
or neglect to render an account or to pay over any balance in his hands
at the expiration of his term of office shall for each offense forfeit
the sum of fifty dollars, which sum, together with such unpaid balance,
shall be sued for and collected by the board of education of such city,
which board shall prosecute without delay for the recovery of such
forfeiture, together with the unpaid balance; and in case of the death
of such school officer suit may be brought against his representatives,
and all moneys recovered, after deducting expenses, shall be placed at
the disposal of the board of education of such city.
 § 3807. Penalty for false reports and misapplication of public funds.
Every person in the employ of the board of education of the city of New
York, and every school officer and every officer or teacher of a school
or society, who shall wilfully sign a false report to such board of
education, shall for each offense forfeit the sum of twenty-five
dollars; and every such person or officer who shall wilfully misapply
any of the public funds committed to his care shall be deemed guilty of
embezzlement.
 § 3808. Forfeiture of amount of penalty where suit is neglected.
Where any penalty for the benefit of a school district, or of the
schools of any school district, town, supervisory district or county,
shall be incurred, and the officer, whose duty it is by law to sue for
the same, shall wilfully and unreasonably refuse or neglect to sue for
the same, such officer shall forfeit the amount of such penalty to the
same use, and it shall be the duty of his successor in office to sue for
the same.
 § 3809. Forfeiture of amount of moneys lost by neglect. Whenever the
share of school moneys or any portion thereof, apportioned to any school
district, or any money to which a town or school district would have
been entitled, shall be lost, in consequence of any wilful neglect of
official duty by any district superintendent, town clerk, trustees or
clerks of school districts, the officer guilty of such neglect shall
forfeit to the town, or school district so losing the same, the full
amount of such loss with interest thereon.
 § 3810. No costs to plaintiffs in certain cases. 1. In any action
against school officers, including supervisors of towns, in respect to
their duties and powers under this chapter, for any act performed by
virtue of or under the color of their offices, or for any refusal or
omission to perform any duty enjoined by law, and which might have been
the subject of an appeal to the commissioner of education, no costs
shall be allowed to the plaintiff, in cases where the court shall
certify that it appeared on the trial that the defendants acted in good
faith.
 2. The provision of subdivision one of this section shall not extend
to suits for penalties, nor to suits or proceedings to enforce the
decisions of the commissioner of education.
 § 3811. Costs, expenses and damages a district charge in certain
cases. 1. Whenever the trustees or board of education of any school
district, or any school district officers, have been or shall be
instructed by a resolution adopted at a district meeting to defend any
action brought against them, or to bring or defend an action or
proceeding touching any district property or claim of the district, or
involving its rights or interests, or to continue any such action or
defense, all their costs and reasonable expenses, as well as all costs
and damages adjudged against them, shall be a district charge and shall
be levied by tax upon the district. Whenever any superintendent,
principal, member of the teaching or supervisory staff, member of a
committee on special education or subcommittee thereof, surrogate parent
as defined in the regulations of the commissioner of education, or any
trustee or member of the board of education of a school district or
non-instructional employee of any school district other than the city
school district of the city of New York or any board of cooperative
educational services shall defend any action or proceeding, other than
a criminal prosecution or an action or proceeding brought against him by
a school district or board of cooperative educational services hereafter
brought against him, including proceedings before the commissioner of
education, arising out of the exercise of his powers or the performance
of his duties under this chapter, all his reasonable costs and expenses,
as well as all costs and damages adjudged against him, shall be a
district charge and shall be levied by tax upon the district or shall
constitute an administrative charge upon the board of cooperative
educational services provided that (a) such superintendent, principal,
member of the teaching or supervisory staff, member of a committee on
special education or subcommittee thereof, surrogate parent as defined
in the regulations of the commissioner of education, non-instructional
employee of any school district or board of cooperative educational
services or such trustee or member of a board of education of such
school district or board of cooperative educational services shall
notify the trustees or board of education or board of cooperative
educational services in writing of the commencement of such action or
proceedings against him within five days after service of process upon
him; and (b) the trustees or board of education or board of cooperative
educational services shall, at any time during the ten days next
following the notice to them of the commencement of such action or
proceedings, have the right to designate and appoint the legal counsel
to represent such superintendent, principal, member of the teaching or
supervisory staff, member of a committee on special education or
subcommittee thereof, surrogate parent as defined in the regulations of
the commissioner of education, non-instructional employee of any school
district or board of cooperative educational services or such trustee
or member of the board of education or board of cooperative educational
services in such action or proceedings against him, in the absence of
which designation and appointment within the time specified such
superintendent, principal, member of the teaching or supervisory staff,
member of a committee on special education or subcommittee thereof,
surrogate parent as defined in the regulations of the commissioner of
education, non-instructional employee of any school district or board of
cooperative educational services or such trustee or member of the board
of education or board of cooperative educational services may select
his own legal counsel; (c) it shall be certified by the court or by the
commissioner of education, as the case may be, that he appeared to have
acted in good faith with respect to the exercise of his powers or the
performance of his duties under this chapter.
 2. If the amount claimed hereunder be disputed by a district meeting,
the board of education or the board of trustees, it shall be adjusted by
the county judge of any county in which the district or any part of it
is situated.
 § 3812. Payment of costs, charges and expenses by vote of district
meeting. 1. Whenever the trustees or board of education or any school
district officer shall have brought or defended any such action or
proceeding, without any such resolution of the district meeting, and
after the final determination of such suit or proceeding, shall present
to any regular meeting of the inhabitants of the district, an account,
in writing, of all costs, charges and expenses paid by him or them, with
the items thereof, and verified by his or their oath or affirmation, and
a majority of the voters at such meeting shall so direct, it shall be
the duty of the trustees to cause the same to be assessed upon and
collected of the taxable property of said district, in the same manner
as other taxes are by law assessed and collected; and, when so
collected, the same shall be paid over, by an order upon the collector
or treasurer to the officers entitled to receive the same.
 2. The provision of subdivision one of this section shall not extend
to suits for penalties, nor to suits or proceedings to enforce the
decisions of the commissioner of education.
 § 3813. Presentation of claims against the governing body of any
school district or certain state supported schools. 1. No action or
special proceeding, for any cause whatever, except as hereinafter
provided, relating to district property or property of schools provided
for in article eighty-five of this chapter or chapter ten hundred sixty
of the laws of nineteen hundred seventy-four or claim against the
district or any such school, or involving the rights or interests of any
district or any such school shall be prosecuted or maintained against
any school district, board of education, board of cooperative
educational services, school provided for in article eighty-five of this
chapter or chapter ten hundred sixty of the laws of nineteen hundred
seventy-four or any officer of a school district, board of education,
board of cooperative educational services, or school provided for in
article eighty-five of this chapter or chapter ten hundred sixty of the
laws of nineteen hundred seventy-four unless it shall appear by and as
an allegation in the complaint or necessary moving papers that a written
verified claim upon which such action or special proceeding is founded
was presented to the governing body of said district or school within
three months after the accrual of such claim, and that the officer or
body having the power to adjust or pay said claim has neglected or
refused to make an adjustment or payment thereof for thirty days after
such presentment. In the case of an action or special proceeding for
monies due arising out of contract, accrual of such claim shall be
deemed to have occurred as of the date payment for the amount claimed
was denied.
 2. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary hereinbefore contained in
this section, no action or special proceeding founded upon tort shall be
prosecuted or maintained against any of the parties named in this
section or against any teacher or member of the supervisory or
administrative staff or employee where the alleged tort was committed by
such teacher or member or employee acting in the discharge of his duties
within the scope of his employment and/or under the direction of the
board of education, trustee or trustees, or governing body of the school
unless a notice of claim shall have been made and served in compliance
with section fifty-e of the general municipal law. Every such action
shall be commenced pursuant to the provisions of section fifty-i of the
general municipal law; provided, however, that this section shall not
apply to: (i) any claim to recover damages for physical, psychological,
or other injury or condition suffered as a result of conduct which would
constitute a sexual offense as defined in article one hundred thirty of
the penal law committed against a child less than eighteen years of age,
incest as defined in section 255.27, 255.26 or 255.25 of the penal law
committed against a child less than eighteen years of age, or the use of
a child in a sexual performance as defined in section 263.05 of the
penal law committed against a child less than eighteen years of age; or
 (ii) any civil claim or cause of action revived pursuant to section
two hundred fourteen-j of the civil practice law and rules.
 2-a. Upon application, the court, in its discretion, may extend the
time to serve a notice of claim. The extension shall not exceed the time
limited for the commencement of an action by the claimant against any
district or any such school. In determining whether to grant the
extension, the court shall consider, in particular, whether the district
or school or its attorney or its insurance carrier or other agent
acquired actual knowledge of the essential facts constituting the claim
within the time specified in subdivision one of this section or within a
reasonable time thereafter. The court shall also consider all other
relevant facts and circumstances, including: whether the claimant was an
infant, or mentally or physically incapacitated, or died before the time
limited for service of the notice of claim; whether the claimant failed
to serve a timely notice of claim by reason of his justifiable reliance
upon settlement representations made by an authorized representative of
the district or school or its insurance carrier; whether the claimant in
serving a notice of claim made an excusable error concerning the
identity of the district or school against which the claim should be
asserted; and whether the delay in serving the notice of claim
substantially prejudiced the district or school in maintaining its
defense on the merits.
 An application for leave to serve a late notice shall not be denied on
the ground that it was made after commencement of an action against the
district or school.
 Nothing contained in this subdivision shall affect claims arising out
of contracts entered into by the parties before the effective date of
this subdivision; nor shall anything contained in this subdivision
affect non-contractual claims which have accrued before the effective
date of this subdivision.
 2-b. Except as provided in subdivision two of this section and,
notwithstanding any other provision of law providing a longer period of
time in which to commence an action or special proceeding, no action or
special proceeding shall be commenced against any entity specified in
subdivision one of this section more than one year after the cause of
action arose; provided, however, that nothing contained in this
subdivision shall be deemed to modify or supersede any provision of law
specifying a shorter period of time in which to commence an action or
special proceeding against any such entity. For purposes of this
subdivision, a cause of action against the school district of residence
for reimbursement of tuition costs incurred pursuant to subdivision four
of section thirty-two hundred two of this chapter by the school district
in which a family home at board is located shall arise as of the date
payment for the amount claimed was denied.
 3. The provisions of this section shall not supersede, alter or affect
the provisions of section twenty-five hundred twelve of this chapter.
 4. In any action for personal injuries by a passenger on a school bus
against a school district, school bus operator under contract with a
school district, or any agent or employee of a district or operator
(including, but not limited to, bus drivers, matrons, teachers serving
as chaperones and volunteers) no such person shall be held liable solely
because the injured party was not wearing a seat safety belt; provided,
however, that nothing contained herein shall be construed to grant
immunity from liability for failure to:
 (a) maintain in operating order any equipment required by statute,
rule or regulation;
 (b) comply with applicable statutes, rules or regulations.
 § 3814. Appeal to county judge. 1. Whenever any officer mentioned in
section thirty-eight hundred twelve shall have complied with the
provisions of such section and the meeting shall have refused to direct
the trustees or board of education to levy a tax for the payment of the
costs, charges and expenses claimed by him, such officer shall
immediately give notice to such meeting that he will appeal to the
county judge of the county in which such district is located from the
refusal of said meeting to vote a tax for the payment of such claim.
 2. Within ten days after the refusal of the meeting to allow such
claim such officer shall serve upon the clerk of the district or, if
there be no district clerk, upon the town clerk of the town, an itemized
statement of his claim, duly verified, together with a written notice
that on a certain day named therein such officer will present such claim
to the county judge for settlement.
 3. The clerk upon whom such notice and claim are served shall file the
same in his office and such notice and claim shall be subject to the
inspection of any of the inhabitants of the school district.
 4. The meeting at which notice of the intention of such officer to
appeal to the county judge is given or any subsequent district meeting,
duly called, may appoint one or more of the legal voters of such
district or authorize the trustee or board of education to employ
counsel to appear before the county judge at the time fixed for a
hearing on such claim and protect the rights of the district upon such
settlement. The expenses incurred in the performance of this duty shall
be a charge upon the district and the trustees or board of education
upon a presentation of the account of such expenses with proper vouchers
therefor shall pay the same from any available funds in the district or
include the necessary amount in a tax list to be levied upon the
district.
 5. A refusal of the trustees or board of education to levy such tax
for the payment of such expenses shall be subject to an appeal to the
commissioner of education.
 § 3815. Hearing before county judge. 1. Upon the appearance of the
parties, or upon due proof of service of the notice and copy of the
account, the county judge shall examine into the matter and hear the
proofs and allegations presented by the parties, and decide by order
whether or not the account, or any and what portion thereof, ought
justly to be charged upon the district, with costs and disbursements to
such officer.
 2. Such costs and disbursements shall not exceed the sum of thirty
dollars, and the decision of the county judge shall be final; but no
portion of such account shall be so ordered to be paid which shall
appear to such judge to have arisen from the wilful neglect or
misconduct of the claimant. The account with the oath of the party
claiming the same shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness
thereof. The county judge may adjourn the hearing from time to time, as
justice shall seem to require.
 § 3816. Duty of trustees or board of education to carry out order. It
shall be the duty of the trustees or board of education of any school
district, within thirty days after service upon them or upon the
district clerk of a copy of an order of the county judge and notice
thereof to them or any two of them, to cause the same to be entered at
length in the book of record of said district, and to raise the amount
thereby directed to be paid, by a tax upon the district, to be by them
assessed and levied in the same manner as a tax voted by the district.