 TITLE VIII
 THE PROFESSIONS
Article 130*. General provisions (§§ 6500-6516).
 131. Medicine (§§ 6520-6529).
 131-A. Definitions of professional misconduct applicable to
 physicians, physician's assistants and specialist's
 assistants (§§ 6530-6532).
 131-B. Physician assistants and specialist assistants
 (§§ 6540-6548).
 132. Chiropractic (§§ 6550-6556).
 133. Dentistry, dental hygiene, and registered dental
 assisting (§§ 6600-6613).
 134. Licensed perfusionists (§§ 6630-6636).
 135. Veterinary medicine and animal health technology
 (§§ 6700-6714).
 136. Physical therapy and physical therapist assistants
 (§§ 6730-6743).
 137. Pharmacy (§§ 6800-6831).
 139. Nursing (§§ 6900-6911).
 140. Professional midwifery practice act (§§ 6950-6958).
 141. Podiatry (§§ 7000-7010).
 143. Optometry (§§ 7100-7107).
 144. Ophthalmic dispensing (§§ 7120-7128).
 145. Engineering and land surveying (§§ 7200-7212).
 147. Architecture (§§ 7300-7308).
 148. Landscape architecture (§§ 7320-7328).
 149. Public accountancy (§§ 7400-7409).
 151. Shorthand reporting (§§ 7500-7504).
 153. Psychology (§§ 7600-7606).
 154. Social work (§§ 7700-7710).
 155. Massage therapy (§§ 7800-7806).
 156. Occupational therapy (§§ 7900-7908).
 157. Dietetics and nutrition (§§ 8000-8006).
 159. Speech-language pathologists and audiologists
 (§§ 8200-8209).
 160. Acupuncture (§§ 8210-8216).
 161. Interior design (§§ 8300-8307).
 162. Athletic trainers (§§ 8350-8358).
 163. Mental health practitioners (§§ 8400-8412).
 164. Respiratory therapists and respiratory therapy
 technicians (§§ 8500-8513).
 165. Clinical laboratory technology practice act
 (§§ 8600-8609).
 166. Medical physics practice (§§ 8700-8709).
 167. Applied behavior analysis (§§ 8800-8808).
 ARTICLE 130*
 GENERAL PROVISIONS
 Subarticle 1. Introductory summary.
Section 6500. Introduction.
 6501. Admission to a profession (licensing).
 6501-b. Affirmation of applications.
 6502. Duration and registration of a license.
 6502-a. Renewal of professional license, certification, or
 registration.
 6503. Practice of a profession.
 6503-a. Waiver for entities providing certain professional
 services.
 6503-b. Waiver for certain special education schools and early
 intervention agencies.
 6504. Regulation of the professions.
 6505. Construction.
 6505-a. Professional referrals.
 6505-b. Course work or training in infection control practices.
 6505-c. Articulation between military and civilian professional
 careers.
 6505-d. Evaluation of prior disciplinary history for
 authorization to practice.
 6505-e. Provision of information related to coursework and
 training in nutrition.
 Subarticle 2. State management.
Section 6506. Supervision by the board of regents.
 6507. Administration by the education department.
 6507-a. Registration fee surcharge.
 6508. Assistance by state boards for the professions.
 Subarticle 3. Professional misconduct.
Section 6509. Definitions of professional misconduct.
 6509-a. Additional definition of professional misconduct;
 limited application.
 6509-b. Additional definition of professional misconduct;
 arrears in payment of support; limited application.
 6509-c. Additional definition of professional misconduct;
 failure to comply in paternity or child support
 proceedings; limited application.
 6509-d. Limited exemption from professional misconduct.
 6509-e. Additional definition of professional misconduct; mental
 health professionals.
 6509-f. Limited exemption from professional misconduct; legally
 protected health activity.
 6510. Proceedings in cases of professional misconduct.
 6510-b. Temporary surrender of licenses during treatment for
 drug or alcohol abuse.
 6510-c. Nurse peer assistance programs.
 6510-d. Voluntary non-disciplinary surrender of a license.
 6510-e. Nurses' refusal of overtime work.
 6511. Penalties for professional misconduct.
 Subarticle 4. Unauthorized acts.
Section 6512. Unauthorized practice a crime.
 6513. Unauthorized use of a professional title a crime.
 6514. Criminal proceedings.
 6515. Restraint of unlawful acts.
 6516. Civil enforcement proceedings and civil penalties.
 Subarticle 1. Introductory summary.
 § 6500. Introduction. This title provides for the regulation of the
admission to and the practice of certain professions. This first article
applies to all the professions included in this title, except that
prehearing procedures and hearing procedures in connection with the
regulation of professional conduct of the profession of medicine and
physician's assistants and specialist's assistants shall be conducted
pursuant to the provisions of Title II-A of article two of the public
health law. Each of the remaining articles applies to a particular
profession.
 § 6501. Admission to a profession (licensing). 1. Admission to
practice of a profession in this state is accomplished by a license
being issued to a qualified applicant by the education department. To
qualify for a license an applicant shall meet the requirements
prescribed in the article for the particular profession and shall meet
the requirements prescribed in section 3-503 of the general obligations
law.
 2. a. Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, any
applicant seeking to qualify for a license pursuant to this title who is
the spouse of an active duty member of the armed forces of the United
States, national guard or reserves as defined in 10 U.S.C. sections 1209
and 1211, and such spouse is transferred by the military to this state
shall be afforded an expedited review of his or her application for
licensure. Such application shall be on a form prescribed by the
department and shall include an attestation by the applicant of the
military status of his or her spouse and any other such supporting
documentation that the department may require. Upon review of such
application, the department shall issue a license to the applicant if
the applicant holds a license in good standing in another state and in
the opinion of the department, the requirements for licensure of such
other state are substantially equivalent to the requirements for
licensure in this state.
 b. In addition to the expedited review granted in paragraph a of this
subdivision, an applicant who provides satisfactory documentation that
he or she holds a license in good standing from another state, may
request the issuance of a temporary practice permit, which, if granted
will permit the applicant to work under the supervision of a New York
state licensee in accordance with regulations of the commissioner. The
department may grant such temporary practice permit when it appears
based on the application and supporting documentation received that the
applicant will meet the requirements for licensure in this state because
he or she holds a license in good standing from another state with
significantly comparable licensure requirements to those of this state,
except the department has not been able to secure direct source
verification of the applicant's underlying credentials (e.g., receipt of
original transcript, experience verification). Such permit shall be
valid for six months or until ten days after notification that the
applicant does not meet the qualifications for licensure. An additional
six months may be granted upon a determination by the department that
the applicant is expected to qualify for the full license upon receipt
of the remaining direct source verification documents requested by the
department in such time period and that the delay in providing the
necessary documentation for full licensure was due to extenuating
circumstances which the military spouse could not avoid.
 c. A temporary practice permit issued under paragraph b of this
subdivision shall be subject to the full disciplinary and regulatory
authority of the board of regents and the department, pursuant to this
title, as if such authorization were a professional license issued under
this article.
 d. The department shall reduce the initial licensure application fee
by one-half for any application submitted by a military spouse under
this subdivision.
 § 6501-b. Affirmation of applications. Notwithstanding any other
provision of law to the contrary, any application required by this title
to be filed with the department may, in lieu of being certified or sworn
under oath, be subscribed by the applicant and affirmed by the applicant
as true under penalties of perjury.
 § 6502. Duration and registration of a license. 1. A license shall be
valid during the life of the holder unless revoked, annulled or
suspended by the board of regents or in the case of physicians,
physicians practicing under a limited permit, physician's assistants,
specialist's assistants and medical residents, the licensee is stricken
from the roster of such licensees by the board of regents on the order
of the state board for professional medical conduct in the department of
health. A licensee must register with the department and meet the
requirements prescribed in section 3-503 of the general obligations law
to practice in this state.
 2. The department shall establish the beginning dates of the
registration periods for each profession and provide an application for
registration conforming to the requirements of section 3-503 of the
general obligations law to every licensee currently registered at least
four months prior to the beginning of the registration period for the
respective profession; provided however, the department shall mail an
application forty-five days prior to the end date of such registration
period to any licensee who has not registered.
 3. An application for registration and the required registration fee
shall be submitted together with or as a part of the application for a
license. A person initially licensed or a licensee resuming practice
after a lapse of registration during the last two years of a triennial
registration period shall receive a prorated refund of one-third of the
total registration fee for each full year of the triennial period that
has elapsed prior to the date of registration. Except as provided in
subdivision three-a of this section, the department shall renew the
registration of each licensee upon receipt of a proper application, on a
form prescribed by the department and conforming to the requirements of
section 3-503 of the general obligations law, and the registration fee.
Any licensee who fails to register by the beginning of the appropriate
registration period shall be required to pay an additional fee for late
filing of ten dollars for each month that registration has been delayed.
No licensee resuming practice after a lapse of registration shall be
permitted to practice without actual possession of the registration
certificate.
 3-a. Prior to issuing any registration pursuant to this section and
section sixty-five hundred twenty-four of this chapter, the department
shall request and review any information relating to an applicant which
reasonably appears to relate to professional misconduct in his or her
professional practice in this and any other jurisdiction. The department
shall advise the director of the office of professional medical conduct
in the department of health of any information about an applicant which
reasonably appears to be professional misconduct as defined in sections
sixty-five hundred thirty and sixty-five hundred thirty-one of this
chapter, within seven days of its discovery. The registration or
re-registration of such applicant shall not be delayed for a period
exceeding thirty days unless the director finds a basis for recommending
summary action pursuant to subdivision twelve of section two hundred
thirty of the public health law after consultation with a committee on
professional conduct of the state board for professional medical
conduct, if warranted. Re-registration shall be issued if the
commissioner of health fails to issue a summary order pursuant to
subdivision twelve of section two hundred thirty of the public health
law within ninety days of notice by the department pursuant to this
subdivision. Re-registration shall be denied if the commissioner of
health issues a summary order pursuant to subdivision twelve of section
two hundred thirty of the public health law.
 4. Any licensee who is not engaging in the practice of his profession
in this state and does not desire to register shall so advise the
department. Such licensee shall not be required to pay an additional fee
for failure to register at the beginning of the registration period.
 5. Licensees shall notify the department of any change of name or
mailing address within thirty days of such change. Failure to register
or provide such notice within one hundred eighty days of such change
shall be willful failure under section sixty-five hundred thirty of this
chapter.
 6. The fee for replacement of a lost registration certificate or
license or for registration of an additional office shall be ten
dollars.
 7. An additional fee of twenty-five dollars shall be charged for the
licensure or registration of any applicant who submits a bad check to
the department.
 § 6502-a. Renewal of professional license, certification, or
registration. 1. This section shall apply to healthcare professionals
licensed, certified, registered or authorized pursuant to this title
other than those licensed or registered pursuant to article one hundred
thirty-one of this title.
 2. In conjunction with and as a condition of each registration
renewal, the professionals described in subdivision one of this section
shall provide to the department, and the department shall collect, such
information and documentation required by the department, in
consultation with the department of health, as is necessary to enable
the department of health to evaluate access to needed services in this
state, including, but not limited to, the location and type of setting
in which the professional practices and other relevant information. The
department of health, in consultation with the department, shall make
such data available in aggregate, de-identified form on a publicly
accessible website.
 3. The dates by which the professionals described in subdivision one
of this section must comply with the requirements of subdivision two of
this section shall be determined by the department and may vary by
profession, to allow the development and refinement of necessary program
features and to allow sufficient advanced notice to be provided to
affected professionals. The provisions of this section shall be
effective only if and for so long as an appropriation is made for the
purposes of its implementation.
 § 6503. Practice of a profession. Admission to the practice of a
profession (1) entitles the licensee to practice the profession as
defined in the article for the particular profession, (2) entitles the
individual licensee to use the professional title as provided in the
article for the particular profession, and (3) subjects the licensee to
the procedures and penalties for professional misconduct as prescribed
in this article (sections sixty-five hundred nine, sixty-five hundred
ten, and sixty-five hundred eleven).
 § 6503-a. Waiver for entities providing certain professional services.
1. a. Notwithstanding any laws to the contrary, except as provided in
subdivision two of this section, a not-for-profit corporation formed for
charitable, educational, or religious purposes or other similar purposes
deemed acceptable by the department; or an education corporation as
defined in subdivision one of section two hundred sixteen-a of this
chapter may provide the following services, provided that, except as
otherwise provided in paragraph b of this subdivision, the entity was in
existence prior to the effective date of this section and has applied to
the department for a waiver pursuant to this section by no later than
February first, two thousand twelve:
 (i) services provided under article one hundred fifty-four, one
hundred sixty-three or one hundred sixty-seven of this title for which
licensure would be required, or
 (ii) services constituting the provision of psychotherapy as defined
in subdivision two of section eighty-four hundred one of this title and
authorized and provided under article one hundred thirty-one, one
hundred thirty-nine, or one hundred fifty-three of this title.
 Such services may be provided either directly through the entity's
employees or indirectly by contract with individuals or professional
entities duly licensed, registered, or authorized to provide such
services.
 b. The department may issue a waiver on or after July first, two
thousand twelve to an entity which was created before, on, or after the
effective date of this section if there is a demonstration of need of
the entity's services satisfactory to the department.
 c. After the commissioner prescribes the application form and posts
notice of its availability on the department's website, any entity
described in paragraph a of this subdivision providing services on the
effective date of this section, must apply for a waiver no later than
February first, two thousand twelve. Upon submission of an application,
an entity may continue to operate and provide services until the
department shall either deny or approve the entity's application. After
the department renders a timely initial determination that the applicant
has submitted the information necessary to verify that the requirements
of paragraphs d, e, and f of this subdivision are satisfied,
applications for waivers shall be approved or denied within ninety days;
provided however, that if the waiver application is denied the entity
shall cease providing professional services, pursuant to paragraph a of
this subdivision, in the state of New York.
 d. Such waiver shall provide that services rendered pursuant to this
section, directly or indirectly, shall be provided only by a person
appropriately licensed to provide such services pursuant to article one
hundred thirty-one, one hundred thirty-nine, one hundred fifty-three,
one hundred fifty-four, or one hundred sixty-three of this title, or by
a person otherwise authorized to provide such services under such
articles, or by a professional entity authorized by law to provide such
services.
 e. An application for a waiver to provide professional services
pursuant to this section shall be on a form prescribed by the
commissioner. Such application shall include:
 (i) the name of the entity,
 (ii) the names of the directors and officers of such entity,
 (iii) a listing of any other jurisdictions where the entity may
provide services, and
 (iv) an attestation made by an officer authorized by the entity to
make such attestation that identifies the scope of services to be
provided; includes a list of professions under this title in which
professional services will be provided by such entity; includes a
statement that, unless otherwise authorized by law, the entity shall
only provide professional services authorized under this section;
includes a statement that only a licensed professional, a person
otherwise authorized to provide such services, or a professional entity
authorized by law to provide such services shall provide such
professional services as authorized under this section; and attests to
the adequacy of the entity's fiscal and financial resources to provide
such services.
 Such application shall also include any other information related to
the application as may be required by the department.
 f. Each officer and director of such entity shall provide an
attestation regarding his or her good moral character as required
pursuant to paragraph h of this subdivision. The commissioner shall be
further authorized to promulgate rules or regulations relating to the
standards of the waiver for entities pursuant to this section. Such
regulations shall include standards relating to the entity's ability to
provide services, the entity's maintenance of patient and business
records, the entity's fiscal policies, and such other standards as may
be prescribed by the commissioner.
 g. The entity operating pursuant to a waiver shall display, at each
site where professional services are provided to the public, a
certificate of such waiver issued by the department pursuant to this
section, which shall contain the name of the entity and the address of
the site. Such entities shall obtain from the department additional
certificates for each site at which professional services are provided
to the public. Each entity shall be required to re-apply for a waiver
every three years. If any information supplied to the department
regarding the entity shall change, the entity shall be required to
provide such updated information to the department within sixty days.
 h. Entities operating under a waiver pursuant to this section shall be
under the supervision of the regents and shall be subject to
disciplinary proceedings and penalties. The waivers for such entities
shall be subject to suspension, revocation or annulment for cause in the
same manner and to the same extent as individuals and professional
services corporations with respect to their licenses, certificates, and
registrations, as applicable, as provided in this title relating to the
applicable profession. All officers and directors of such entities shall
be of good moral character. Entities operating pursuant to a waiver and
their officers and directors shall be entitled to the same due process
procedures as are provided to such individuals and professional services
corporations. No waiver issued under this section shall be transferable
or assignable, as such terms are defined in the regulations of the
commissioner.
 i. An entity operating pursuant to a waiver shall not practice any
profession licensed pursuant to this title or hold itself out to the
public as authorized to provide professional services pursuant to this
title except as specifically authorized by this section or as otherwise
authorized by law.
 2. No waiver pursuant to this section shall be required of:
 a. any entity operated under an operating certificate appropriately
issued in accordance with article sixteen, thirty-one, or thirty-two of
the mental hygiene law, article twenty-eight of the public health law,
or comparable procedures by a New York state or federal agency,
political subdivision, municipal corporation, or local government agency
or unit, in accordance with the scope of the authority of such operating
certificate; or
 b. a university faculty practice corporation duly incorporated
pursuant to the not-for-profit corporation law; or
 c. an institution of higher education authorized to provide a program
leading to licensure in a profession defined under article one hundred
thirty-one, one hundred thirty-nine, one hundred fifty-three, one
hundred fifty-four or one hundred sixty-three of this title, to the
extent that the scope of such services is limited to the services
authorized to be provided within such registered program; or
 d. an institution of higher education providing counseling only to the
students, staff, or family members of students and staff of such
institution; or
 e. any other entity as may be defined in the regulations of the
commissioner, provided that such entity is otherwise authorized to
provide such services pursuant to law and only to the extent such
services are authorized under any certificates of incorporation or such
other organizing documents as may be applicable.
 3. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority
of another state agency to certify, license, contract or otherwise
authorize an entity applying for a waiver pursuant to this section, if
such state agency is otherwise authorized under another provision of law
to certify, license, contract or authorize such an entity, nor shall a
waiver pursuant to this section be construed to provide an exemption of
such entity from any certification, licensure, need to contract or any
other such requirement established by such state agency or under any
other provision of law. If a state agency determines that such
certification, licensure, contract or other authorization is required, a
waiver pursuant to this section shall not have the effect of authorizing
the provision of professional services under the jurisdiction of such
agency in the absence of certification, licensure, a contract or other
authorization from such state agency, and the department shall consult
with such agency regarding the need for licensure, contracting,
certification or authorization. In determining an application for a
waiver pursuant to this section, the department shall consider as a
factor in such determination any denial of an operating certificate or
other authority to provide the services authorized pursuant to this
section by a New York state or federal agency, political subdivision,
municipal corporation, or local government agency or unit, and shall not
approve a waiver application authorizing an entity to provide a program
or services where the entity operated such a program or provided such
services for which an operating certificate or license is pending, was
disapproved or was revoked, or a written authorization or contract was
terminated for cause, by one of such agencies, except upon approval of
such action by the appropriate state agency. Such state agencies shall
notify the department, upon request and within a fifteen day period,
whether a waiver applicant has been subject to such disapproval,
revocation or termination for cause or has a pending application for a
license or operating certificate.
 4. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority
of the following entities to provide professional services they are
authorized by law to provide:
 a. any appropriately organized professional entity, including, but not
limited to, those established under the business corporation law, the
limited liability company law or the partnership law; or
 b. any entity operated by a New York state or federal agency,
political subdivision, municipal corporation, or local government agency
or unit pursuant to authority granted by law, including but not limited
to any entity operated by the office of mental health, the office for
people with developmental disabilities, or the office of alcoholism and
substance abuse services under articles seven, thirteen, and nineteen of
the mental hygiene law, respectively.
 5. For the purposes of this section, "professional entity" shall mean
and include sole proprietorships and any professional services
organization established pursuant to article fifteen of the business
corporation law, article twelve of the limited liability company law and
section two and article eight-B of the partnership law.
 § 6503-b. Waiver for certain special education schools and early
intervention agencies. 1. Definitions. As used in this section the
following terms shall have the following meanings:
 a. "Special education school" means an approved program as defined in
paragraph b of subdivision one of section forty-four hundred ten of this
chapter that meets the requirements of paragraph b of subdivision six of
such section forty-four hundred ten; an approved private non-residential
or residential school for the education of students with disabilities
that is located within the state; a child care institution as defined in
section four thousand one of this chapter that operates a private school
for the education of students with disabilities or an institution for
the deaf or blind operating pursuant to article eighty-five of this
chapter that either: (1) conducts a multi-disciplinary evaluation for
purposes of articles eighty-one or eighty-nine of this chapter that
involves the practice of one or more professions for which a license is
required pursuant to this title and no exception from corporate practice
restrictions applies, or (2) provides related services to students
enrolled in the school or approved program that involves the practice of
one or more professions for which a license is required pursuant to this
title and no exception from practice restrictions applies. Such term
shall not include a school district, board of cooperative educational
services, municipality, state agency or other public entity. Nothing in
this section shall be construed to require a child care institution that
conducts multi-disciplinary evaluations or provides related services
through an approved private nonresidential school operated by such child
care institution to obtain a waiver, provided that such school obtains a
waiver pursuant to this section.
 b. "Early intervention agency" means an agency which is approved or is
seeking approval in accordance with title two-A of article twenty-five
of the public health law to deliver early intervention program
multi-disciplinary evaluations, service coordination services and early
intervention program services, and is lawfully operated as a sole
proprietorship or by a partnership, not-for-profit corporation,
education corporation, business corporation, a limited liability company
or professional services organization established pursuant to article
fifteen of the business corporation law, article twelve or thirteen of
the limited liability company law or article eight-B of the partnership
law.
 c. "Early intervention program services" means early intervention
services as defined in subdivision seven of section twenty-five hundred
forty-one of the public health law that are provided under the early
intervention program and authorized in an eligible child's
individualized family services plan.
 d. "Multi-disciplinary evaluation" for purposes of a special education
school means a multi-disciplinary evaluation of a preschool child
suspected of having a disability or a preschool child with a disability
that is conducted pursuant to section forty-four hundred ten of this
chapter or an evaluation of a school-age child suspected of having a
disability or with a disability which is conducted by a child care
institution that operates a special education school or the special
education school operated by such institution pursuant to subdivision
three of section four thousand two of this chapter or by an institution
for the deaf or blind operating pursuant to article eighty-five of this
chapter or an evaluation of a school-age child suspected of having a
disability or with a disability that is authorized to be conducted by a
special education school pursuant to any other provision of this chapter
and the regulations of the commissioner for purposes of identification
of the child as a child with a disability or the development of an
individualized education program for the child.
 e. "Multi-disciplinary evaluation" for purposes of the early
intervention program means a professional, objective assessment
conducted by appropriately qualified personnel in accordance with
section twenty-five hundred forty-four of the public health law and its
implementing regulations to determine a child's eligibility for early
intervention program services.
 f. "Related services" means related services as defined in paragraph g
of subdivision two of section four thousand two, paragraph k of
subdivision two of section forty-four hundred one, or paragraph j of
subdivision one of section forty-four hundred ten of this chapter
provided to a child with a disability pursuant to such child's
individualized education program.
 2. Waiver. a. No special education school may employ individuals
licensed pursuant to this article to conduct components of a
multi-disciplinary evaluation of a child with a disability or a child
suspected of having a disability or to provide related services to
children with disabilities enrolled in the school, and no special
education school may provide such an evaluation component or related
services by contract with an individual licensed or otherwise authorized
to practice pursuant to this article or with an entity authorized by law
to provide such professional services, unless such school obtains a
waiver pursuant to this section. All special education schools approved
by the commissioner as of the effective date of this section shall be
deemed operating under a waiver pursuant to this section for a period
commencing on such effective date and ending on July first, two thousand
thirteen.
 b. No early intervention agency may employ or contract with
individuals licensed pursuant to this article or with a not-for-profit
corporation, education corporation, business corporation, limited
liability company, or a professional services organization established
pursuant to article fifteen of the business corporation law, article
twelve or thirteen of the limited liability company law or article
eight-B of the partnership law, to conduct an early intervention program
multi-disciplinary evaluation, provide service coordination services or
early intervention program services unless such agency has obtained a
waiver pursuant to this section and has been approved in accordance with
title two-A of article twenty-five of the public health law as an early
intervention program provider. All early intervention agencies approved
as of the effective date of this section shall be deemed to be operating
under a waiver pursuant to this section for a period commencing on such
effective date and ending on July first, two thousand thirteen. Nothing
in this section shall be construed to require an early intervention
agency to operate under a waiver in accordance with this section
provided that it is otherwise authorized by law to provide the
applicable professional services.
 3. Obtaining a waiver. a. A special education school and early
intervention agency shall obtain an application for a waiver on a form
prescribed by the department. The department may issue a waiver on or
after July first, two thousand thirteen to an entity which was created
before, on or after the effective date of this section if there is
demonstration of need of the entity's services satisfactory to the
department. The application for an initial waiver shall be accompanied
by a fee of three hundred forty-five dollars. Where the applicant
simultaneously applies for a waiver as a special education school and
early intervention agency the total waiver fee shall be three hundred
forty-five dollars.
 b. Within one hundred twenty days after the commissioner prescribes
the application form and posts notice of its availability on the
department's website, a special education school or early intervention
agency must apply for a waiver. Upon submission of such application, the
school or agency may continue to operate and provide services until the
department shall either deny or approve the application. After the
department renders a timely initial determination that the applicant has
submitted the information necessary to verify that the requirements of
paragraphs c, d and e of this subdivision are satisfied, applications
for waivers shall be approved or denied within ninety days, provided
however that if the waiver application is denied the school or agency
shall cease providing services pursuant to this subdivision in the state
of New York.
 c. Such waiver shall provide that services rendered pursuant to this
section, directly or indirectly, shall be provided only by a person
appropriately licensed to provide such services, except as otherwise
provided in law, to provide such services or by a professional services
entity authorized by law to provide such services.
 d. An application for a waiver to provide professional services
pursuant to this section shall be on a form prescribed by the
commissioner. Such application shall include: (i) the name of the
special education school or early intervention agency; (ii) the names of
the directors or trustees and officers of such school or agency; (iii) a
listing of any other jurisdictions where such school or agency may
provide services; and (iv) an attestation made by an officer authorized
by such school or agency to make such attestation that identifies the
scope of services to be provided; includes a list of professions under
this title in which professional services will be provided by such
school or agency; includes a statement that, unless otherwise authorized
by law, the school or agency shall only provide services authorized
under this section; includes a statement that only a licensed
professional, a person otherwise authorized to provide such services, or
a professional services entity authorized by law to provide such
services shall provide such services as authorized under this section;
and attests to the adequacy of the school's or agency's fiscal and
financial resources to provide such services. Such application shall
also include any other information related to the application as may be
required by the department. A school or agency with an approved waiver
may apply, on a form prescribed by the commissioner, to amend the waiver
to add additional professional services.
 e. Each officer, trustee and director of such school or agency shall
provide an attestation regarding his or her good moral character as
required pursuant to paragraph g of this subdivision. The commissioner
shall be further authorized to promulgate rules or regulations relating
to the standards of the waiver for special education schools and early
intervention agencies pursuant to this section. Such regulations shall
include standards relating to the school's or agency's ability to
provide services, the school's or agency's maintenance of student or
client and business records, the school's or agency's fiscal policies,
and such other standards as may be prescribed by the commissioner.
 f. The special education school or early intervention agency operating
pursuant to a waiver shall display, at each site where services are
provided to the public, a certificate of such waiver issued by the
department pursuant to this section, which shall contain the name of the
school or agency and the address of the site. Such schools or agencies
shall obtain from the department additional certificates for each site
at which professional services are provided to the public. Each school
or agency shall be required to re-apply for a waiver every three years.
An early intervention agency's waiver shall not be renewed unless the
agency is approved to provide early intervention program
multi-disciplinary evaluations, service coordination or early
intervention program services in accordance with title two-A of article
twenty-five of the public health law. Except as otherwise provided in
subdivision four of this section, if any information supplied to the
department regarding the school or agency shall change, the school or
agency shall be required to provide such updated information to the
department within sixty days.
 g. All officers, trustees and directors of such schools or agencies
shall be of good moral character. Schools or agencies operating pursuant
to a waiver and their officers and directors shall be entitled to the
same due process procedures as are provided to such individuals and
professional services corporations. No waiver issued under this section
shall be transferable or assignable; as such terms are defined in the
regulations of the commissioner.
 4. Renewal of waiver. A. All special education school and early
intervention agency waivers shall be renewed on dates set by the
department. The triennial waiver fee shall be two hundred sixty dollars
or a pro-rated portion thereof as determined by the department. An early
intervention agency's waiver shall not be renewed unless the agency is
approved to provide early intervention program multi-disciplinary
evaluations, service coordination nor early intervention program
services in accordance with title two-A of article twenty-five of the
public health law.
 5. Change of location. In the event that a change in the location of
the chief administrative offices of a special education school or early
intervention agency is contemplated, the owner shall notify the office
of professions of the department of the change of location at least
thirty days prior to relocation.
 6. Professional practice. a. Notwithstanding any other provision of
law to the contrary, a special education school operating under a waiver
may employ individuals licensed or otherwise authorized to practice any
profession pursuant to this article to conduct components of a
multi-disciplinary evaluation of a child with a disability or a child
suspected of having a disability or to provide related services to
children with disabilities enrolled in the school or may provide
components of such an evaluation or such related services by contract
with an individual licensed or otherwise authorized to practice pursuant
to this article or a not-for-profit corporation, education corporation,
business corporation, limited liability company or professional services
organization established pursuant to article fifteen of the business
corporation law, article twelve or thirteen of the limited liability
company law or article eight-B of the partnership law authorized by law
to provide the applicable professional services.
 b. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, an
early intervention agency operating under a waiver that is approved in
accordance with title two-A of article twenty-five of the public health
law may employ or contract with individuals licensed or otherwise
authorized to practice any profession pursuant to this article or with a
not-for-profit corporation, education corporation, business corporation,
limited liability company or professional services organization
established pursuant to article fifteen of the business corporation law,
article twelve or thirteen of the limited liability company law or
article eight-B of the partnership law authorized to conduct early
intervention program multi-disciplinary evaluations, provide service
coordination services and early intervention program services.
 c. A special education school or early intervention agency operating
under a waiver shall not practice any profession licensed pursuant to
this title or hold itself out to the public as authorized to provide
professional services pursuant to this title except as authorized by
this section or otherwise authorized by law.
 7. Supervision of professional practice. A special education school or
early intervention agency shall be under the supervision of the regents
of the university of the state of New York and be subject to
disciplinary proceedings and penalties. A special education school or
early intervention agency operating under a waiver shall be subject to
suspension, revocation or annulment of the waiver for cause, in the same
manner and to the same extent as is provided with respect to individuals
and their licenses, certificates, and registrations in the provisions of
this title relating to the applicable profession. Notwithstanding the
provisions of this subdivision, a special education school or early
intervention agency that conducts or contracts for a component of a
multi-disciplinary evaluation that involves the practice of medicine
shall be subject to the pre-hearing procedures and hearing procedures as
is provided with respect to individual physicians and their licenses in
title two-A of article two of the public health law. Notwithstanding any
other provision of law to the contrary, upon revocation or other
termination by the commissioner of approval of the special education
school pursuant to article eighty-nine of this chapter and the
regulations of the commissioner implementing such article or termination
of the early intervention agency pursuant to title two-A of article
twenty-five of the public health law and implementing regulations by the
commissioner pursuant to subdivision eighteen of section forty-four
hundred three of this chapter, the school's or early intervention
agency's waiver pursuant to this section shall be deemed revoked and
annulled.
 § 6504. Regulation of the professions. Admission to the practice of
the professions (licensing) and regulation of such practice shall be
supervised by the board of regents (section sixty-five hundred six) and
administered by the education department (section sixty-five hundred
seven), assisted by a state board for each profession (section
sixty-five hundred eight).
 § 6505. Construction. No definition of the practice of a profession
shall be construed to restrain or restrict the performance of similar
acts authorized in the definition of other professions.
 § 6505-a. Professional referrals. There shall be no monetary
liability on the part of, and no cause of action for damages shall arise
against, any association or society of professionals authorized to
practice under this title, or any employee, agent, or member thereof,
for referring any person to a member of the profession represented by
such association or society provided that such referral was made without
charge as a service to the public, and without malice, and in the
reasonable belief that such referral was warranted, based upon the facts
disclosed.
 § 6505-b. Course work or training in infection control practices.
Every dentist, registered nurse, licensed practical nurse, podiatrist,
optometrist, athletic trainer, and dental hygienist practicing in the
state shall, on or before July first, nineteen hundred ninety-four and
every four years thereafter, complete course work or training
appropriate to the professional's practice approved by the department
regarding infection control, which shall include sepsis, and barrier
precautions, including engineering and work practice controls, in
accordance with regulatory standards promulgated by the department, in
consultation with the department of health, which shall be consistent,
as far as appropriate, with such standards adopted by the department of
health pursuant to section two hundred thirty-nine of the public health
law to prevent the transmission of HIV, HBV, HCV and infections that
could lead to sepsis in the course of professional practice. Each such
professional shall document to the department at the time of
registration commencing with the first registration after July first,
nineteen hundred ninety-four that the professional has completed course
work or training in accordance with this section, provided, however that
a professional subject to the provisions of paragraph (f) of subdivision
one of section twenty-eight hundred five-k of the public health law
shall not be required to so document. The department shall provide an
exemption from this requirement to anyone who requests such an exemption
and who (i) clearly demonstrates to the department's satisfaction that
there would be no need for him or her to complete such course work or
training because of the nature of his or her practice or (ii) that he or
she has completed course work or training deemed by the department to be
equivalent to the course work or training approved by the department
pursuant to this section. The department shall consult with
organizations representative of professions, institutions and those with
expertise in infection control and HIV, HBV, HCV and infections that
could lead to sepsis with respect to the regulatory standards
promulgated pursuant to this section.
 § 6505-c. Articulation between military and civilian professional
careers. 1. The commissioner shall develop, jointly with the
commissioner of the department of veterans' services, a program to
facilitate articulation between participation in the military service of
the United States or the military service of the state and admission to
practice of a profession. The commissioner and the commissioner of
veterans' services shall identify, review and evaluate professional
training programs offered through either the military service of the
United States or the military service of the state which may, where
applicable, be accepted by the department as equivalent education and
training in lieu of all or part of an approved program. Particular
emphasis shall be placed on the identification of military programs
which have previously been deemed acceptable by the department as
equivalent education and training, programs which may provide, where
applicable, equivalent education and training for those professions
which are critical to public health and safety and programs which may
provide, where applicable, equivalent education and training for those
professions for which shortages exist in the state of New York.
 2. The commissioner and the director shall prepare a list of those
military programs which have previously been deemed acceptable by the
department as equivalent education and training in lieu of all or part
of an approved program no later than the thirtieth of August, two
thousand three. On and after such date, such list shall be made
available to the public and applicants for admission to practice of a
profession.
 3. The commissioner and the director shall prepare a list of those
military programs which may provide, where applicable, equivalent
education and training for those professions which are critical to
public health and safety, programs which may provide, where applicable,
equivalent education and training for those professions for which
shortages exist in the state of New York and any other military programs
which may, where applicable, be accepted by the department as equivalent
education and training in lieu of all or part of an approved program no
later than the thirty-first of October, two thousand three. On and after
such date, such list shall be made available to the public and
applicants for admission to practice of a profession.
 4. Such lists shall be prepared annually no later than the thirtieth
of June thereafter with additions and deletions made jointly by the
commissioner and the director and made available to the public and
applicants for admission to practice of a profession on such date.
 § 6505-d. Evaluation of prior disciplinary history for authorization
to practice. An applicant seeking licensure, certification, or
authorization pursuant to this title who has been subject to
disciplinary action by a duly authorized professional disciplinary
agency of another jurisdiction solely on the basis of having engaged in
legally protected health activity, as defined by section 570.17 of the
criminal procedure law, shall not be denied such licensure,
certification, or authorization, unless the department determines that
such action would have constituted professional misconduct in this
state. Provided however, that nothing in this section shall be construed
as prohibiting the department from evaluating the conduct of such
applicant and making a determination to be licensed, certified, or
authorized to practice a profession under this title.
 § 6505-e. Provision of information related to coursework and training
in nutrition. 1. The department, in consultation with the department of
health, shall compile a list of continuing medical education courses and
training opportunities regarding nutrition, which may include but not be
limited to plant-based nutrition, clinically proven methods for the
prevention, reversal, and treatment of diet-related illnesses, and
informational resources regarding racial disparities in outcomes for
diet-related diseases, that are publicly available, and shall distribute
such compilation to physicians who are licensed to practice medicine in
the state.
 2. The compiled list shall be made publicly available on the
department's website and on the department of health's website, and
shall be updated and redistributed no less frequently than every two
years via email.
 3. In compiling such resources, the department shall consult with
organizations representative of professions, and institutions of higher
education, and the department of health shall consult with those with
expertise in nutrition and the prevention, reversal, and treatment of
diet-related illnesses.
 Subarticle 2. State management.
 § 6506. Supervision by the board of regents. The board of regents
shall supervise the admission to and the practice of the professions. In
supervising, the board of regents may:
 (1) Promulgate rules, except that no rule shall be promulgated
concerning article 131-A of this chapter;
 (2) Establish by rule, high school, preprofessional, professional and
other educational qualifications required for licensing in the
professions regulated by this title;
 (3) Charter schools offering educational programs for the professions
regulated by this title, and no such school shall operate in this state
without such a charter, except Columbia University, any school chartered
by special act of the legislature prior to September one, nineteen
hundred seventy-one, and schools specifically authorized to conduct such
programs by the regents;
 (4) Appoint such committees as it deems necessary and compensate
members of such committees who are not members of the board of regents
or the department up to one hundred dollars per day for each day devoted
to committee functions, together with their necessary expenses;
 (5) Waive education, experience and examination requirements for a
professional license prescribed in the article relating to the
profession, provided the board of regents shall be satisfied that the
requirements of such article have been substantially met;
 (6) Indorse a license issued by a licensing board of another state or
country upon the applicant fulfilling the following requirements:
 (a) Application: file an application with the department;
 (b) Education: meet educational requirements in accordance with the
commissioner's regulations;
 (c) Experience: have experience satisfactory to the board and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 (d) Examination: pass an examination satisfactory to the board and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 (e) Age: be at least twenty-one years of age;
 (f) Citizenship or immigration status: be a United States citizen or a
noncitizen lawfully admitted for permanent residence in the United
States;
 (g) Character: be of good moral character as determined by the
department; and
 (h) Prior professional conduct: where an application is submitted for
licensure endorsement in any profession regulated by this title and the
board of regents determines that while engaged in practice in another
jurisdiction the applicant: (i) has been subject to disciplinary action
by a duly authorized professional disciplinary agency of such other
jurisdiction, where the conduct upon which the disciplinary action was
based would, if committed in New York state, constitute practicing the
profession beyond its authorized scope, with gross incompetence, with
gross negligence on a particular occasion, or with negligence or
incompetence on more than one occasion under the laws of New York state,
or (ii) has voluntarily or otherwise surrendered his or her professional
license in another jurisdiction after a disciplinary action was
instituted by a duly authorized professional disciplinary agency of such
other jurisdiction, based on conduct that would, if committed in New
York state, constitute practicing the profession beyond its authorized
scope, with gross incompetence, with gross negligence on a particular
occasion, or with negligence or incompetence on more than one occasion
under the laws of New York state, the board of regents shall evaluate
the conduct and may deny licensure endorsement to the applicant based on
such conduct;
 (7) Direct the department to remedy any error, omission, delay or
other circumstance in the issuance or registration of a license;
 (8) Designate a professional conduct officer, who shall be the chief
administrative officer of the office of the professions, or his
designee, in connection with professional licensing and misconduct
proceedings and criminal matters, such officer to be empowered to issue
subpoenas and administer oaths in connection with such proceedings;
 (9) Establish by rule, standards of conduct with respect to
advertising, fee splitting, practicing under a name other than that of
the individual licensee (when not specifically authorized), proper use
of academic or professional degrees or titles tending to imply
professional status, and such other ethical practices as such board
shall deem necessary, except that no rule shall be established
concerning article 131-A of this chapter; and
 (10) Delegate to department officers the disposition of any licensing
matters pursuant to rules.
 § 6507. Administration by the education department. 1. The
commissioner and the department shall administer the admission to and
the practice of the professions.
 2. In administering, the commissioner may:
 a. Promulgate regulations, except that no regulations shall be
promulgated concerning article 131-A of this chapter;
 b. Conduct investigations;
 c. Issue subpoenas;
 d. Grant immunity from prosecution in accordance with section 50.20 of
the criminal procedure law to anyone subpoenaed in any investigation or
hearing conducted pursuant to this title; and
 e. Excuse, for cause acceptable to the commissioner, the failure to
register with the department. Such excuse shall validate and authorize
such practitioner's right to practice pending registration.
 3. The department assisted by the board for each profession, shall:
 a. Establish standards for preprofessional and professional education,
experience and licensing examinations as required to implement the
article for each profession. Notwithstanding any other provision of law,
the commissioner shall establish standards requiring that all persons
applying, on or after January first, nineteen hundred ninety-one,
initially, or for the renewal of, a license, registration or limited
permit to be a physician, chiropractor, dentist, registered nurse,
podiatrist, optometrist, psychiatrist, psychologist, licensed master
social worker, licensed clinical social worker, licensed creative arts
therapist, licensed marriage and family therapist, licensed mental
health counselor, licensed psychoanalyst, dental hygienist, licensed
behavior analyst, certified behavior analyst assistant, or athletic
trainer shall, in addition to all the other licensure, certification or
permit requirements, have completed two hours of coursework or training
regarding the identification and reporting of child abuse and
maltreatment. The coursework or training shall be obtained from an
institution or provider which has been approved by the department to
provide such coursework or training. The coursework or training shall
include information regarding the physical and behavioral indicators of
child abuse and maltreatment and the statutory reporting requirements
set out in sections four hundred thirteen through four hundred twenty of
the social services law, including but not limited to, when and how a
report must be made, what other actions the reporter is mandated or
authorized to take, the legal protections afforded reporters, and the
consequences for failing to report. Such coursework or training may also
include information regarding the physical and behavioral indicators of
the abuse of individuals with developmental disabilities and voluntary
reporting of abused or neglected adults to the office for people with
developmental disabilities or the local adult protective services unit.
Each applicant shall provide the department with documentation showing
that he or she has completed the required training. The department shall
provide an exemption from the child abuse and maltreatment training
requirements to any applicant who requests such an exemption and who
shows, to the department's satisfaction, that there would be no need
because of the nature of his or her practice for him or her to complete
such training;
 b. Review qualifications in connection with licensing requirements;
and
 c. Provide for licensing examinations and reexaminations.
 4. The department shall:
 a. Register or approve educational programs designed for the purpose
of providing professional preparation which meet standards established
by the department.
 b. Issue licenses, registrations, and limited permits to qualified
applicants;
 c. (i) Issue a certificate of authority to a qualified professional
service corporation being organized under section fifteen hundred three
of the business corporation law or to a university faculty practice
corporation being organized under section fourteen hundred twelve of the
not-for-profit corporation law on payment of a fee of ninety dollars,
(ii) require such corporations to file a certified copy of each
certificate of incorporation and amendment thereto within thirty days
after the filing of such certificate or amendment on payment of a fee of
twenty dollars, (iii) require such corporations to file a triennial
statement required by section fifteen hundred fourteen of the business
corporation law on payment of a fee of one hundred five dollars.
 d. Revoke limited permits on the recommendation of the committee on
professional conduct for the profession concerned, except for limited
permits issued to physicians, physician's assistants and specialist's
assistants which shall be subject to sections two hundred thirty, two
hundred thirty-a, two hundred thirty-b and two hundred thirty-c of the
public health law;
 e. Maintain public records of licenses issued and retain in its files
identifying data concerning each person to whom a license has been
issued;
 e-1. Compile and make available to the New York city department of
buildings in electronic form: (i) a list of all architects and
professional engineers currently licensed by and registered with the
department; (ii) a list of all architects and professional engineers who
currently hold limited permits issued by the department, together with
the conditions and limitations applicable to each such limited permit;
and (iii) a list of all architects and professional engineers whose
licenses have been revoked or suspended by the board of regents of the
state of New York or who are currently on probation, together with the
date of revocation or the date and duration of suspension or probation,
as applicable. The New York city department of buildings shall not
accept plans or other documents submitted in connection with
applications for work permits under articles ten through seventeen of
subchapter one of chapter one of title twenty-seven of the
administrative code of the city of New York by any person representing
that he or she is an architect or professional engineer without
verifying, by means of such lists, that such person meets the
qualifications established by law to practice as an architect or
professional engineer in New York state.
 f. Collect the fees prescribed by this title or otherwise provided by
law;
 g. Prepare an annual report for the legislature, the governor and
other executive offices, the state boards for the professions,
professional societies, consumer agencies and other interested persons.
Such report shall include but not be limited to a description and
analysis of the administrative procedures and operations of the
department based upon a statistical summary relating to (i) new
licensure, (ii) discipline, (iii) complaint, investigation, and hearing
backlog, (iv) budget, and (v) the state boards for the professions.
Information provided shall be enumerated by profession; and
 h. Establish an administrative unit which shall be responsible for the
investigation, prosecution and determination of alleged violations of
professional conduct.
 5. Where an application is submitted for licensure or a limited permit
in any profession regulated by this title and the commissioner
determines that while engaged in practice in another jurisdiction: (i)
the applicant has been subject to disciplinary action by a duly
authorized professional disciplinary agency of such other jurisdiction,
where the conduct upon which the disciplinary action was based would, if
committed in New York state, constitute practicing the profession beyond
its authorized scope, with gross incompetence, with gross negligence on
a particular occasion, or with negligence or incompetence on more than
one occasion under the laws of New York state, or (ii) the applicant has
voluntarily or otherwise surrendered his or her professional license in
another jurisdiction after a disciplinary action was instituted by a
duly authorized professional disciplinary agency of such other
jurisdiction based on conduct that would, if committed in New York
state, constitute practicing the profession beyond its authorized scope,
with gross incompetence, with gross negligence on a particular occasion,
or with negligence or incompetence on more than one occasion under the
laws of New York state, the department shall evaluate the conduct and
the commissioner may deny licensure or issuance of a limited permit to
the applicant based on such conduct.
 6. The commissioner and the department shall perform any other
functions necessary to implement this title.
 § 6507-a. Registration fee surcharge. The commissioner is hereby
authorized to impose and collect a fifteen percent surcharge, rounded
upward to the nearest dollar, on any professional registration fee
imposed under this title that is subject to deposit in the office of the
professions account established pursuant to section ninety-seven-nnn of
the state finance law. Such surcharge shall not be imposed on any such
fee dedicated for deposit in the professional medical conduct account.
 § 6508. Assistance by state boards for the professions. 1. A board for
each profession shall be appointed by the board of regents on the
recommendation of the commissioner for the purpose of assisting the
board of regents and the department on matters of professional
licensing, practice, and conduct. The composition of each board shall be
as prescribed in the article relating to each profession. Within each
board a committee on licensing may be appointed by the board chairman.
 Except as provided in paragraph (a) of this subdivision, the
membership of each professional licensing board shall be increased by
one member, and each such board shall have at least one public
representative who shall be selected by the board of regents from the
general public.
 a. The membership of the professional licensing boards created under
sections sixty-five hundred twenty-three, sixty-eight hundred four,
sixty-nine hundred three, and seventy-four hundred three of this chapter
shall be increased by two members, and each such board shall have at
least two public representatives, who shall be selected by the board of
regents from the general public.
 b. For the purposes of this title, a "public representative" shall be
a person who is a consumer of services provided by those licensed or
otherwise supervised or regulated by the boards created hereunder, and
shall not be, nor within five years immediately preceding appointment
have been:
 (i) a licensee or person otherwise subject to the supervision or
regulation of the board to which appointed; or
 (ii) a person maintaining a contractual relationship with a licensee
of such board, which would constitute more than two percentum of the
practice or business of any such licensee, or an officer, director, or
representative of such person or group of persons.
 2. Each board, or its committee on licensing, shall select or prepare
examinations, may conduct oral and practical examinations and
reexaminations, shall fix passing grades, and assist the department in
other licensing matters as prescribed by the board of regents.
 3. Each board shall conduct disciplinary proceedings as prescribed in
this article and shall assist in other professional conduct matters as
prescribed by the board of regents.
 4. Members of each board shall be appointed by the board of regents
for five-year terms except that the terms of those first appointed shall
be arranged so that as nearly as possible an equal number shall
terminate annually. A vacancy occurring during a term shall be filled by
an appointment by the board of regents for the unexpired term. Each
state professional association or society may nominate one or more
candidates for each appointment to be made to the board for its
profession, but the board of regents shall not be required to appoint
candidates so nominated. Former members of a board may be re-appointed
by the board of regents, on the recommendation of the commissioner, to
serve as members of the board solely for the purposes of disciplinary
proceedings, proceedings relating to the moral character of an applicant
for licensure, and proceedings relating to applications for the
restoration of a professional license. In addition, each board shall
establish a roster of auxiliary members from candidates nominated by
professional associations or societies for appointment by the board of
regents, on the recommendation of the commissioner, to serve as members
of the board solely for the purposes of disciplinary proceedings,
proceedings relating to the moral character of an applicant for
licensure, and proceedings relating to applications for the restoration
of a professional license.
 5. Each member of a board shall receive a certificate of appointment,
shall before beginning his term of office file a constitutional oath of
office with the secretary of state, shall receive up to one hundred
dollars as prescribed by the board of regents for each day devoted to
board work, and shall be reimbursed for his necessary expenses. Any
member may be removed from a board by the board of regents for
misconduct, incapacity or neglect of duty.
 6. Each board shall elect from its members a chairman and
vice-chairman annually, shall meet upon call of the chairman or the
department, and may adopt bylaws consistent with this title and approved
by the board of regents. A quorum for the transaction of business by the
board shall be a majority of members but not less than five members.
 7. An executive secretary to each board shall be appointed by the
board of regents on recommendation of the commissioner. Such executive
secretary shall not be a member of the board, shall hold office at the
pleasure of, and shall have the powers, duties and annual salary
prescribed by the board of regents.
 Subarticle 3. Professional misconduct.
 § 6509. Definitions of professional misconduct. Each of the following
is professional misconduct, and any licensee found guilty of such
misconduct under the procedures prescribed in section sixty-five hundred
ten shall be subject to the penalties prescribed in section sixty-five
hundred eleven:
 (1) Obtaining the license fraudulently,
 (2) Practicing the profession fraudulently, beyond its authorized
scope, with gross incompetence, with gross negligence on a particular
occasion or negligence or incompetence on more than one occasion,
 (3) Practicing the profession while the ability to practice is
impaired by alcohol, drugs, physical disability, or mental disability,
 (4) Being habitually drunk or being dependent on, or a habitual user
of narcotics, barbiturates, amphetamines, hallucinogens, or other drugs
having similar effects,
 (5) (a) Being convicted of committing an act constituting a crime
under:
 (i) New York State law or,
 (ii) Federal law or,
 (iii) The law of another jurisdiction and which, if committed within
this state, would have constituted a crime under New York State law;
 (b) Having been found guilty of improper professional practice or
professional misconduct by a duly authorized professional disciplinary
agency of another state where the conduct upon which the finding was
based would, if committed in New York state, constitute professional
misconduct under the laws of New York state;
 (c) Having been found by the commissioner of health to be in violation
of article thirty-three of the public health law.
 (d) Having his license to practice medicine revoked, suspended or
having other disciplinary action taken, or having his application for a
license refused, revoked or suspended or having voluntarily or otherwise
surrendered his license after a disciplinary action was instituted by a
duly authorized professional disciplinary agency of another state, where
the conduct resulting in the revocation, suspension or other
disciplinary action involving the license or refusal, revocation or
suspension of an application for a license or the surrender of the
license would, if committed in New York state, constitute professional
misconduct under the laws of New York state.
 (6) Refusing to provide professional service to a person because of
such person's race, creed, color, or national origin,
 (7) Permitting, aiding or abetting an unlicensed person to perform
activities requiring a license,
 (8) Practicing the profession while the license is suspended, or
wilfully failing to register or notify the department of any change of
name or mailing address, or, if a professional service corporation
wilfully failing to comply with sections fifteen hundred three and
fifteen hundred fourteen of the business corporation law or, if a
university faculty practice corporation wilfully failing to comply with
paragraphs (b), (c) and (d) of section fifteen hundred three and section
fifteen hundred fourteen of the business corporation law,
 (9) Committing unprofessional conduct, as defined by the board of
regents in its rules or by the commissioner in regulations approved by
the board of regents,
 (10) A violation of section twenty-eight hundred three-d or
twenty-eight hundred five-k of the public health law.
 11. A violation of section six thousand five hundred five-b of this
chapter by a professional other than a professional subject to the
provisions of paragraph (f) of subdivision one of section twenty-eight
hundred five-k of the public health law.
 (12) In the event that the department of environmental conservation
has reported to the department alleged misconduct by an architect or
professional engineer in making a certification under section nineteen
of the tax law (relating to the green building tax credit) the board of
regents, upon a hearing and a finding of willful misconduct, may revoke
the license of such professional or prescribe such other penalty as it
determines to be appropriate.
 (13) In the event that any agency designated pursuant to title four-B
of article four of the real property tax law (relating to the green roof
tax abatement) has reported to the department alleged misconduct by an
architect or engineer in making a certification under such title, the
board of regents, upon a hearing and a finding of willful misconduct,
may revoke the license of such professional or prescribe such other
penalty as it determines to be appropriate.
 (14) In the event that any agency designated pursuant to title four-C
of article four of the real property tax law (relating to the solar
electric generating system tax abatement) has reported to the department
alleged misconduct by an architect or engineer in making a certification
under such title, the board of regents, upon a hearing and a finding of
willful misconduct, may revoke the license of such professional or
prescribe such other penalty as it determines to be appropriate.
 § 6509-a. Additional definition of professional misconduct; limited
application. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of this article
or of any other provision of law to the contrary, the license or
registration of a person subject to the provisions of articles one
hundred thirty-two, one hundred thirty-three, one hundred thirty-six,
one hundred thirty-seven, one hundred thirty-nine, one hundred
forty-one, one hundred forty-three, one hundred forty-four, one hundred
fifty-six, one hundred fifty-nine and one hundred sixty-four of this
chapter may be revoked, suspended or annulled or such person may be
subject to any other penalty provided in section sixty-five hundred
eleven of this article in accordance with the provisions and procedure
of this article for the following:
 That any person subject to the above enumerated articles, has directly
or indirectly requested, received or participated in the division,
transference, assignment, rebate, splitting or refunding of a fee for,
or has directly requested, received or profited by means of a credit or
other valuable consideration as a commission, discount or gratuity in
connection with the furnishing of professional care, or service,
including x-ray examination and treatment, or for or in connection with
the sale, rental, supplying or furnishing of clinical laboratory
services or supplies, x-ray laboratory services or supplies, inhalation
therapy service or equipment, ambulance service, hospital or medical
supplies, physiotherapy or other therapeutic service or equipment,
artificial limbs, teeth or eyes, orthopedic or surgical appliances or
supplies, optical appliances, supplies or equipment, devices for aid of
hearing, drugs, medication or medical supplies or any other goods,
services or supplies prescribed for medical diagnosis, care or treatment
under this chapter, except payment, not to exceed thirty-three and
one-third per centum of any fee received for x-ray examination,
diagnosis or treatment, to any hospital furnishing facilities for such
examination, diagnosis or treatment. Nothing contained in this section
shall prohibit such persons from practicing as partners, in groups or as
a professional corporation or as a university faculty practice
corporation nor from pooling fees and moneys received, either by the
partnerships, professional corporations, university faculty practice
corporations or groups by the individual members thereof, for
professional services furnished by any individual professional member,
or employee of such partnership, corporation or group, nor shall the
professionals constituting the partnerships, corporations or groups be
prohibited from sharing, dividing or apportioning the fees and moneys
received by them or by the partnership, corporation or group in
accordance with a partnership or other agreement; provided that no such
practice as partners, corporations or in groups or pooling of fees or
moneys received or shared, division or apportionment of fees shall be
permitted with respect to care and treatment under the workers'
compensation law except as expressly authorized by the workers'
compensation law. Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit a
medical or dental expense indemnity corporation pursuant to its contract
with the subscriber from prorationing a medical or dental expense
indemnity allowance among two or more professionals in proportion to the
services rendered by each such professional at the request of the
subscriber, provided that prior to payment thereof such professionals
shall submit both to the medical or dental expense indemnity corporation
and to the subscriber statements itemizing the services rendered by each
such professional and the charges therefor.
 § 6509-b. Additional definition of professional misconduct; arrears in
payment of support; limited application. 1. The provisions of this
section shall apply in all cases of licensee or registrant arrears in
payment of child support or combined child and spousal support referred
to the board of regents by a court pursuant to the requirements of
section two hundred forty-four-c of the domestic relations law or
pursuant to section four hundred fifty-eight-b of the family court act.
 2. Upon receipt of an order from the court pursuant to one of the
foregoing provisions of law, the board of regents, if it finds such
person to be so licensed or registered, shall within thirty days of
receipt of such order from the court, provide notice to the licensee or
registrant of, and cause the regents review committee to initiate, a
hearing which shall be held at least twenty days and no more than thirty
days after the sending of such notice to the licensee or registrant. The
hearing shall be held solely for the purpose of determining whether
there exists as of the date of the hearing proof that full payment of
all arrears of support established by the order of the court to be due
from the licensee or registrant have been paid. Proof of such payment
shall be a certified check showing full payment of established arrears
or a notice issued by the court or by the support collection unit where
the order is payable to the support collection unit designated by the
appropriate social services district. Such notice shall state that full
payment of all arrears of support established by the order of the court
to be due have been paid. The licensee or registrant shall be given full
opportunity to present such proof of payment at the hearing in person or
by counsel. The only issue to be determined by the regents review
committee as a result of the hearing is whether the arrears have been
paid. No evidence with respect to the appropriateness of the court order
or ability of the respondent party in arrears to comply with such order
shall be received or considered by the committee.
 3. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of this article or of
any other provision of law to the contrary, the license or registration
of a person subject to the provisions of this title and/or subject to
the provisions of title two-A of article two of the public health law
shall be suspended if, at the hearing provided for by subdivision two of
this section, the licensee or registrant fails to present proof of
payment as required by such subdivision. Such suspension shall not be
lifted unless the court or the support collection unit, where the court
order is payable to the support collection unit designated by the
appropriate social services district, issues notice to the regents
review committee that full payment of all arrears of support established
by the order of the court to be due have been paid.
 4. The board of regents shall inform the court of all actions taken
hereunder as required by law.
 5. This section applies to support obligations paid pursuant to any
order of child support or child and spousal support issued under
provisions of article three-A or section two hundred thirty-six or two
hundred forty of the domestic relations law, or article four, five or
five-A of the family court act.
 6. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of this article or of
any other provision of law to the contrary, the provisions of this
section shall apply to the exclusion of any other requirements of this
article and to the exclusion of any other requirement of law to the
contrary.
 § 6509-c. Additional definition of professional misconduct; failure
to comply in paternity or child support proceedings; limited
application. 1. The provisions of this section shall apply in all
cases of licensee or registrant failure after receiving appropriate
notice, to comply with a summons, subpoena or warrant relating to a
paternity or child support proceeding referred to the board of regents
by a court pursuant to the requirements of section two hundred
forty-four-c of the domestic relations law or pursuant to section four
hundred fifty-eight-b or five hundred forty-eight-b of the family court
act.
 2. Upon receipt of an order from the court pursuant to one of the
foregoing provisions of law, the board of regents, if it finds such
person to be so licensed or registered, shall within thirty days of
receipt of such order from the court, provide notice to the licensee or
registrant that his or her license or registration shall be suspended in
sixty days unless the conditions as set forth in subdivision three of
this section are met.
 3. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of this article or of
any other provision of law to the contrary, the license or registration
of a person subject to the provisions of this title and/or subject to
the provisions of title two-A of article two of the public health law
shall be suspended unless the court terminates its order to commence
suspension proceedings. Such suspension shall not be lifted unless the
court issues an order to the board of regents terminating its order to
commence suspension proceedings.
 4. The board of regents shall inform the court of all actions taken
hereunder as required by law.
 5. This section applies to paternity or child support proceedings
commenced under, and support obligations paid pursuant to any order of
child support or child and spousal support issued under provisions of
section two hundred thirty-six or two hundred forty of the domestic
relations law, or article four, five, five-A or five-B of the family
court act.
 6. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of this article or of
any other provision of law to the contrary, the provisions of this
section shall apply to the exclusion of any other requirements of this
article and to the exclusion of any other requirement of law to the
contrary.
 § 6509-d. Limited exemption from professional misconduct.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, it shall not
be considered professional misconduct pursuant to this sub-article for
any person who is licensed under title eight of this chapter and who
would otherwise be prohibited from prescribing or administering drugs
pursuant to the article that licenses such individual, to administer an
opioid antagonist in the event of an emergency.
 § 6509-e. Additional definition of professional misconduct; mental
health professionals. 1. For the purposes of this section:
 a. "Mental health professional" means a person subject to the
provisions of article one hundred fifty-three, one hundred fifty-four or
one hundred sixty-three of this title; or any other person designated as
a mental health professional pursuant to law, rule or regulation.
 b. "Sexual orientation change efforts" (i) means any practice by a
mental health professional that seeks to change an individual's sexual
orientation, including, but not limited to, efforts to change behaviors,
gender identity, or gender expressions, or to eliminate or reduce sexual
or romantic attractions or feelings towards individuals of the same sex
and (ii) shall not include counseling for a person seeking to transition
from one gender to another, or psychotherapies that: (A) provide
acceptance, support and understanding of patients or the facilitation of
patients' coping, social support and identity exploration and
development, including sexual orientation-neutral interventions to
prevent or address unlawful conduct or unsafe sexual practices; and (B)
do not seek to change sexual orientation.
 2. It shall be professional misconduct for a mental health
professional to engage in sexual orientation change efforts upon any
patient under the age of eighteen years, and any mental health
professional found guilty of such misconduct under the procedures
prescribed in section sixty-five hundred ten of this subarticle shall be
subject to the penalties prescribed in section sixty-five hundred eleven
of this subarticle.
 § 6509-f. Limited exemption from professional misconduct; legally
protected health activity. 1. As used in this section, the term "health
care practitioner" means a person who is licensed, certified, or
authorized under this title and acting within their lawful scope of
practice and includes, but is not limited to persons subject to articles
one hundred thirty-one, one hundred thirty-one-B, one hundred
thirty-six, one hundred thirty-seven, one hundred thirty-seven-A, one
hundred thirty-nine, one hundred forty, one hundred fifty-three, one
hundred fifty-four, one hundred fifty-six, one hundred fifty-nine, or
one hundred sixty-three of this title or any other person designated as
a health care practitioner by law, rule, or regulation.
 2. Any legally protected health activity, as defined by section 570.17
of the criminal procedure law, by a health care practitioner acting
within their scope of practice, shall not, by itself, constitute
professional misconduct under this title, or any other law, rule or
regulation governing the licensure, certification, or authorization of
such practitioner, nor shall any license, certification, or
authorization of a health care practitioner be revoked, suspended, or
annulled, or otherwise subject to any other penalty or discipline
provided in the public health law or this title solely on the basis that
such health care practitioner engaged in legally protected health
activity.
 3. Nothing in this section shall be construed to expand the scope of
practice of any individual licensed, certified, or authorized under this
title, nor does this section give any such individual the authority to
act outside their scope of practice, as defined in this title.
 § 6510. Proceedings in cases of professional misconduct. In cases of
professional misconduct the proceedings shall be as follows:
 1. Preliminary procedures.
 a. Complaint. A complaint of a licensee's professional misconduct may
be made by any person to the education department.
 b. Investigation. The department shall investigate each complaint
which alleges conduct constituting professional misconduct. The results
of the investigation shall be referred to the professional conduct
officer designated by the board of regents pursuant to section
sixty-five hundred six of this article. If such officer decides that
there is not substantial evidence of professional misconduct or that
further proceedings are not warranted, no further action shall be taken.
If such officer, after consultation with a professional member of the
applicable state board for the profession, determines that there is
substantial evidence of professional misconduct, and that further
proceedings are warranted, such proceedings shall be conducted pursuant
to this section. If the complaint involves a question of professional
expertise, then such officer may seek, and if so shall obtain, the
concurrence of at least two members of a panel of three members of the
applicable board. The department shall cause a preliminary review of
every report made to the department pursuant to section twenty-eight
hundred three-e as added by chapter eight hundred sixty-six of the laws
of nineteen hundred eighty and sections forty-four hundred five-b of the
public health law and three hundred fifteen of the insurance law, to
determine if such report reasonably appears to reflect conduct
warranting further investigation pursuant to this subdivision.
 b-1. Legally protected health activities. The department shall not
charge a licensee, acting within their scope of practice, with
professional misconduct as defined in section sixty-five hundred nine of
this subarticle, or cause a complaint made by any person to the
department to be investigated beyond a preliminary review, solely on the
basis that such licensee engaged in legally protected health activity,
as defined by section 570.17 of the criminal procedure law. Such
preliminary review shall determine if such report reasonably appears to
reflect conduct warranting further investigation pursuant to this
paragraph.
 c. Charges. In all disciplinary proceedings other than those
terminated by an administrative warning pursuant to paragraph a of
subdivision two of this section, the department shall prepare the
charges. The charges shall state the alleged professional misconduct and
shall state concisely the material facts but not the evidence by which
the charges are to be proved.
 d. Records and reports as public information. In all disciplinary
proceedings brought pursuant to this section or in any voluntary
settlement of a complaint between the licensee and the department, the
department shall notify the licensee in writing that the record and
reports of such disciplinary proceeding or of such voluntary settlement
shall be considered matters of public information unless specifically
excepted in this article, or in any other law or applicable rule or
regulation.
 e. Service of charges and notice of hearing. In order to commence
disciplinary proceedings under this title, service of a copy of the
charges and notice of hearing must be completed twenty days before the
date of the hearing if by personal delivery, and must be completed
twenty-five days before the date of the hearing if by any other method.
 f. Service of charges and of notice of hearing upon a natural person.
Personal service of the charges and notice of any hearing pursuant to
subdivision two or three of this section upon a natural person shall be
made by any of the following methods:
 (1) by delivery within the state to the person to be served; or
 (2) by delivery within the state to a person of suitable age and
discretion at the actual place of business, dwelling place or usual
place of abode of the person to be served and either: (i) by mailing by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the person to be served at
his or her last known residence, or (ii) by mailing by certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the person to be served at his or her last
address on file with the division of licensing services of the
department in an envelope bearing the legend "personal and
confidential," provided that, in either case: such delivery and mailing
shall be effected within twenty days of each other; service pursuant to
this subparagraph shall be complete ten days after either the delivery,
or the mailing, whichever is later; and proof of service shall, among
other things, identify such person of suitable age and discretion and
state the date, time and place of such service; or
 (3) where service under subparagraphs one and two of this paragraph
cannot be made with due diligence, a copy of the charges and the notice
of hearing shall be served by certified mail, return receipt requested,
to the person's last known address on file with the division of
licensing services of the department or by affixing the changes and the
notice of hearing to the door of either the actual place of business,
dwelling place or usual place of abode of the person to be served;
provided that: service pursuant to this subparagraph shall be complete
ten days after such mailing, and proof of service shall set forth the
department's efforts of due diligence.
 g. Service of charges and notice of hearing outside of the state. A
natural person subject to the jurisdiction of the department may be
served with a copy of the charges and the notice of hearing outside of
the state in the same manner as service is made within the state, by any
person authorized to make service within the state of New York or by any
person authorized to make service by the laws of the state, territory,
possession or country in which service is made or by any duly qualified
attorney or equivalent in such jurisdiction.
 2. Expedited procedures.
 a. Violations. Violations involving professional misconduct of a minor
or technical nature may be resolved by expedited procedures as provided
in paragraph b or c of this subdivision. For purposes of this
subdivision, violations of a minor or technical nature shall include,
but shall not be limited to, isolated instances of violations concerning
professional advertising or record keeping, and other isolated
violations which do not directly affect or impair the public health,
welfare or safety. The board of regents shall make recommendations to
the legislature on or before June first, nineteen hundred eighty-one,
for the further definition of violations of a minor or technical nature.
The initial instance of any violation of a minor or technical nature may
be resolved by the issuance of an administrative warning pursuant to
paragraph b of this subdivision. Subsequent instances of similar
violations of a minor or technical nature within a period of three years
may be resolved by the procedure set forth in paragraph c of this
subdivision.
 b. Administrative warning. If a professional conduct officer, after
consultation with a professional member of the state board, determines
that there is substantial evidence of professional misconduct but that
it is an initial violation of a minor or technical nature which would
not justify the imposition of a more severe disciplinary penalty, the
matter may be terminated by the issuance of an administrative warning.
Such warnings shall be confidential and shall not constitute an
adjudication of guilt or be used as evidence that the licensee is guilty
of the alleged misconduct. However, in the event of a further allegation
of similar misconduct by the same licensee, the matter may be reopened
and further proceedings instituted as provided in this section.
 c. Determination of penalty on uncontested minor violations. If a
professional conduct officer, after consultation with a professional
member of the state board, determines that there is substantial evidence
of a violation of a minor or technical nature, and of a nature
justifying a penalty as specified in this paragraph, the department may
prepare and serve charges either by personal service or by certified
mail, return receipt requested. Such charges shall include a statement
that unless an answer is received within twenty days denying the
charges, the matter shall be referred to a violations committee
consisting of at least three members of the state board for the
profession, at least one of whom shall be a public representative, for
determination. The violations panel shall be appointed by the executive
secretary of the state board. The licensee shall be given at least
fifteen days notice of the time and place of the meeting of the
violations committee and shall have the right to appear in person and by
an attorney and to make a statement to the committee in mitigation or
explanation of the misconduct. The department may appear and make a
statement in support of its position. The violations committee may issue
a censure and reprimand, and in addition, or in the alternative, may
impose a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars for each specification
of minor, or technical misconduct. If the fine is not paid within three
months the matter may be reopened and shall be subject to the hearing
and regents decision procedures of this section. The determination of
the panel shall be final and shall not be subject to the regents
decision procedures of this section. If an answer is filed denying the
charges, the matter shall be processed as provided in subdivision three
of this section.
 d. Convictions of crimes or administrative violations. In cases of
professional misconduct based solely upon a violation of subdivision
five of section sixty-five hundred nine of this article, the
professional conduct officer may prepare and serve the charges and may
refer the matter directly to a regents review committee for its review
and report of its findings, determination as to guilt, and
recommendation as to the measure of discipline to be imposed. In such
cases the notice of hearing shall state that the licensee may file a
written answer, brief and affidavits; that the licensee may appear
personally before the regents review committee, may be represented by
counsel and may present evidence or sworn testimony on behalf of the
licensee, and the notice may contain such other information as may be
considered appropriate by the department. The department may also
present evidence or sworn testimony at the hearing. A stenographic
record of the hearing shall be made. Such evidence or sworn testimony
offered at the meeting of the regents review committee shall be limited
to evidence and testimony relating to the nature and severity of the
penalty to be imposed upon the licensee. The presiding officer at the
meeting of the regents review committee may, in his or her discretion,
reasonably limit the number of witnesses whose testimony will be
received and the length of time any witness will be permitted to
testify. In lieu of referring the matter to the board of regents, the
regents review committee may refer any such matter for further
proceedings pursuant to paragraph b or c of this subdivision or
subdivision three of this section.
 3. Adversary proceedings. Contested disciplinary proceedings and other
disciplinary proceedings not resolved pursuant to subdivision two of
this section shall be tried before a hearing panel of the appropriate
state board as provided in this subdivision.
 a. Notice of hearing. The department shall set the time and place of
the hearing and shall prepare the notice of hearing. The notice of
hearing shall state (1) the time and place of the hearing, (2) that the
licensee may file a written answer to the charges prior to the hearing,
(3) that the licensee may appear personally at the hearing and may be
represented by counsel, (4) that the licensee shall have the right to
produce witnesses and evidence in his behalf, to cross-examine witnesses
and examine evidence produced against him, and to issue subpoenas in
accordance with the provisions of the civil practice law and rules, (5)
that a stenographic record of the hearing will be made, and (6) such
other information as may be considered appropriate by the department.
 b. Hearing panel. The hearing shall be conducted by a panel of three
or more members, at least two of whom shall be members of the applicable
state board for the profession, and at least one of whom shall be a
public representative who is a member of the applicable state board or
of the state board for another profession licensed pursuant to this
title. The executive secretary for the applicable state board shall
appoint the panel and shall designate its chairperson. After the
commencement of a hearing, no panel member shall be replaced. A
determination by the administrative officer of a need to disqualify or
remove any panel member will result in the disqualification or removal
of the panel and cause a new panel to be appointed. In addition to said
panel members, the department shall designate an administrative officer,
admitted to practice as an attorney in the state of New York, who shall
have the authority to rule on all motions, procedures and other legal
objections and shall draft a report for the hearing panel which shall be
subject to the approval of and signature by the panel chairperson on
behalf of the panel. The administrative officer shall not be entitled to
a vote.
 c. Conduct of hearing. The evidence in support of the charges shall be
presented by an attorney for the department. The licensee shall have the
rights required to be stated in the notice of hearing. The panel shall
not be bound by the rules of evidence, but its determination of guilt
shall be based on a preponderance of the evidence. A hearing which has
been initiated shall not be discontinued because of the death or
incapacity to serve of one member of the hearing panel.
 d. Results of hearing. The hearing panel shall render a written report
which shall include (1) findings of fact, (2) a determination of guilty
or not guilty on each charge, and (3) in the event of a determination of
guilty, a recommendation of the penalty to be imposed. For the panel to
make a determination of guilty, a minimum of two of the voting members
of the panel must vote for such a determination. A copy of the report of
the hearing panel shall be transmitted to the licensee.
 4. Regents decision procedures.
 a. Regents review committee. The transcript and report of the hearing
panel shall be reviewed at a meeting by a regents review committee
appointed by the board of regents. The regents review committee shall
consist of three members, at least one of whom shall be a regent.
 b. Regents review committee meetings. The review shall be based on the
transcript and the report of the hearing panel. The licensee may appear
at the meeting, and the regents review committee may require the
licensee to appear. The licensee may be represented by counsel. The
department shall notify the licensee at least seven days before the
meeting (1) of the time and place of the meeting, (2) of his right to
appear, (3) of his right to be represented by counsel, (4) whether or
not he is required to appear, and (5) of such other information as may
be considered appropriate. After the meeting, the regents review
committee shall transmit a written report of its review to the board of
regents. In cases referred directly to the regents review committee
pursuant to paragraph d of subdivision two of this section, the review
shall be based upon the charges, the documentary evidence submitted by
the department, any answer, affidavits or brief the licensee may wish to
submit, and any evidence or sworn testimony presented by the licensee or
the department at the hearing, pursuant to the procedures described by
paragraph d of subdivision two of this section.
 c. Regents decision and order. The board of regents (1) shall consider
the transcript, the report of the hearing panel, and the report of the
regents review committee, (2) shall decide whether the licensee is
guilty or not guilty on each charge, (3) shall decide what penalties, if
any, to impose as prescribed in section sixty-five hundred eleven of
this article, and (4) shall issue an order to carry out its decisions.
Such decisions shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of the
members of the board of regents. If the board of regents disagrees with
the hearing panel's determination of not guilty, it shall remand the
matter to the original panel for reconsideration or to a new panel for a
new hearing. The panel's determination of not guilty on reconsideration
or a new hearing shall be final. The order shall be served upon the
licensee personally or by certified mail to the licensee's last known
address and such service shall be effective as of the date of the
personal service or five days after mailing by certified mail. The
licensee shall deliver to the department the license and registration
certificate which has been revoked, annulled, suspended, or surrendered
within five days after the effective date of the service of the order.
If the license or registration certificate is lost, misplaced or its
whereabouts is otherwise unknown, the licensee shall submit an affidavit
to that effect, and shall deliver such license or certificate to the
department when located.
 5. Court review procedures. The decisions of the board of regents may
be reviewed pursuant to the proceedings under article seventy-eight of
the civil practice law and rules. Such proceedings shall be returnable
before the appellate division of the third judicial department, and such
decisions shall not be stayed or enjoined except upon application to
such appellate division after notice to the department and to the
attorney general and upon a showing that the petitioner has a
substantial likelihood of success.
 5-a. At any time, if the professional conduct officer or his or her
designee designated to investigate a complaint of professional
misconduct of a licensed health care provider or licensed mental health
care provider determines that there is a reasonable belief that an act
that constitutes a sex offense identified in paragraph (h) of
subdivision three of section 130.05 of the penal law has been committed
by the licensee against a client or patient during a treatment session,
consultation, interview, or examination, the professional conduct
officer or the office of professional discipline shall notify the
appropriate law enforcement official or authority.
 6. The provisions of subdivisions one through four of this section
shall not be applicable to proceedings in cases of professional
misconduct involving the medical profession, except as provided in
paragraph m of subdivision ten of section two hundred thirty of the
public health law.
 7. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, persons who assist the
department as consultants or expert witnesses in the investigation or
prosecution of alleged professional misconduct, licensure matters,
restoration proceedings, or criminal prosecutions for unauthorized
practice, shall not be liable for damages in any civil action or
proceeding as a result of such assistance, except upon proof of actual
malice. The attorney general shall defend such persons in any such
action or proceeding, in accordance with section seventeen of the public
officers law.
 8. The files of the department relating to the investigation of
possible instances of professional misconduct, or the unlawful practice
of any profession licensed by the board of regents, or the unlawful use
of a professional title or the moral fitness of an applicant for a
professional license or permit, shall be confidential and not subject to
disclosure at the request of any person, except upon the order of a
court in a pending action or proceeding. The provisions of this
subdivision shall not apply to documents introduced in evidence at a
hearing held pursuant to this chapter and shall not prevent the
department from sharing information concerning investigations with other
duly authorized public agencies responsible for professional regulation
or criminal prosecution.
 9. A disciplinary proceeding under subdivision three or four of this
section shall be treated in the same manner as an action or proceeding
in supreme court for the purpose of any claim by counsel of actual
engagement.
 § 6510-b. Temporary surrender of licenses during treatment for drug or
alcohol abuse. 1. The license and registration of a licensee who may be
temporarily incapacitated for the active practice of a profession
licensed pursuant to title eight of this chapter, except professionals
licensed pursuant to article one hundred thirty-one or article one
hundred thirty-one-b thereof, and whose alleged incapacity is the result
of a problem of drug or alcohol abuse which has not resulted in harm to
a patient or client, may be voluntarily surrendered to the department,
which may accept and hold such license during the period of such alleged
incapacity or the department may accept the surrender of such license
after agreement to conditions to be met prior to the restoration of the
license. The department shall give written notification of such
surrender to the licensing authorities of any other state or country in
which the licensee is authorized to practice. In addition to the
foregoing, the department shall also give written notification of such
surrender, for professionals licensed pursuant to articles one hundred
thirty-two, one hundred thirty-three, one hundred thirty-five, one
hundred thirty-seven, one hundred thirty-nine and one hundred forty-one
of this chapter to the commissioner of health or his designee, and where
appropriate to each hospital at which the professional has privileges,
is affiliated, or is employed. The licensee whose license is so
surrendered shall notify all persons who request professional services
that he or she has temporarily withdrawn from the practice of the
profession. The department may provide for similar notification of
patients or clients and of other interested parties, as appropriate
under the circumstances of the professional practice and
responsibilities of the licensee. The licensure status of such licensee
shall be "inactive" and he or she shall not be authorized to practice
the profession and shall refrain from practice in this state or in any
other state or country. The voluntary surrender shall not be deemed to
be an admission of disability or of professional misconduct, and shall
not be used as evidence of a violation of subdivision three or four of
section sixty-five hundred nine of this chapter, unless the licensee
practices while the license is "inactive"; and any such practice shall
constitute a violation of subdivision eight of said section. The
surrender of a license under this subdivision shall not bar any
disciplinary action except action based solely upon the provisions of
subdivision three or four of section sixty-five hundred nine of this
chapter, and only if no harm to a patient has resulted; and shall not
bar any civil or criminal action or proceeding which might be brought
without regard to such surrender. A surrendered license shall be
restored upon a showing to the satisfaction of the department that the
licensee is not incapacitated for the active practice of the profession,
provided that the department may, by order of the commissioner, impose
reasonable conditions on the licensee, if it determines that because of
the nature and extent of the licensee's former incapacity, such
conditions are necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of
the public. Prompt written notification of such restoration shall be
given to all licensing bodies which were notified of the temporary
surrender of the license.
 2. There shall be appointed within the department, by the board of
regents, a committee on drug and alcohol abuse, which shall advise the
board of regents on matters relating to practice by professional
licensees with drug or alcohol abuse problems, and which shall
administer the provisions of this section. The board of regents shall
determine the size, composition, and terms of office of such committee,
a majority of the members of which shall be persons with expertise in
problems of drug or alcohol abuse. The committee shall recommend to the
board of regents such rules as are necessary to carry out the purposes
of this section, including but not limited to procedures for the
submission of applications for the surrender of a license and for the
referral of cases for investigation or prosecution pursuant to section
sixty-five hundred ten of this article if a licensee fails to comply
with the conditions of an approved program of treatment. There shall be
an executive secretary appointed by the board of regents to assist the
committee. The executive secretary shall employ, or otherwise retain,
the services of a registered professional nurse with appropriate
qualifications in substance abuse and addiction to assist in the
implementation of the program authorized by section six thousand five
hundred ten-c of this article. Determinations by the committee relating
to licensees shall be made by panels of at least three members of the
committee designated by the executive secretary, who shall also
designate a member of the state board for the licensee's profession as
the ex-officio non voting member of each panel. In the case of a
determination relating to a licensed nurse, at least one panel member
must be a registered professional nurse licensed by the state.
 3. Application for the surrender of a license pursuant to this section
shall be submitted to the committee, and shall identify a proposed
treatment or rehabilitation program, and shall include a consent to the
release of all information concerning the licensee's treatment to the
committee. All information concerning an application, other than the
fact of the surrender of the license and the participation in the
program and the successful completion or failure of or withdrawal from
the program, shall be strictly confidential, and may not be released by
the committee to any person or body without the consent of the licensee.
The immunity from disciplinary action conferred by this section shall be
conditioned upon the approval of the treatment or rehabilitation program
by the committee and its successful completion by the applicant and the
elimination of the incapacity to practice. Approval of a treatment or
rehabilitation program by the committee shall not constitute a
representation as to the probability of success of the program or any
assumption of financial responsibility for its costs.
 4. The immunity from disciplinary action conferred by this section may
be revoked by the committee upon a finding that the licensee has failed
to successfully complete the program or that the incapacity to practice
has not been eliminated. Such revocation shall be made only after notice
and an opportunity to be heard, but no adjudicatory hearing shall be
required. The matter shall be referred for appropriate proceedings
pursuant to section sixty-five hundred ten of this chapter. The license
must be returned unless charges are served pursuant to section
sixty-five hundred ten within thirty days after the revocation of the
approval of the special treatment afforded by this section.
 5. The commissioner is authorized to adopt regulations to carry out
the purposes of this section, including but not limited to the notice of
temporary inactive status to be required in different professions and
practice situations and the measures required upon temporary withdrawal
from practice.
 6. No individual who serves as a member of a committee whose purpose
is to confront and refer either to treatment or to the department
licensees who are thought to be suffering from alcoholism or drug abuse
shall be liable for damages to any person for any action taken by such
individual provided such action was taken without malice and within the
scope of such individual's function as a member of such committee, and
provided further that such committee has been established by and
functions under the auspices of an association or society of
professionals authorized to practice under this title.
 7. In addition to the provisions of section two thousand eight hundred
three-e of the public health law, any entity licensed pursuant to
articles thirty-six, forty and forty-four of the public health law, and
any mental hygiene facilities, and correctional, occupational, school
and college health services shall provide a report to the office of
professional discipline when there is a suspension, restriction,
termination, curtailment or resignation of employment or privileges in
any way related to a licensed nurse that is impaired when the impairment
is alleged to have been caused by a drug-related problem. Any person,
facility, or corporation which makes a report pursuant to this section
in good faith shall have immunity from any liability, civil or criminal,
for having made such a report except where the conduct constitutes
negligence, gross negligence or intentional misconduct. For the purpose
of any proceeding, civil or criminal, the good faith of any person,
facility or corporation required to make a report shall be presumed.
Such presumption may be rebutted by any competent evidence.
 8. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the license and
registration of a licensed dentist or pharmacist who may be temporarily
incapacitated for the active practice of their profession licensed
pursuant to articles one hundred thirty-three and one hundred
thirty-seven of this title and whose alleged incapacity is the result of
a problem of drug or alcohol abuse which has not resulted in harm to a
patient or client, may be voluntarily surrendered to, or voluntarily
offered for any alternative disposition with the department, which may
accept and hold such license or make any other disposition regarding
such license deemed appropriate under the circumstances, if the
department determines the health and safety of the public will be
adequately protected thereby, during the period of such alleged
incapacity. The department may accept the surrender of such license
after agreement to conditions to be met prior to the restoration of the
license or the department may treat the license as not surrendered and
may impose conditions to allow the licensee to retain the license. All
other provisions of this section shall be applied to the professions of
dentistry and pharmacy in conformity with this subdivision.
 § 6510-c. Nurse peer assistance programs. 1. As used in this section:
 a. "Drug-related problem" means a problem or problems that are related
to the use, misuse or addiction to drugs or alcohol.
 b. "Participant" means an individual licensed pursuant to article one
hundred thirty-nine of this title who has or may have a drug-related
problem.
 c. "Approved nurse peer assistance program" means a program operated
by the New York State Nurses Association or a statewide professional
association of nurses which has experience in providing peer assistance
services to nurses who have drug-related problems which are designed to
help a participant or a licensee's employer and has been approved by the
department in accordance with criteria established in regulations of the
commissioner.
 d. "Peer assistance services" includes assessing the needs of a
participant, including early identification of drug-related problems,
and providing information, support, and advice as requested by a
participant.
 2. a. The department shall provide funds, including but not limited to
a portion of the funds made available pursuant to the provisions of this
section, for services provided by an approved nurse peer assistance
program. Funds used to provide services shall not be used for the
treatment of participants. Funded services shall include, but not be
limited to:
 (1) providing peer assistance services for nurses with drug-related
problems;
 (2) maintaining a toll-free telephone information line for anonymous
nurses, their employers, and others to provide assistance in the
identification of services and information for nurses dealing with
drug-related problems;
 3. training monitors for the professional assistance program;
 4. arranging for mental health consultants to assess nurses for the
professional assistance program, as needed; and
 5. preparing written assessments of nurses who have been referred from
the professional assistance program.
 b. An additional fee of fifteen dollars shall be paid at the time of
application for licensure and first registration and every registration
by those licensed pursuant to article one hundred thirty-nine of this
title for the purpose of implementing this program. The funds made
available under this provision shall be deposited in the office of
professions special revenue account for its purposes in implementing
this section. The department may use a portion of this amount for its
administrative expenses incurred in implementing this program including,
but not limited to, employment of personnel, the costs of approving and
contracting with a peer assistance program as required by this section
and outreach activities to promote this program.
 3. No approved nurse peer assistance program or individual who serves
in an approved nurse peer assistance program shall be liable in damages
to any person for any action taken or not taken or recommendations made
unless, based on the facts disclosed by a participant, the conduct of
the program or person with respect to the person asserting liability
constituted negligence, gross negligence, or intentional misconduct.
 4. All information concerning a participant gathered by the approved
nurse peer assistance program shall be strictly confidential and may not
be released to any person or body without the consent of the
participant, except upon the order of a court in a pending action or
proceeding. Aggregate data may be released to the committee on drug and
alcohol abuse.
 § 6510-d. Voluntary non-disciplinary surrender of a license. A
professional who is licensed pursuant to article one hundred thirty-nine
of this title may voluntarily surrender a license to the committee on
drug and alcohol abuse when such licensee requests to be monitored
and/or receive peer support services in relation to the use, misuse or
addiction to drugs. The committee shall accept such voluntary
non-disciplinary surrender of a license and provide for expedited
reinstatement of the license if the licensee meets criteria set by the
committee. Such criteria will include, but not be limited to, confidence
that the licensee's use of drugs and/or alcohol has not resulted in harm
to a patient or client and the licensee is not incapacitated, unfit for
practice or a threat to the health, safety and welfare of the public.
Such voluntary surrender, if accepted by the committee, shall result in
an immediate reinstatement of the license and shall provide immunity
from a violation of subdivision three or four of section six thousand
five hundred nine of this article and cannot be deemed an admission or
used as evidence in professional misconduct. Acceptance by the committee
shall not require a report to the department of health or to any
employer or licensing authority of another jurisdiction, nor require any
disclosure to patients or to the public that such license has been
temporarily surrendered, except if it is subsequently determined by the
department that a participant being monitored by the department is found
to have used drugs and/or alcohol which has resulted in harm to a
patient or client.
 § 6510-e. Nurses' refusal of overtime work. The refusal of a licensed
practical nurse or a registered professional nurse to work beyond said
nurse's regularly scheduled hours of work shall not solely constitute
patient abandonment or neglect except under the circumstances provided
for under subdivision three of section one hundred sixty-seven of the
labor law.
 § 6511. Penalties for professional misconduct. The penalties which may
be imposed by the board of regents on a present or former licensee found
guilty of professional misconduct (under the definitions and proceedings
prescribed in sections sixty-five hundred nine and sixty-five hundred
ten of this article) are: (1) censure and reprimand, (2) suspension of
license, (a) wholly, for a fixed period of time; (b) partially, until
the licensee successfully completes a course of retraining in the area
to which the suspension applies; (c) wholly, until the licensee
successfully completes a course of therapy or treatment prescribed by
the regents; (3) revocation of license, (4) annulment of license or
registration, (5) limitation on registration or issuance of any further
license, (6) a fine not to exceed ten thousand dollars, upon each
specification of charges of which the respondent is determined to be
guilty, (7) a requirement that a licensee pursue a course of education
or training, and (8) a requirement that a licensee perform up to one
hundred hours of public service, in a manner and at a time and place as
directed by the board. The board of regents may stay such penalties in
whole or in part, may place the licensee on probation and may restore a
license which has been revoked, provided, in the case of licensees
subject to section two hundred thirty of the public health law, notice
that the board is considering such restoration is given to the office of
professional medical conduct at least thirty days before the date on
which such restoration shall be considered. Upon the recommendation of
the office of professional medical conduct, the board of regents may
deny such restoration. Any fine imposed pursuant to this section or
pursuant to subdivision two of section sixty-five hundred ten of this
article may be sued for and recovered in the name of the people of the
state of New York in an action brought by the attorney general. In such
action the findings and determination of the board of regents or of the
violations committee shall be admissible evidence and shall be
conclusive proof of the violation and the penalty assessed.
 Subarticle 4. Unauthorized acts.
Section 6512. Unauthorized practice a crime.
 6513. Unauthorized use of a professional title a crime.
 6514. Criminal proceedings.
 6515. Restraint of unlawful acts.
 6516. Civil enforcement proceedings and civil penalties.
 § 6512. Unauthorized practice a crime. 1. Anyone not authorized to
practice under this title who practices or offers to practice or holds
himself out as being able to practice in any profession in which a
license is a prerequisite to the practice of the acts, or who practices
any profession as an exempt person during the time when his professional
license is suspended, revoked or annulled, or who aids or abets an
unlicensed person to practice a profession, or who fraudulently sells,
files, furnishes, obtains, or who attempts fraudulently to sell, file,
furnish or obtain any diploma, license, record or permit purporting to
authorize the practice of a profession, shall be guilty of a class E
felony.
 2. Anyone who knowingly aids or abets three or more unlicensed persons
to practice a profession or employs or holds such unlicensed persons out
as being able to practice in any profession in which a license is a
prerequisite to the practice of the acts, or who knowingly aids or abets
three or more persons to practice any profession as exempt persons
during the time when the professional licenses of such persons are
suspended, revoked or annulled, shall be guilty of a class E felony.
 § 6513. Unauthorized use of a professional title a crime. 1. Anyone
not authorized to use a professional title regulated by this title, and
who uses such professional title, shall be guilty of a class A
misdemeanor.
 2. Anyone who knowingly aids or abets three or more persons not
authorized to use a professional title regulated by this title, to use
such professional title, or knowingly employs three or more persons not
authorized to use a professional title regulated by this title, who use
such professional title in the course of such employment, shall be
guilty of a class E felony.
 § 6514. Criminal proceedings. 1. All alleged violations of sections
sixty-five hundred twelve or sixty-five hundred thirteen of this article
shall be reported to the department which shall cause an investigation
to be instituted. All alleged violations of section sixty-five hundred
thirty-one of the education law shall be reported to the department of
health which shall cause an investigation to be instituted. If the
investigation substantiates that violations exist, such violations shall
be reported to the attorney general with a request for prosecution.
 2. The attorney general shall prosecute such alleged offenses in the
name of the state, provided, however, in the event of alleged violations
of article one hundred fifty-five of this title, a district attorney may
prosecute such alleged offenses in the name of the state provided,
however, that any district attorney may prosecute such offenses where
they are incidental to a criminal prosecution instituted by him under
other statutes.
 3. All criminal courts having jurisdiction over misdemeanors are
hereby empowered to hear, try and determine alleged violations under
this title, which constitute misdemeanors, without indictment and to
impose applicable punishment of fines or imprisonments or both. It shall
be necessary to prove in any prosecution under this title only a single
prohibited act or a single holding out without proving a general course
of conduct.
 4. A proceeding before a committee on professional conduct shall not
be deemed to be a criminal proceeding within the meaning of this
section.
 § 6515. Restraint of unlawful acts. Where a violation of this title is
alleged to have occurred, the attorney general, the department or, in
the event of alleged violations of article one hundred fifty-five of
this title occurring in cities having a population of one million or
more, the corporation counsel may apply to the supreme court within the
judicial district in which such violation is alleged to have occurred
for an order enjoining or restraining commission or continuance of the
unlawful acts complained of. The remedy provided in this section shall
be in addition to any other remedy provided by law or to the proceedings
commenced against a licensee under this title.
 § 6516. Civil enforcement proceedings and civil penalties. 1. Issuance
of cease and desist order. Whenever the department has reasonable cause
to believe that any person has violated any provision of section
sixty-five hundred twelve or sixty-five hundred thirteen of this
article, the department may issue and serve upon such person a notice to
cease and desist from such violation. Such cease and desist order shall
be served personally by the department. If personal service can not be
made after due diligence and such fact is certified under oath, a copy
of the order shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested,
to the person's last known address by the department.
 2. Contents of cease and desist order. The cease and desist order
shall be in writing and shall describe with particularity the nature of
the violation, including a reference of the specific provision or
provisions of law alleged to have been violated and an order to the
respondent to cease any unlawful activity. The cease and desist order
shall advise the respondent (a) of the right to contest the order by
requesting a hearing within thirty days of the service of the cease and
desist order before a hearing officer designated by the department (b)
of the right to request a stay of the cease and desist order at the time
a hearing is requested and (c) shall set forth the respondent's rights
at such a hearing pursuant to subdivision five of this section.
 3. Civil penalties. Civil penalties up to five thousand dollars may be
imposed for each violation and the respondent may be ordered to make
restitution to any person who has an interest in any money or property,
either real or personal, acquired by the respondent as a result of a
violation. Whenever the department concludes that civil penalties and/or
restitution may be warranted because of the egregiousness of the
unlawful activity, it may serve, along with the cease and desist order,
a notice of a hearing on the allegations of unlawful activity and the
department's intention to order the respondent to make restitution
and/or impose a civil penalty. The notice should specify the civil
penalty sought for each violation.
 4. Request for hearing. If the respondent to a cease and desist order
contests the cease and desist order, the respondent shall request a
hearing conducted by the department within thirty days of the receipt of
the cease and desist order. Such a hearing shall be scheduled, and the
requesting party notified of the date, within fifteen days of the
receipt of the request for a hearing. If the respondent requests a stay
of the cease and desist order, the hearing officer shall determine
whether the cease and desist order should be stayed in whole or in part
within five working days of the request for a stay. The respondent may
file a written answer to the cease and desist order prior to the
hearing. A stenographic record of the hearing shall be made.
 5. Conduct of hearing. The evidence in support of the cease and desist
order shall be presented by an attorney for the department. The
respondent may appear personally and may be represented by counsel at
the hearing, may produce witnesses and evidence in his or her behalf at
the hearing, may cross-examine witnesses and examine evidence produced
against him or her at the hearing, and may issue subpoenas in accordance
with section three hundred four of the state administrative procedure
act. The hearing officer shall not be bound by the rules of evidence,
but his or her determination that a violation of section sixty-five
hundred twelve or sixty-five hundred thirteen of this article has
occurred shall be based on a preponderance of the evidence. A hearing
which has been initiated shall not be discontinued because of the death
or incapacity of the hearing officer. In the event of a hearing
officer's death or incapacity to serve, a new hearing officer shall be
designated by the department to continue the hearing. The new hearing
officer shall affirm in writing that he or she has read and considered
evidence and transcripts of the prior proceedings.
 6. Results of hearing. The hearing officer designated by the
department shall render a written report which shall include (a)
findings of fact, (b) a determination on each violation alleged in the
cease and desist order, (c) a determination as to whether to accept,
reject, or modify any of the terms of the cease and desist order in
whole or in part, and (d) the civil penalty imposed, if any. A copy of
the hearing officer's written report shall be served upon the respondent
with a notice setting forth the respondent's rights to an administrative
appeal within ten days of the conclusion of the hearing.
 7. Appeals. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final, except
that it may be appealed to a regents review committee within twenty days
of the receipt of the hearing officer's report. The initiation of an
appeal shall not in and of itself affect the validity or terms of the
cease and desist order. The regents review committee shall consist of
three members, at least one of whom shall be a regent. The review shall
be based on the transcript and the report of the hearing officer. The
respondent may appear at the meeting, and the regents review committee
may require the respondent to appear. The respondent may be represented
by counsel. The department shall notify the respondent at least ten days
before the meeting (a) of the time and place of the meeting, (b) of the
right to appear, (c) of the right to be represented by counsel, (d)
whether or not the respondent is required to appear, and (e) of such
other information as may be considered appropriate. After the meeting,
the regents review committee shall transmit a written report of its
review to the board of regents. The board of regents (i) shall consider
the transcript, the report of the hearing officer, and the report of the
regents review committee, (ii) shall decide whether the respondent has
violated each charge in the cease and desist order, (iii) shall decide
what penalties, if any, to impose as prescribed in this section, and
(iv) shall issue an order to carry out its decisions. Such decisions
shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the
board of regents. The order shall be served upon the respondent
personally or by certified mail to the respondent's last known address
and such service shall be effective as of the date of the personal
service or five days after mailing by certified mail. The decisions of
the board of regents under this section may be reviewed in a proceeding
pursuant to article seventy-eight of the civil practice law and rules
brought in the supreme court, Albany county. Such decisions shall not be
stayed or enjoined except upon application to such supreme court
pursuant to article sixty-three of the civil practice law and rules with
notice to the department and to the attorney general.
 8. General enforcement of cease and desist order. In any case where
the cease and desist order is confirmed by the board of regents or where
the respondent does not request an administrative hearing within the
allotted time or does not appeal the decision of the hearing officer
within the allotted time, an action or proceeding may be filed in the
name of the state of New York seeking a restraining order, injunction,
appropriate writ, or judgment against any person who violates the terms
of the cease and desist order.
 9. Special enforcement of civil monetary penalties. Provided that no
appeal is pending on the imposition of such civil penalty, in the event
such civil penalty imposed by the department remains unpaid, in whole or
in part, more than forty-five days after written demand for payment has
been sent by first class mail to the address of the respondent, a notice
of impending default judgment shall be sent by first class mail to the
respondent. The notice of impending default judgment shall advise the
respondent: (a) that a civil penalty was imposed on the respondent; (b)
the date the penalty was imposed; (c) the amount of the civil penalty;
(d) the amount of the civil penalty that remains unpaid as of the date
of the notice; (e) the violations for which the civil penalty was
imposed; and (f) that a judgment by default will be entered in the
supreme court, Albany county unless the department receives full payment
of all civil penalties due within twenty days of the date of the notice
of impending default judgment. If full payment shall not have been
received by the department within thirty days of mailing of the notice
of impending default judgment, the department shall proceed to enter
with such court a statement of the default judgment containing the
amount of the penalty or penalties remaining due and unpaid, along with
proof of mailing of the notice of impending default judgment. The filing
of such judgment shall have the full force and effect of a default
judgment duly docketed with such court pursuant to the civil practice
law and rules and shall in all respects be governed by that chapter and
may be enforced in the same manner and with the same effect as that
provided by law in respect to execution issued against property upon
judgments of a court of record. A judgment entered pursuant to this
subdivision shall remain in full force and effect for eight years
notwithstanding any other provision of law.
 ARTICLE 131
 MEDICINE
Section 6520. Introduction.
 6521. Definition of practice of medicine.
 6522. Practice of medicine and use of title "physician".
 6523. State board for medicine.
 6524. Requirements for a professional license.
 6525. Limited permits.
 6526. Exempt persons.
 6527. Special provisions.
 6528. Qualification of certain applicants for licensure.
 6529. Power of board of regents regarding certain physicians.
 § 6520. Introduction. This article applies to the profession of
medicine. The general provisions for all professions contained in
article one hundred thirty of this title apply to this article.
 § 6521. Definition of practice of medicine. The practice of the
profession of medicine is defined as diagnosing, treating, operating or
prescribing for any human disease, pain, injury, deformity or physical
condition.
 § 6522. Practice of medicine and use of title "physician". Only a
person licensed or otherwise authorized under this article shall
practice medicine or use the title "physician".
 § 6523. State board for medicine. A state board for medicine shall be
appointed by the board of regents on recommendation of the commissioner
for the purpose of assisting the board of regents and the department on
matters of professional licensing in accordance with section sixty-five
hundred eight of this title. The board shall be composed of not less
than twenty physicians licensed in this state for at least five years,
two of whom shall be doctors of osteopathy. To the extent such physician
appointees are available for appointment, at least one of the physician
appointees to the state board for medicine shall be an expert on
reducing health disparities among demographic subgroups, and one shall
be an expert on women's health. The board shall also consist of not less
than two physician's assistants licensed to practice in this state. The
participation of physician's assistant members shall be limited to
matters relating to article one hundred thirty-one-B of this chapter. An
executive secretary to the board shall be appointed by the board of
regents on recommendation of the commissioner and shall be either a
physician licensed in this state or a non-physician, deemed qualified by
the commissioner and board of regents.
 § 6524. Requirements for a professional license. To qualify for a
license as a physician, an applicant shall fulfill the following
requirements:
 (1) Application: file an application with the department;
 (2) Education: have received an education, including a degree of
doctor of medicine, "M.D.", or doctor of osteopathy, "D.O.", or
equivalent degree in accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 (3) Experience: have experience satisfactory to the board and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 (4) Examination: pass an examination satisfactory to the board and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 (5) Age: be at least twenty-one years of age; however, the
commissioner may waive the age requirement for applicants who have
attained the age of eighteen and will be in a residency program until
the age of twenty-one;
 (6) Citizenship or immigration status: be a United States citizen or a
noncitizen lawfully admitted for permanent residence in the United
States; provided, however that the board of regents may grant a three
year waiver for a noncitizen physician to practice in an area which has
been designated by the department as medically underserved, except that
the board of regents may grant an additional extension not to exceed six
years to a noncitizen physician to enable him or her to secure
citizenship or permanent resident status, provided such status is being
actively pursued; and provided further that the board of regents may
grant an additional three year waiver, and at its expiration, an
extension for a period not to exceed six additional years, for the
holder of an H-1b visa, an O-1 visa, or an equivalent or successor visa
thereto;
 (7) Character: be of good moral character as determined by the
department; and
 (8) Fees: pay a fee of two hundred sixty dollars to the department for
admission to a department conducted examination and for an initial
license, a fee of one hundred seventy-five dollars for each
reexamination, a fee of one hundred thirty-five dollars for an initial
license for persons not requiring admission to a department conducted
examination, a fee of five hundred seventy dollars for any biennial
registration period commencing August first, nineteen hundred ninety-six
and thereafter. The comptroller is hereby authorized and directed to
deposit the fee for each biennial registration period into the special
revenue funds-other entitled "professional medical conduct account" for
the purpose of offsetting any expenditures made pursuant to section two
hundred thirty of the public health law in relation to the operation of
the office of professional medical conduct within the department of
health, provided that for each biennial registration fee paid by the
licensee using a credit card, the amount of the administrative fee
incurred by the department in processing such credit card transaction
shall be deposited by the comptroller in the office of the professions
account established by section ninety-seven-nnn of the state finance
law. The amount of the funds expended as a result of such increase shall
not be greater than such fees collected over the registration period.
 (9) For every license or registration issued after the effective date
of this subdivision, an additional fee of thirty dollars shall be paid
and deposited in the special revenue fund entitled "the professional
medical conduct account" for the purpose of offsetting any expenditures
made pursuant to subdivision fifteen of section two hundred thirty of
the public health law. The amount of such funds expended for such
purpose shall not be greater than such additional fees collected over
the licensure period or for the duration of such program if less than
the licensure period.
 (10) A physician shall not be required to pay any fee under this
section if he or she certifies to the department that for the period of
registration or licensure, he or she shall only practice medicine
without compensation or the expectation or promise of compensation. The
following shall not be considered compensation for the purposes of this
subdivision: (a) nominal payment solely to enable the physician to be
considered an employee of a health care provider, or (b) providing
liability coverage to the physician relating to the services provided.
 (11) No physician may be re-registered unless he or she, as part of
the re-registration application, includes an attestation made under
penalty of perjury, in a form prescribed by the commissioner, that he or
she has, within the six months prior to submission of the
re-registration application, updated his or her physician profile in
accordance with subdivision four of section twenty-nine hundred
ninety-five-a of the public health law.
 § 6525. Limited permits. Permits limited as to eligibility, practice
and duration, shall be issued by the department to eligible applicants,
as follows:
 1. Eligibility: The following persons shall be eligible for a limited
permit:
 (1) A person who fulfills all requirements for a license as a
physician except those relating to the examination and citizenship or
permanent residence in the United States;
 (2) A foreign physician who holds a standard certificate from the
educational council for foreign medical graduates or who has passed an
examination satisfactory to the state board for medicine and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations; or
 (3) A foreign physician or a foreign intern who is in this country on
a non-immigration visa for the continuation of medical study, pursuant
to the exchange student program of the United States department of
state.
 2. Limit of practice. A permittee shall be authorized to practice
medicine only under the supervision of a licensed physician and only in
a public, voluntary, or proprietary hospital.
 3. Duration. A limited permit shall be valid for two years. It may be
renewed biennially at the discretion of the department.
 4. Fees. The fee for each limited permit and for each renewal shall be
one hundred five dollars.
 § 6526. Exempt persons. The following persons under the following
limitations may practice medicine within the state without a license:
 1. Any physician who is employed as a resident in a public hospital,
provided such practice is limited to such hospital and is under the
supervision of a licensed physician;
 2. Any physician who is licensed in a bordering state and who resides
near a border of this state, provided such practice is limited in this
state to the vicinity of such border and provided such physician does
not maintain an office or place to meet patients or receive calls within
this state;
 3. Any physician who is licensed in another state or country and who
is meeting a physician licensed in this state, for purposes of
consultation, provided such practice is limited to such consultation;
 4. Any physician who is licensed in another state or country, who is
visiting a medical school or teaching hospital in this state to receive
medical instruction for a period not to exceed six months or to conduct
medical instruction, provided such practice is limited to such
instruction and is under the supervision of a licensed physician;
 5. Any physician who is authorized by a foreign government to practice
in relation to its diplomatic, consular or maritime staffs, provided
such practice is limited to such staffs;
 6. Any commissioned medical officer who is serving in the United
States armed forces or public health service or any physician who is
employed in the United States Veterans Administration, provided such
practice is limited to such service or employment;
 7. Any intern who is employed by a hospital and who is a graduate of a
medical school in the United States or Canada, provided such practice is
limited to such hospital and is under the supervision of a licensed
physician; or
 8. Any medical student who is performing a clinical clerkship or
similar function in a hospital and who is matriculated in a medical
school which meets standards satisfactory to the department, provided
such practice is limited to such clerkship or similar function in such
hospital.
 9. Any dentist or dental school graduate eligible for licensure in the
state who administers anesthesia as part of a hospital residency program
established for the purpose of training dentists in anesthesiology.
 10. (a) Any physician who is licensed and in good standing in another
state or territory, and who has a written agreement to provide medical
services to athletes and team personnel of a United States sports team
recognized by the United States Olympic committee or an out-of-state
secondary school, institution of postsecondary education, or
professional athletic organization sports team, may provide medical
services to such athletes and team personnel at a discrete sanctioned
team sporting event in this state as defined by the commissioner in
regulations, provided such services are provided only to such athletes
and team personnel at the discrete sanctioned team sporting event. Any
such medical services shall be provided only five days before through
three days after each discrete sanctioned team sporting event.
 (b) Any person practicing as a physician in New York state pursuant to
this subdivision shall be subject to the personal and subject matter
jurisdiction and disciplinary and regulatory authority of the board of
regents and the state board for professional medical conduct established
pursuant to section two hundred thirty of the public health law as if he
or she is a licensee and as if the exemption pursuant to this
subdivision is a license. Such individual shall comply with applicable
provisions of this title, the public health law, the rules of the board
of regents, the state board for professional medical conduct established
pursuant to section two hundred thirty of the public health law, and the
regulations of the commissioner and the commissioner of health, relating
to professional misconduct, disciplinary proceedings and penalties for
professional misconduct.
 § 6527. Special provisions. 1. A not-for-profit medical or dental
expense indemnity corporation or a hospital service corporation
organized under the insurance law may employ licensed physicians and
enter into contracts with partnerships or medical corporations organized
under article forty-four of the public health law, health maintenance
organizations possessing a certificate of authority pursuant to article
forty-four of the public health law, professional corporations organized
under article fifteen of the business corporation law or other groups of
physicians to practice medicine on its behalf for persons insured under
its contracts or policies.
 2. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of any general, special
or local law, any licensed physician who voluntarily and without the
expectation of monetary compensation renders first aid or emergency
treatment at the scene of an accident or other emergency, outside a
hospital, doctor's office or any other place having proper and necessary
medical equipment, to a person who is unconscious, ill or injured, shall
not be liable for damages for injuries alleged to have been sustained by
such person or for damages for the death of such person alleged to have
occurred by reason of an act or omission in the rendering of such first
aid or emergency treatment unless it is established that such injuries
were or such death was caused by gross negligence on the part of such
physician. Nothing in this subdivision shall be deemed or construed to
relieve a licensed physician from liability for damages for injuries or
death caused by an act or omission on the part of a physician while
rendering professional services in the normal and ordinary course of his
practice.
 3. No individual who serves as a member of (a) a committee established
to administer a utilization review plan of a hospital, including a
hospital as defined in article twenty-eight of the public health law or
a hospital as defined in subdivision ten of section 1.03 of the mental
hygiene law, or (b) a committee having the responsibility of the
investigation of an incident reported pursuant to section 29.29 of the
mental hygiene law or the evaluation and improvement of the quality of
care rendered in a hospital as defined in article twenty-eight of the
public health law or a hospital as defined in subdivision ten of section
1.03 of the mental hygiene law, or (c) any medical review committee or
subcommittee thereof of a local, county or state medical, dental,
podiatry or optometrical society, any such society itself, a
professional standards review organization or an individual when such
committee, subcommittee, society, organization or individual is
performing any medical or quality assurance review function including
the investigation of an incident reported pursuant to section 29.29 of
the mental hygiene law, either described in clauses (a) and (b) of this
subdivision, required by law, or involving any controversy or dispute
between (i) a physician, dentist, podiatrist or optometrist or hospital
administrator and a patient concerning the diagnosis, treatment or care
of such patient or the fees or charges therefor or (ii) a physician,
dentist, podiatrist or optometrist or hospital administrator and a
provider of medical, dental, podiatric or optometrical services
concerning any medical or health charges or fees of such physician,
dentist, podiatrist or optometrist, or (d) a committee appointed
pursuant to section twenty-eight hundred five-j of the public health law
to participate in the medical and dental malpractice prevention program,
or (e) any individual who participated in the preparation of incident
reports required by the department of health pursuant to section
twenty-eight hundred five-l of the public health law, or (f) a committee
established to administer a utilization review plan, or a committee
having the responsibility of evaluation and improvement of the quality
of care rendered, in a health maintenance organization organized under
article forty-four of the public health law or article forty-three of
the insurance law, including a committee of an individual practice
association or medical group acting pursuant to a contract with such a
health maintenance organization, shall be liable in damages to any
person for any action taken or recommendations made, by him within the
scope of his function in such capacity provided that (a) such individual
has taken action or made recommendations within the scope of his
function and without malice, and (b) in the reasonable belief after
reasonable investigation that the act or recommendation was warranted,
based upon the facts disclosed.
 Neither the proceedings nor the records relating to performance of a
medical or a quality assurance review function or participation in a
medical and dental malpractice prevention program nor any report
required by the department of health pursuant to section twenty-eight
hundred five-l of the public health law described herein, including the
investigation of an incident reported pursuant to section 29.29 of the
mental hygiene law, shall be subject to disclosure under article
thirty-one of the civil practice law and rules except as hereinafter
provided or as provided by any other provision of law. No person in
attendance at a meeting when a medical or a quality assurance review or
a medical and dental malpractice prevention program or an incident
reporting function described herein was performed, including the
investigation of an incident reported pursuant to section 29.29 of the
mental hygiene law, shall be required to testify as to what transpired
thereat. The prohibition relating to discovery of testimony shall not
apply to the statements made by any person in attendance at such a
meeting who is a party to an action or proceeding the subject matter of
which was reviewed at such meeting.
 4. This article shall not be construed to affect or prevent the
following:
 a. The furnishing of medical assistance in an emergency;
 b. The practice of the religious tenets of any church;
 c. A physician from refusing to perform an act constituting the
practice of medicine to which he is conscientiously opposed by reason of
religious training and belief.
 d. The organization of a medical corporation under article forty-four
of the public health law, the organization of a university faculty
practice corporation under section fourteen hundred twelve of the
not-for-profit corporation law or the organization of a professional
service corporation under article fifteen of the business corporation
law.
 e. The physician's use of whatever medical care, conventional or
non-conventional, which effectively treats human disease, pain, injury,
deformity or physical condition.
 5. There shall be no monetary liability on the part of, and no cause
of action for damages shall arise against, any person, partnership,
corporation, firm, society, or other entity on account of the
communication of information in the possession of such person or entity,
or on account of any recommendation or evaluation, regarding the
qualifications, fitness, or professional conduct or practices of a
physician, to any governmental agency, medical or specialists society, a
hospital as defined in article twenty-eight of the public health law, a
hospital as defined in subdivision ten of section 1.03 of the mental
hygiene law, or a health maintenance organization organized under
article forty-four of the public health law or article forty-three of
the insurance law, including a committee of an individual practice
association or medical group acting pursuant to a contract with a health
maintenance organization. The foregoing shall not apply to information
which is untrue and communicated with malicious intent.
 6. A licensed physician may prescribe and order a non-patient specific
regimen to a registered professional nurse, pursuant to regulations
promulgated by the commissioner, and consistent with the public health
law, for:
 (a) administering immunizations.
 (b) the emergency treatment of anaphylaxis.
 (c) administering purified protein derivative (PPD) tests or other
tests to detect or screen for tuberculosis infections.
 (d) administering tests to determine the presence of the human
immunodeficiency virus.
 (e) administering tests to determine the presence of the hepatitis C
virus.
 (f) the urgent or emergency treatment of opioid related overdose or
suspected opioid related overdose.
 (g) screening of persons at increased risk of syphilis, gonorrhea and
chlamydia.
 * (h) administering tests to determine the presence of COVID-19 or its
antibodies or influenza virus.
 * NB Repealed July 1, 2026
 (i) administering electrocardiogram tests to detect signs and symptoms
of acute coronary syndrome.
 (j) administering point-of-care blood glucose tests to evaluate acute
mental status changes in persons with suspected hypoglycemia.
 (k) administering tests and intravenous lines to persons that meet
severe sepsis and septic shock criteria.
 (l) administering tests to determine pregnancy.
 7. A licensed physician may prescribe and order a patient specific
order or non-patient specific regimen to a licensed pharmacist, pursuant
to regulations promulgated by the commissioner, and consistent with the
public health law, for: (a) administering immunizations to prevent
influenza to patients two years of age or older; and (b) administering
immunizations to prevent pneumococcal, acute herpes zoster, hepatitis A,
hepatitis B, human papillomavirus, measles, mumps, rubella, varicella,
COVID-19, meningococcal, tetanus, diphtheria or pertussis disease and
medications required for emergency treatment of anaphylaxis to patients
eighteen years of age or older; and (c) administering other
immunizations recommended by the advisory committee on immunization
practices of the centers for disease control and prevention for patients
eighteen years of age or older if the commissioner of health in
consultation with the commissioner determines that an immunization: (i)
(A) may be safely administered by a licensed pharmacist within their
lawful scope of practice; and (B) is needed to prevent the transmission
of a reportable communicable disease that is prevalent in New York
state; or (ii) is a recommended immunization for such patients who: (A)
meet age requirements, (B) lack documentation of such immunization, (C)
lack evidence of past infection, or (D) have an additional risk factor
or another indication as recommended by the advisory committee on
immunization practices of the centers for disease control and
prevention. Nothing in this subdivision shall authorize unlicensed
persons to administer immunizations, vaccines or other drugs.
 7-a. A licensed physician may prescribe and order a patient specific
order or non-patient specific order to a licensed pharmacist, pursuant
to regulations promulgated by the commissioner in consultation with the
commissioner of health, and consistent with the public health law, for
dispensing up to a seven day starter pack of HIV post-exposure
prophylaxis for the purpose of preventing human immunodeficiency virus
infection following a potential human immunodeficiency virus exposure.
 8. Nothing in this article shall prohibit the provision of
psychotherapy as defined in subdivision two of section eighty-four
hundred one of this title to the extent permissible within the scope of
practice of medicine, by any not-for-profit corporation or education
corporation providing services within the state of New York and
operating under a waiver pursuant to section sixty-five hundred three-a
of this title, provided that such entities offering such psychotherapy
services shall only provide such services through an individual
appropriately licensed or otherwise authorized to provide such services
or a professional entity authorized by law to provide such services.
 9. (a) Nothing in this article shall be construed to affect or prevent
a person in training or trained and deemed qualified by a supervising
licensed physician, to assist the licensed physician in the care of a
patient for the purpose of instilling mydriatic or cycloplegic eye drops
and anesthetic eye drops in conjunction with such dilating drops to the
surface of the eye of a patient, provided that the person instilling
such eye drops is:
 (i) under the on-site supervision of a supervising licensed physician;
 (ii) at least eighteen years of age; and
 (iii) complies with standards issued by the department.
 (b) The supervising licensed physician shall submit a form prescribed
by the department detailing the identity of each person instilling
mydriatic or cycloplegic eye drops and anesthetic eye drops in
conjunction with such dilating drops to the surface of the eye of a
patient, under his or her supervision, attesting to compliance with the
above requirements.
 (c) The supervising licensed physician's use of any such person
pursuant to the terms of this subdivision shall be undertaken with
professional judgment in order to ensure the safety and well-being of
the patient. Such use shall subject the licensed physician to the full
disciplinary and regulatory authority of the office of professional
medical conduct and the board of regents. The licensed physician must
notify the patient or the patient's designated health care surrogate
that the licensed physician may utilize the services of an individual to
administer certain eye drops and must provide the patient or the
patient's designated health care surrogate the opportunity to refuse the
licensed physician's plan to utilize such person.
 10. A licensed physician may prescribe and order a
non-patient-specific regimen to a licensed pharmacist, for insulin and
related supplies pursuant to section sixty-eight hundred one of this
title.
 11. A licensed physician may prescribe and order a non-patient
specific order to a pharmacist licensed and located in the state,
pursuant to regulations promulgated by the commissioner, and consistent
with section sixty-eight hundred one of this title, for dispensing
self-administered hormonal contraceptives as defined in section
sixty-eight hundred two of this title.
 § 6528. Qualification of certain applicants for licensure. (a)
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article or any law to the
contrary, an individual who at the time of his enrollment in a medical
school outside the United States is a resident of the United States
shall be eligible for licensure in this state if he has satisfied the
requirements of subdivisions one, five, six, seven and eight of section
sixty-five hundred twenty-four of this chapter and:
 (1) has studied medicine in a medical school located outside the
United States which is recognized by the World Health Organization;
 (2) has completed all of the formal requirements of the foreign
medical school except internship and/or social service;
 (3) has attained a score satisfactory to a medical school approved by
the Liaison Committee on Medical Education on a qualifying examination
acceptable to the state board for medicine, and has satisfactorily
completed one academic year of supervised clinical training under the
direction of such medical school;
 (4) has completed the post-graduate hospital training required by the
Board of all applicants for licensure; and
 (5) has passed the examination required by the Board of all applicants
for licensure.
 (b) Satisfaction of the requirements of paragraphs (1), (2), and (3)
of subdivision (a) of this section shall be in lieu of the completion of
any foreign internship and/or social service requirements, and no such
requirements shall be a condition of licensure as a physician in this
State.
 (c) Satisfaction of the requirements of paragraphs (1), (2), and (3)
of subdivision (a) of this section shall be in lieu of certification by
the Educational Council for Foreign Medical Graduates, and such
certification shall not be a condition of licensure as a physician in
this State for candidates who have completed the requirements of
subdivision (a) of this section.
 (d) No hospital licensed by this State, or operated by the State or a
political subdivision thereof, or which receives state financial
assistance, directly or indirectly, shall require an individual who has
satisfied the requirements of paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) of
subdivision (a) of this section, and who at the time of his enrollment
in a medical school outside the United States is a resident of the
United States, to satisfy any further education or examination
requirements prior to commencing an internship or residency.
 (e) A document granted by a medical school located outside the United
States which is recognized by the World Health Organization issued after
the completion of all the formal requirements of such foreign medical
school except internship and/or social service shall, upon certification
by the medical school in which such training was received of
satisfactory completion by the person to whom such document was issued
of the requirements listed in paragraph (3) of subdivision (a) of this
section, be deemed the equivalent of a degree of doctor of medicine for
purposes of licensure and practice as a physician in this State.
 § 6529. Power of board of regents regarding certain physicians.
Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the board of
regents is authorized, in its discretion, to confer the degree of doctor
of medicine (M.D.) upon physicians who are licensed pursuant to section
sixty-five hundred twenty-four or sixty-five hundred twenty-eight of
this chapter. Each applicant shall pay a fee of three hundred dollars to
the education department for the issuance of such degree.
 ARTICLE 131-A
 DEFINITIONS OF PROFESSIONAL MISCONDUCT APPLICABLE TO PHYSICIANS,
 PHYSICIAN'S ASSISTANTS AND SPECIALIST'S ASSISTANTS
Section 6530. Definitions of professional misconduct.
 6531. Additional definition of professional misconduct,
 limited application.
 6531-a. Additional definition of professional misconduct; mental
 health professionals.
 6531-b. Exceptions; reproductive health services.
 6532. Enforcement, administration and interpretation of this
 article.
 § 6530. Definitions of professional misconduct. Each of the following
is professional misconduct, and any licensee found guilty of such
misconduct under the procedures prescribed in section two hundred thirty
of the public health law shall be subject to penalties as prescribed in
section two hundred thirty-a of the public health law except that the
charges may be dismissed in the interest of justice:
 1. Obtaining the license fraudulently;
 2. Practicing the profession fraudulently or beyond its authorized
scope;
 3. Practicing the profession with negligence on more than one
occasion;
 4. Practicing the profession with gross negligence on a particular
occasion;
 5. Practicing the profession with incompetence on more than one
occasion;
 6. Practicing the profession with gross incompetence;
 7. Practicing the profession while impaired by alcohol, drugs,
physical disability, or mental disability;
 8. Being a habitual abuser of alcohol, or being dependent on or a
habitual user of narcotics, barbiturates, amphetamines, hallucinogens,
or other drugs having similar effects, except for a licensee who is
maintained on an approved therapeutic regimen which does not impair the
ability to practice, or having a psychiatric condition which impairs the
licensee's ability to practice;
 9. (a) Being convicted of committing an act constituting a crime
under:
 (i) New York state law or,
 (ii) federal law or,
 (iii) the law of another jurisdiction and which, if committed within
this state, would have constituted a crime under New York state law;
 (b) Having been found guilty of improper professional practice or
professional misconduct by a duly authorized professional disciplinary
agency of another state where the conduct upon which the finding was
based would, if committed in New York state, constitute professional
misconduct under the laws of New York state;
 (c) Having been found guilty in an adjudicatory proceeding of
violating a state or federal statute or regulation, pursuant to a final
decision or determination, and when no appeal is pending, or after
resolution of the proceeding by stipulation or agreement, and when the
violation would constitute professional misconduct pursuant to this
section;
 (d) Having his or her license to practice medicine revoked, suspended
or having other disciplinary action taken, or having his or her
application for a license refused, revoked or suspended or having
voluntarily or otherwise surrendered his or her license after a
disciplinary action was instituted by a duly authorized professional
disciplinary agency of another state, where the conduct resulting in the
revocation, suspension or other disciplinary action involving the
license or refusal, revocation or suspension of an application for a
license or the surrender of the license would, if committed in New York
state, constitute professional misconduct under the laws of New York
state;
 (e) Having been found by the commissioner of health to be in violation
of article thirty-three of the public health law;
 10. Refusing to provide professional service to a person because of
such person's race, creed, color or national origin;
 11. Permitting, aiding or abetting an unlicensed person to perform
activities requiring a license;
 12. Practicing the profession while the license is suspended or
inactive as defined in subdivision thirteen of section two hundred
thirty of the public health law, or willfully failing to register or
notify the department of education of any change of name or mailing
address, or, if a professional service corporation, willfully failing to
comply with sections fifteen hundred three and fifteen hundred fourteen
of the business corporation law or, if a university faculty practice
corporation wilfully failing to comply with paragraphs (b), (c) and (d)
of section fifteen hundred three and section fifteen hundred fourteen of
the business corporation law;
 13. A willful violation by a licensee of subdivision eleven of section
two hundred thirty of the public health law;
 14. A violation of section twenty-eight hundred three-d, twenty-eight
hundred five-k or subparagraph (ii) of paragraph (h) of subdivision ten
of section two hundred thirty of the public health law; or
 15. Failure to comply with an order issued pursuant to subdivision
seven, paragraph (a) of subdivision ten, and subdivision seventeen of
section two hundred thirty of the public health law;
 16. A willful or grossly negligent failure to comply with substantial
provisions of federal, state, or local laws, rules, or regulations
governing the practice of medicine;
 17. Exercising undue influence on the patient, including the promotion
of the sale of services, goods, appliances, or drugs in such manner as
to exploit the patient for the financial gain of the licensee or of a
third party;
 18. Directly or indirectly offering, giving, soliciting, or receiving
or agreeing to receive, any fee or other consideration to or from a
third party for the referral of a patient or in connection with the
performance of professional services;
 19. Permitting any person to share in the fees for professional
services, other than: a partner, employee, associate in a professional
firm or corporation, professional subcontractor or consultant authorized
to practice medicine, or a legally authorized trainee practicing under
the supervision of a licensee. This prohibition shall include any
arrangement or agreement whereby the amount received in payment for
furnishing space, facilities, equipment or personnel services used by a
licensee constitutes a percentage of, or is otherwise dependent upon,
the income or receipts of the licensee from such practice, except as
otherwise provided by law with respect to a facility licensed pursuant
to article twenty-eight of the public health law or article thirteen of
the mental hygiene law;
 20. Conduct in the practice of medicine which evidences moral
unfitness to practice medicine;
 21. Willfully making or filing a false report, or failing to file a
report required by law or by the department of health or the education
department, or willfully impeding or obstructing such filing, or
inducing another person to do so;
 22. Failing to make available to a patient, upon request, copies of
documents in the possession or under the control of the licensee which
have been prepared for and paid for by the patient or client;
 23. Revealing of personally identifiable facts, data, or information
obtained in a professional capacity without the prior consent of the
patient, except as authorized or required by law;
 24. Practicing or offering to practice beyond the scope permitted by
law, or accepting and performing professional responsibilities which the
licensee knows or has reason to know that he or she is not competent to
perform, or performing without adequate supervision professional
services which the licensee is authorized to perform only under the
supervision of a licensed professional, except in an emergency situation
where a person's life or health is in danger;
 25. Delegating professional responsibilities to a person when the
licensee delegating such responsibilities knows or has reason to know
that such person is not qualified, by training, by experience, or by
licensure, to perform them.
 25-a. With respect to any non-emergency treatment, procedure or
surgery which is expected to involve local or general anesthesia,
failing to disclose to the patient the identities of all physicians,
except medical residents in certified training programs, podiatrists and
dentists, reasonably anticipated to be actively involved in such
treatment, procedure or surgery and to obtain such patient's informed
consent to said practitioners' participation;
 26. Performing professional services which have not been duly
authorized by the patient or his or her legal representative;
 27. Advertising or soliciting for patronage that is not in the public
interest. (a) Advertising or soliciting not in the public interest shall
include, but not be limited to, advertising or soliciting that: (i) is
false, fraudulent, deceptive, misleading, sensational, or flamboyant;
 (ii) represents intimidation or undue pressure;
 (iii) uses testimonials;
 (iv) guarantees any service;
 (v) makes any claim relating to professional services or products or
the costs or price therefor which cannot be substantiated by the
licensee, who shall have the burden of proof;
 (vi) makes claims of professional superiority which cannot be
substantiated by the licensee, who shall have the burden of proof; or
 (vii) offers bonuses or inducements in any form other than a discount
or reduction in an established fee or price for a professional service
or product.
 (b) The following shall be deemed appropriate means of informing the
public of the availability of professional services: (i) informational
advertising not contrary to the foregoing prohibitions; and
 (ii) the advertising in a newspaper, periodical or professional
directory or on radio or television of fixed prices, or a stated range
of prices, for specified routine professional services, provided that if
there is an additional charge for related services which are an integral
part of the overall service being provided by the licensee, the
advertisement shall so state, and provided further that the
advertisement indicates the period of time for which the advertised
prices shall be in effect.
 (c)(i) All licensees placing advertisements shall maintain, or cause
to be maintained, an exact copy of each advertisement, transcript, tape
or video tape thereof as appropriate for the medium used, for a period
of one year after its last appearance. This copy shall be made available for inspection upon demand of the department of health;
 (ii) A licensee shall not compensate or give anything of value to representatives of the press, radio, television or other communications
media in anticipation of or in return for professional publicity in a
news item;
 (d) No demonstrations, dramatizations or other portrayals of
professional practice shall be permitted in advertising on radio or
television;
 28. Failing to respond within thirty days to written communications
from the department of health and to make available any relevant records
with respect to an inquiry or complaint about the licensee's
professional misconduct. The period of thirty days shall commence on the
date when such communication was delivered personally to the licensee.
If the communication is sent from the department of health by registered
or certified mail, with return receipt requested, to the address
appearing in the last registration, the period of thirty days shall
commence on the date of delivery to the licensee, as indicated by the
return receipt;
 29. Violating any term of probation or condition or limitation imposed
on the licensee pursuant to section two hundred thirty of the public
health law;
 30. Abandoning or neglecting a patient under and in need of immediate
professional care, without making reasonable arrangements for the
continuation of such care, or abandoning a professional employment by a
group practice, hospital, clinic or other health care facility, without
reasonable notice and under circumstances which seriously impair the
delivery of professional care to patients or clients;
 31. Willfully harassing, abusing, or intimidating a patient either
physically or verbally;
 32. Failing to maintain a record for each patient which accurately
reflects the evaluation and treatment of the patient, provided, however,
that a physician who transfers an original mammogram to a medical
institution, or to a physician or health care provider of the patient,
or to the patient directly, as otherwise provided by law, shall have no
obligation under this section to maintain the original or a copy
thereof. Unless otherwise provided by law, all patient records must be
retained for at least six years. Obstetrical records and records of
minor patients must be retained for at least six years, and until one
year after the minor patient reaches the age of eighteen years;
 33. Failing to exercise appropriate supervision over persons who are
authorized to practice only under the supervision of the licensee;
 34. Guaranteeing that satisfaction or a cure will result from the
performance of professional services;
 35. Ordering of excessive tests, treatment, or use of treatment
facilities not warranted by the condition of the patient;
 36. Claiming or using any secret or special method of treatment which
the licensee refused to divulge to the department of health;
 37. Failing to wear an identifying badge, which shall be conspicuously
displayed and legible, indicating the practitioner's name and
professional title authorized pursuant to this chapter, while practicing
as an employee or operator of a hospital, clinic, group practice or
multi-professional facility, or at a commercial establishment offering
health services to the public;
 38. Entering into an arrangement or agreement with a pharmacy for the
compounding and/or dispensing of coded or specially marked
prescriptions;
 39. With respect to all professional practices conducted under an
assumed name, other than facilities licensed pursuant to article
twenty-eight of the public health law or article thirteen of the mental
hygiene law, failing to post conspicuously at the site of such practice
the name and licensure field of all of the principal professional
licensees engaged in the practice at that site (i.e., principal
partners, officers or principal shareholders);
 40. Failing to provide access by qualified persons to patient
information in accordance with the standards set forth in section
eighteen of the public health law as added by chapter 497 of the laws of
1986;
 41. Knowingly or willfully performing a complete or partial autopsy on
a deceased person without lawful authority;
 42. Failing to comply with a signed agreement to practice medicine in
New York state in an area designated by the commissioner of education as
having a shortage of physicians or refusing to repay medical education
costs in lieu of such required service, or failing to comply with any
provision of a written agreement with the state or any municipality
within which the licensee has agreed to provide medical service, or
refusing to repay funds in lieu of such service as consideration of
awards made by the state or any municipality thereof for his or her
professional education in medicine, or failing to comply with any
agreement entered into to aid his or her medical education;
 43. Failing to complete forms or reports required for the
reimbursement of a patient by a third party. Reasonable fees may be
charged for such forms or reports, but prior payment for the
professional services to which such forms or reports relate may not be
required as a condition for making such forms or reports available;
 44. In the practice of psychiatry, (a) any physical contact of a
sexual nature between licensee and patient except the use of films
and/or other audiovisual aids with individuals or groups in the
development of appropriate responses to overcome sexual dysfunction and
(b) in therapy groups, activities which promote explicit physical sexual
contact between group members during sessions; and
 45. In the practice of ophthalmology, failing to provide a patient,
upon request, with the patient's prescription including the name,
address, and signature of the prescriber and the date of the
prescription.
 46. A violation of section two hundred thirty-nine of the public
health law by a professional.
 47. Failure to use scientifically accepted barrier precautions and
infection control practices as established by the department of health
pursuant to section two hundred thirty-a of the public health law.
 48. A violation of section two hundred thirty-d of the public health
law or the regulations of the commissioner of health enacted thereunder.
 49. Except for good cause shown, failing to provide within one day any
relevant records or other information requested by the state or local
department of health with respect to an inquiry into a report of a
communicable disease as defined in the state sanitary code, or HIV/AIDS.
 50. Performing a pelvic examination or supervising the performance of
a pelvic examination in violation of subdivision seven of section
twenty-five hundred four of the public health law.
 * 51. A violation of article twenty-eight-F of the public health law
and/or regulations promulgated thereunder.
 * NB Effective August 5, 2026
 § 6531. Additional definition of professional misconduct, limited
application. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of this article
or any other provisions of law to the contrary, the license or
registration of a person subject to the provisions of this article and
article one hundred thirty-one-B of this chapter may be revoked,
suspended, or annulled or such person may be subject to any other
penalty provided in section two hundred thirty-a of the public health
law in accordance with the provisions and procedures of this article for
the following:
 That any person subject to the above-enumerated articles has directly
or indirectly requested, received or participated in the division,
transference, assignment, rebate, splitting, or refunding of a fee for,
or has directly requested, received or profited by means of a credit or
other valuable consideration as a commission, discount or gratuity, in
connection with the furnishing of professional care or service,
including x-ray examination and treatment, or for or in connection with
the sale, rental, supplying, or furnishing of clinical laboratory
services or supplies, x-ray laboratory services or supplies, inhalation
therapy service or equipment, ambulance service, hospital or medical
supplies, physiotherapy or other therapeutic service or equipment,
artificial limbs, teeth or eyes, orthopedic or surgical appliances or
supplies, optical appliances, supplies, or equipment, devices for aid of
hearing, drugs, medication, or medical supplies, or any other goods,
services, or supplies prescribed for medical diagnosis, care, or
treatment under this chapter, except payment, not to exceed thirty-three
and one-third percent of any fee received for x-ray examination,
diagnosis, or treatment, to any hospital furnishing facilities for such
examination, diagnosis, or treatment. Nothing contained in this section
shall prohibit such persons from practicing as partners, in groups or as
a professional corporation or as a university faculty practice
corporation, nor from pooling fees and moneys received, either by the
partnerships, professional corporations, or university faculty practice
corporations or groups by the individual members thereof, for
professional services furnished by an individual professional member, or
employee of such partnership, corporation, or group, nor shall the
professionals constituting the partnerships, corporations or groups be
prohibited from sharing, dividing, or apportioning the fees and moneys
received by them or by the partnership, corporation, or group in
accordance with a partnership or other agreement; provided that no such
practice as partners, corporations, or groups, or pooling of fees or
moneys received or shared, division or apportionment of fees shall be
permitted with respect to and treatment under the workers' compensation
law. Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit a corporation
licensed pursuant to article forty-three of the insurance law pursuant
to its contract with the subscribed from prorationing a medical or
dental expenses indemnity allowance among two or more professionals in
proportion to the services rendered by each such professional at the
request of the subscriber, provided that prior to payment thereof such
professionals shall submit both to the corporation licensed pursuant to
article forty-three of the insurance law and to the subscriber
statements itemizing the services rendered by each such professional and
the charges therefor.
 § 6531-a. Additional definition of professional misconduct; mental
health professionals. 1. Definitions. For the purposes of this section:
 a. "Mental health professional" means a person subject to the
provisions of article one hundred thirty-one of this title.
 b. "Sexual orientation change efforts" (i) means any practice by a
mental health professional that seeks to change an individual's sexual
orientation, including, but not limited to, efforts to change behaviors,
gender identity, or gender expressions, or to eliminate or reduce sexual
or romantic attractions or feelings towards individuals of the same sex;
and (ii) shall not include counseling for a person seeking to transition
from one gender to another, or psychotherapies that: (A) provide
acceptance, support and understanding of patients or the facilitation of
patients' coping, social support, and identity exploration and
development, including sexual orientation-neutral interventions to
prevent or address unlawful conduct or unsafe sexual practices; and (B)
do not seek to change sexual orientation.
 2. It shall be professional misconduct for a mental health
professional to engage in sexual orientation change efforts upon any
patient under the age of eighteen years, and any mental health
professional found guilty of such misconduct under the procedures
prescribed in title two-A of article two of the public health law shall
be subject to the penalties prescribed in section two hundred thirty-a
of the public health law, as added by chapter six hundred six of the
laws of nineteen hundred ninety-one.
 § 6531-b. Exceptions; reproductive health services. 1. As used in this
section, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
 (a) "Reproductive health care" shall mean and include all services,
care, or products of a medical, surgical, psychiatric, therapeutic,
diagnostic, mental health, behavioral health, preventative,
rehabilitative, supportive, consultative, referral, prescribing, or
dispensing nature relating to the human reproductive system provided in
accordance with the constitution and the laws of this state, whether
provided in person or by means of telehealth or telehealth services,
which includes, but is not limited to, all services, care, and products
relating to pregnancy, assisted reproduction, contraception, miscarriage
management or abortion, including but not limited to care an individual
provides to themself.
 (b) "Health care practitioner" means a person who is licensed,
certified, or authorized under this title and acting within their lawful
scope of practice.
 (c) "Gender-affirming care" means any type of care provided to an
individual to affirm their gender identity or gender expression,
including but not limited to care an individual provides to themself;
provided that surgical interventions on minors with variations in their
sex characteristics that are not sought and initiated by the individual
patient are not gender-affirming care.
 2. Any legally protected health activity, as defined by section 570.17
of the criminal procedure law, by a health care practitioner acting
within their scope of practice, shall not, by itself, constitute
professional misconduct under this title, or title two-A of article two
of the public health law, or any other law, rule or regulation governing
the licensure, certification, or authorization of such practitioner, nor
shall any license, certification or authorization of a health care
practitioner be revoked, suspended, or annulled or otherwise subject to
any other penalty or discipline provided in the public health law or
this title solely on the basis that such health care practitioner
engaged in legally protected health activity, as defined by section
570.17 of the criminal procedure law.
 3. Nothing in this section shall be construed to expand the scope of
practice of any individual licensed, certified or authorized under this
title, nor does this section give any such individual the authority to
act outside their scope of practice, as defined in this title.
 § 6532. Enforcement, administration and interpretation of this
article. The board of professional medical conduct and the department
of health shall enforce, administer and interpret this article. Before
issuing a declaratory ruling pursuant to section two hundred four of the
state administrative procedure act with respect to this article, the
department of health shall fully consult with the department of
education. Neither the commissioner of education, the board of regents
nor the commissioner of health may promulgate any rules or regulations
concerning this article.
 ARTICLE 131-B
 PHYSICIAN ASSISTANTS
Section 6540. Definitions.
 6541. Requirements for license.
 6542. Performance of medical services.
 6543. Construction.
 6544. Regulations.
 6545. Emergency services rendered by physician assistant.
 6546. Limited permits.
 § 6540. Definitions. As used in this article: 1. Physician assistant.
The term "physician assistant" means a person who is licensed as a
physician assistant pursuant to this article.
 2. Physician. The term "physician" means a practitioner of medicine
licensed to practice medicine pursuant to article one hundred thirty-one
of this chapter.
 3. Approved program. The term "approved program" means a program for
the education of physician assistants which has been formerly approved
by the department.
 4. Hospital. The term "hospital" means an institution or facility
possessing a valid operating certificate issued pursuant to article
twenty-eight of the public health law and authorized to employ physician
assistants in accordance with rules and regulations of the public health
and health planning council.
 § 6541. Requirements for license. 1. To qualify for a license as a
physician assistant, each person shall pay a fee of one hundred fifteen
dollars to the department for admission to a department conducted
examination, a fee of forty-five dollars for each reexamination and a
fee of seventy dollars for persons not requiring admission to a
department conducted examination and shall also submit satisfactory
evidence, verified by oath or affirmation, that he or she:
 (a) at the time of application is at least twenty-one years of age;
 (b) is of good moral character;
 (c) has received an education including a bachelor's or equivalent
degree in accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 (d) has satisfactorily completed an approved program for the training
of physician assistants. The approved program for the training of
physician assistants shall include not less than forty weeks of
supervised clinical training and thirty-two credit hours of classroom
work. Applicants for a license as a physician assistant who have
completed an approved program leading to a bachelor's degree or
equivalent in physician assistant studies shall be deemed to have
satisfied this paragraph. The commissioner is empowered to determine
whether an applicant possesses equivalent education and training, such
as experience as a nurse or military corpsman, which may be accepted in
lieu of all or part of an approved program; and
 (e) in the case of an applicant for a license as a physician
assistant, has obtained a passing score on an examination acceptable to
the department.
 2. The department shall furnish to each person applying for a license
pursuant to this section an application form calling for such
information as the department deems necessary and shall issue to each
applicant who satisfies the requirements of subdivision one of this
section a license as a physician assistant in a particular medical
specialty for the period expiring December thirty-first of the first
odd-numbered year terminating subsequent to the issuance of such
license.
 3. Every licensee shall apply to the department for a renewal of his
or her license. The department shall mail to every licensed physician
assistant an application form for renewal, addressed to the licensee's
post office address on file with the department. Upon receipt of such
application properly executed, together with evidence of satisfactory
completion of such continuing education requirements as may be
established by the commissioner of health pursuant to section
thirty-seven hundred one of the public health law, the department shall
issue a renewal. Renewal periods shall be triennial and the renewal fee
shall be forty-five dollars.
 § 6542. Performance of medical services. 1. Notwithstanding any other
provision of law, a physician assistant may perform medical services,
but only when under the supervision of a physician and only when such
acts and duties as are assigned to such physician assistant are within
the scope of practice of such supervising physician.
 2. Supervision shall be continuous but shall not be construed as
necessarily requiring the physical presence of the supervising physician
at the time and place where such services are performed.
 3. No physician shall employ or supervise more than six physician
assistants in such physician's private practice at one time.
 4. Nothing in this article shall prohibit a hospital from employing
physician assistants, provided that they work under the supervision of a
physician designated by the hospital and not beyond the scope of
practice of such physician. The numerical limitation of subdivision
three of this section shall not apply to services performed in a
hospital.
 5. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, nothing shall
prohibit a physician employed by or rendering services to the department
of corrections and community supervision under contract from supervising
no more than eight physician assistants in such physician's practice for
the department of corrections and community supervision at one time.
 6. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a trainee in an
approved program may perform medical services when such services are
performed within the scope of such program.
 7. A physician assistant may prescribe and order a non-patient
specific regimen to a registered professional nurse, pursuant to
regulations promulgated by the commissioner, and consistent with the
public health law, for:
 (a) administering immunizations.
 (b) the emergency treatment of anaphylaxis.
 (c) administering purified protein derived (PPD) tests or other tests
to detect or screen for tuberculosis infections.
 (d) administering tests to determine the presence of the human
immunodeficiency virus.
 (e) administering tests to determine the presence of the hepatitis C
virus.
 (f) the urgent or emergency treatment of opioid related overdose or
suspected opioid related overdose.
 (g) screening of persons at increased risk of syphilis, gonorrhea, and
chlamydia.
 (h) administering electrocardiogram tests to detect signs and symptoms
of acute coronary syndrome.
 (i) administering point-of-care blood glucose tests to evaluate acute
mental status changes in persons with suspected hypoglycemia.
 (j) administering tests and intravenous lines to persons that meet
severe sepsis and septic shock criteria.
 (k) administering tests to determine pregnancy.
 * (l) administering tests to determine the presence of COVID-19 or its
antibodies or influenza virus.
 * NB Repealed July 1, 2026
 8. Nothing in this article, or in article thirty-seven of the public
health law, shall be construed to authorize physician assistants to
perform those specific functions and duties specifically delegated by
law to those persons licensed as allied health professionals under the
public health law or this chapter.
 § 6543. Construction. Only a person licensed as a physician assistant
by the department may use the title "physician assistant" or the letters
"P.A." after his or her name.
 § 6544. Regulations. The commissioner may promulgate such other
regulations as are necessary to carry out the purposes of this article.
 § 6545. Emergency services rendered by physician assistant.
Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of any general, special or
local law, any physician assistant properly licensed in this state who
voluntarily and without the expectation of monetary compensation renders
first aid or emergency treatment at the scene of an accident or other
emergency, outside a hospital, doctor's office or any other place having
proper and necessary medical equipment, to a person who is unconscious,
ill or injured, shall not be liable for damages for injuries alleged to
have been sustained by such person or for damages for the death of such
person alleged to have occurred by reason of an act or omission in the
rendering of such first aid or emergency treatment unless it is
established that such injuries were or such death was caused by gross
negligence on the part of such physician assistant. Nothing in this
section shall be deemed or construed to relieve a licensed physician
assistant from liability for damages for injuries or death caused by an
act or omission on the part of a physician assistant while rendering
professional services in the normal and ordinary course of his or her
practice.
 § 6546. Limited permits. Permits limited as to eligibility, practice
and duration, shall be issued by the department to eligible applicants,
as follows:
 1. Eligibility. A person who fulfills all requirements to be licensed
as a physician assistant except that relating to the examination shall
be eligible for a limited permit.
 2. Limit of practice. A permittee shall be authorized to practice as a
physician assistant only under the direct supervision of a physician.
 3. Duration. A limited permit shall expire one year from the date of
issuance or upon notice to the permittee by the department that the
application for a license has been denied. A limited permit shall be
extended upon application for one additional year, provided that the
permittee's request for such extension is endorsed by a physician who
either has supervised or will supervise the permittee, except that such
extension may be denied by the department for cause which shall be
stated in writing. If the permittee is awaiting the results of a
licensing examination at the time such limited permit expires, such
permit shall continue to be valid until ten days after notification to
the permittee of the result of such examination.
 4. Fees. The fee for each limited permit shall be one hundred five
dollars.
 ARTICLE 131-C
 SPECIALIST ASSISTANTS
Section 6547. Definitions.
 6548. Registration.
 6549. Performance of medical services.
 6549-a. Construction.
 6549-b. Regulations.
 § 6547. Definitions. As used in this article:
 1. Specialist assistant. The term "specialist assistant" means a
person who is registered pursuant to this article as a specialist
assistant for a particular medical specialty as defined by regulations
promulgated by the commissioner of health pursuant to section
thirty-seven hundred eleven of the public health law.
 2. Physician. The term "physician" means a practitioner of medicine
licensed to practice medicine pursuant to article one hundred thirty-one
of this chapter.
 3. Approved program. The term "approved program" means a program for
the education of specialist assistants which has been approved by the
department.
 4. Hospital. The term "hospital" means an institution or facility
possessing a valid operating certificate issued pursuant to article
twenty-eight of the public health law and authorized to employ
specialist assistants in accordance with rules and regulations of the
public health and health planning council.
 § 6548. Registration. 1. To qualify for registration as a specialist
assistant, each person shall pay a fee of one hundred fifteen dollars to
the department for admission to a department conducted examination, a
fee of forty-five dollars for each reexamination and a fee of seventy
dollars for persons not requiring admission to a department conducted
examination and shall also submit satisfactory evidence, verified by
oath or affirmation, that he or she:
 (a) at the time of application is at least twenty-one years of age;
 (b) is of good moral character;
 (c) has successfully completed a four-year course of study in a
secondary school approved by the board of regents or has passed an
equivalency test; and
 (d) has satisfactorily completed an approved program for the training
of specialist assistants.
 2. The department shall furnish to each person applying for
registration hereunder an application form calling for such information
as the department deems necessary and shall issue to each applicant who
satisfies the requirements of subdivision one of this section a
certificate of registration as specialist assistant in a particular
medical specialty for the period expiring December thirty-first of the
first odd-numbered year terminating subsequent to such registration.
 3. Every registrant shall apply to the department for a certificate of
registration. The department shall mail to every registered specialist
assistant an application form for registration, addressed to the
registrant's post office address on file with the department. Upon
receipt of such application properly executed, together with evidence of
satisfactory completion of such continuing education requirements as may
be established by the commissioner of health pursuant to section
thirty-seven hundred eleven of the public health law, the department
shall issue a certificate of registration. Registration periods shall be
triennial and the registration fee shall be forty-five dollars.
 § 6549. Performance of medical services. 1. Notwithstanding any other
provision of law, a specialist assistant may perform medical services,
but only when under the supervision of a physician and only when such
acts and duties as are assigned to him or her are related to the
designated medical speciality for which he or she is registered and are
within the scope of practice of his or her supervising physician.
 2. Supervision shall be continuous but shall not be construed as
necessarily requiring the physical presence of the supervising physician
at the time and place where such services are performed.
 3. No physician shall employ or supervise more than two specialist
assistants in his or her private practice.
 4. Nothing in this article shall prohibit a hospital from employing
specialist assistants provided they work under the supervision of a
physician designated by the hospital and not beyond the scope of
practice of such physician. The numerical limitation of subdivision
three of this section shall not apply to services performed in a
hospital.
 5. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, nothing shall
prohibit a physician employed by or rendering services to the department
of correctional services under contract from supervising no more than
four specialist assistants in his or her practice for the department of
corrections and community supervision.
 6. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a trainee in an
approved program may perform medical services when such services are
performed within the scope of such program.
 7. Nothing in this article or in article thirty-seven-A of the public
health law, shall be construed to authorize specialist assistants to
perform those specific functions and duties specifically delegated by
law to those persons licensed as allied health professionals under the
public health law or this chapter.
 § 6549-a. Construction. Only a person registered as a specialist
assistant by the department may use the title "registered specialist
assistant" or the letters "R.S.A." after his or her name.
 § 6549-b. Regulations. The commissioner may promulgate such other
regulations as are necessary to carry out the purposes of this article.
 ARTICLE 132
 CHIROPRACTIC
Section 6550. Introduction.
 6551. Definition of practice of chiropractic.
 6552. Practice of chiropractic and use of title
 "chiropractor".
 6553. State board for chiropractic.
 6554. Requirements for a professional license.
 6554-a. Mandatory continuing education for chiropractors.
 6555. Exempt persons.
 6556. Special provisions.
 § 6550. Introduction. This article applies to the profession of
chiropractic. The general provisions for all professions contained in
article one hundred thirty of this title apply to this article.
 § 6551. Definition of practice of chiropractic. 1. The practice of
the profession of chiropractic is defined as detecting and correcting by
manual or mechanical means structural imbalance, distortion, or
subluxations in the human body for the purpose of removing nerve
interference and the effects thereof, where such interference is the
result of or related to distortion, misalignment or subluxation of or in
the vertebral column.
 2. a. A license to practice as a chiropractor shall not permit the
holder thereof to use radio-therapy, fluoroscopy, or any form of
ionizing radiation except X-ray which shall be used for the detection of
structural imbalance, distortion, or subluxations in the human body.
 b. The requirements and limitations with respect to the use of X-ray
by chiropractors shall be enforced by the state commissioner of health
and he is authorized to promulgate rules and regulations after
conferring with the board to carry out the purposes of this subdivision.
 c. Chiropractors shall retain for a period of three years all X-ray
films taken in the course of their practice, together with the records
pertaining thereto, and shall make such films and records available to
the state commissioner of health or his representative on demand.
 3. A license to practice chiropractic shall not permit the holder
thereof to treat for any infectious diseases such as pneumonia, any
communicable diseases listed in the sanitary code of the state of New
York, any of the cardio-vascular-renal or cardio-pulmonary diseases, any
surgical condition of the abdomen such as acute appendicitis, or
diabetes, or any benign or malignant neoplasms; to operate; to reduce
fractures or dislocations; to prescribe, administer, dispense or use in
his practice drugs or medicines; or to use diagnostic or therapeutic
methods involving chemical or biological means except diagnostic
services performed by clinical laboratories which services shall be
approved by the board as appropriate to the practice of chiropractic; or
to utilize electrical devices except those devices approved by the board
as being appropriate to the practice of chiropractic. Nothing herein
shall be construed to prohibit a licensed chiropractor who has
successfully completed a registered doctoral program in chiropractic,
which contains courses of study in nutrition satisfactory to the
department, from using nutritional counseling, including the dispensing
of food concentrates, food extracts, vitamins, minerals, and other
nutritional supplements approved by the board as being appropriate to,
and as a part of, his or her practice of chiropractic. Nothing herein
shall be construed to prohibit an individual who is not subject to
regulation in this state as a licensed chiropractor from engaging in
nutritional counseling.
 § 6552. Practice of chiropractic and use of title "chiropractor".
Only a person licensed or exempt under this article shall practice
chiropractic or use the title "chiropractor".
 § 6553. State board for chiropractic. A state board for chiropractic
shall be appointed by the board of regents on recommendation of the
commissioner for the purpose of assisting the board of regents and the
department on matters of professional licensing and professional conduct
in accordance with section sixty-five hundred eight of this title. The
board shall be composed of not less than seven members, including at
least four licensed chiropractors, one licensed physician who is a
doctor of medicine, one licensed physician who is a doctor of
osteopathy, and one educator who holds a doctorate or equivalent degree
in either anatomy, physiology, pathology, chemistry or microbiology. An
executive secretary to the board shall be appointed by the board of
regents on recommendation of the commissioner.
 § 6554. Requirements for a professional license. To qualify for a
license as a chiropractor, an applicant shall fulfill the following
requirements:
 (1) Application: file an application with the department;
 (2) Education: have received an education, including two years of
preprofessional college study and completion of a four-year resident
program in chiropractic, in accordance with the commissioner's
regulations;
 (3) Experience: have experience satisfactory to the board and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations:
 (4) Examination: pass examinations satisfactory to the board and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations, in clinical chiropractic
analysis, the practice of chiropractic, X-ray as it relates to
chiropractic analysis, and examinations satisfactory to the department
in anatomy, physiology, pathology, chemistry, microbiology, diagnosis,
and the use and effect of X-ray;
 (5) Age: be at least twenty-one years of age;
 (6) Citizenship or immigration status: be a United States citizen or a
noncitizen lawfully admitted for permanent residence in the United
States;
 (7) Character: be of good moral character as determined by the
department; and
 (8) Fees: pay a fee of one hundred seventy-five dollars to the
department for admission to a department conducted examination and for
an initial license, a fee of eighty-five dollars for each reexamination,
a fee of one hundred fifteen dollars for an initial license for persons
not requiring admission to a department conducted examination, and a fee
of one hundred fifty-five dollars for each triennial registration
period.
 § 6554-a. Mandatory continuing education for chiropractors. 1. (a)
Each chiropractor licensed pursuant to this article, required to
register triennially with the department to practice in this state,
shall comply with the provisions of the mandatory continuing education
requirements, except as set forth in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this
subdivision. Chiropractors who do not satisfy the mandatory continuing
education requirements shall not practice until they have met such
requirements and have been issued a registration or conditional
registration certificate.
 (b) Chiropractors shall be exempt from the mandatory continuing
education requirement for the triennial registration period during which
they are first licensed. In accordance with the intent of this section,
adjustments to the mandatory continuing education requirement may be
granted by the department for reasons of health, certified by an
appropriate health care professional, for extended active duty with the
armed forces of the United States, or for other good cause acceptable to
the department which may prevent compliance.
 (c) A licensed chiropractor not engaged in chiropractic practice as an
individual practitioner, a partner or a partnership, a shareholder of a
professional service corporation, as an employee of such practice units,
or as an employee of a facility operating pursuant to article
twenty-eight of the public health law, or as otherwise determined by the
department, shall be exempt from the mandatory continuing education
requirement upon the filing of a statement with the department declaring
such status. Any licensee who returns to the public practice of
chiropractic during the triennial registration period shall notify the
department prior to reentering the profession and shall meet such
mandatory continuing education requirements as shall be promulgated by
regulation of the commissioner in consultation with the board.
 (d) Nothing in this section shall be construed as enabling or
authorizing the department or state board for chiropractic to require or
implement continuing competency testing or continued competency
certification for chiropractors.
 2. During each triennial registration period an applicant for
registration shall complete thirty-six hours of acceptable formal
continuing education, a maximum of twelve hours of which may be
self-instructional coursework as approved by the department in
consultation with the board. Any chiropractor whose first registration
date following the effective date of this section occurs less than three
years from such effective date, but on or after January first, two
thousand four, shall complete continuing education hours on a prorated
basis at the rate of one hour per month for the period beginning January
first, two thousand four up to the first registration date thereafter. A
licensee who has not satisfied the mandatory continuing education
requirements shall not be issued a triennial registration certificate by
the department and shall not practice unless and until a conditional
registration certificate is issued as provided in subdivision three of
this section. The individual licensee shall determine the selection of
courses or programs of study pursuant to subdivision four of this
section. Continuing education hours taken during one triennium may not
be carried over or otherwise credited or transferred to a subsequent
triennium.
 3. The department, in its discretion, may issue a conditional
registration to a licensee who fails to meet the continuing education
requirements established in subdivision two of this section but who
agrees to make up any deficiencies and take any additional education
which the department may require. The fee for such a conditional
registration shall be the same as, and in addition to, the fee for the
triennial registration. The duration of such conditional registration
shall be determined by the department but shall not exceed one year. Any
licensee who is notified of the denial of registration for failure to
complete the required continued education and who continues to practice
chiropractic without such registration may be subject to disciplinary
proceedings pursuant to section sixty-five hundred ten of this title.
 4. As used in this section, "acceptable formal continuing education"
shall mean formal programs of learning which are sponsored or presented
by a New York state chiropractic professional organization, national
chiropractic professional organization or higher educational
institution, and which meet the following requirements: contain subject
matter which contributes to the enhancement of professional and clinical
skills of the chiropractor and is approved as acceptable continuing
education by a chiropractic college recognized by the Commission on
Accreditation of the Council of Chiropractic Education to fulfill the
mandatory continuing education requirements, and which meets the
standards prescribed by regulations of the commissioner in consultation
with the board to fulfill the mandatory continuing education
requirement.
 5. Chiropractors shall certify at each triennial registration as to
having satisfied the mandatory continuing education requirements of this
section, shall maintain adequate documentation of completion of
acceptable formal continuing education to support such certification and
shall provide such documentation to the department upon request. Failure
to provide such documentation upon request of the department shall be an
act of misconduct subject to disciplinary proceedings pursuant to
section sixty-five hundred ten of this title.
 6. The mandatory continuing education fee shall be forty-five dollars,
shall be payable on or before the first day of each triennial
registration period, and shall be in addition to the triennial
registration fee required by section sixty-five hundred fifty-four of
this article.
 § 6555. Exempt persons. Nothing in this article shall be construed to
affect or prevent a student enrolled in a college of chiropractic in
this state from engaging in all phases of clinical practice under
supervision of a licensed chiropractor or physician in a curriculum
registered by the department.
 § 6556. Special provisions. 1. Any chiropractor who holds a license
stating that the holder is not authorized to use X-ray in his practice
shall on each registration, continue to obtain a license so marked. Any
chiropractor holding such a license may obtain a license permitting the
use of X-ray provided he first passes an examination in the use and
effect of X-ray satisfactory to the board and the department.
 2. An applicant who graduated from a school of chiropractic prior to
January first, nineteen hundred sixty-eight need not meet the two-year
preprofessional college study requirement provided for in subdivision
two of section sixty-five hundred fifty-four.
 ARTICLE 133
 DENTISTRY, DENTAL HYGIENE, AND REGISTERED DENTAL ASSISTING
Section 6600. Introduction.
 6601. Definition of practice of dentistry.
 6602. Practice of dentistry and use of title "dentist".
 6603. State board for dentistry.
 6604. Requirements for a license as a dentist.
 6604-a. Mandatory continuing education for dentists.
 6604-b. Restricted dental faculty license.
 6605. Limited permits.
 6605-a. Dental anesthesia certificate.
 6605-b. Dental hygiene restricted local infiltration
 anesthesia/nitrous oxide analgesia certificate.
 6606. Definition of practice of dental hygiene.
 6607. Practice of dental hygiene and use of title "dental
 hygienist".
 6608. Definition of practice of registered dental assisting.
 6608-a. Practice of registered dental assisting and use of title
 "registered dental assistant".
 6608-b. Requirements for certification as a registered dental
 assistant.
 6608-c. Exempt persons.
 6608-d. Limited permits.
 6609. Requirements for a license as a dental hygienist.
 6609-a. Mandatory continuing education for dental hygienists.
 6609-b. Limited permit to practice dental hygiene.
 6610. Exempt persons.
 6611. Special provisions.
 6612. Identification of removable full or partial prosthetic
 devices.
 6613. Nitrous oxide equipment.
 § 6600. Introduction. This article applies to the professions of
dentistry, dental hygiene, and registered dental assisting. The general
provisions for all professions contained in article one hundred thirty
of this title apply to this article.
 § 6601. Definition of practice of dentistry. The practice of the
profession of dentistry is defined as diagnosing, treating, operating,
or prescribing for any disease, pain, injury, deformity, or physical
condition of the oral and maxillofacial area related to restoring and
maintaining dental health. The practice of dentistry includes the
prescribing and fabrication of dental prostheses and appliances. The
practice of dentistry may include performing physical evaluations in
conjunction with the provision of dental treatment.
 § 6602. Practice of dentistry and use of title "dentist". Only a
person licensed or otherwise authorized to practice under this article
shall practice dentistry or use the title "dentist".
 § 6603. State board for dentistry. A state board for dentistry shall
be appointed by the board of regents on recommendation of the
commissioner for the purpose of assisting the board of regents and the
department on matters of professional licensing and professional conduct
in accordance with section sixty-five hundred eight of this title. The
board shall be composed of not less than thirteen dentists licensed in
this state for at least five years, not less than three dental
hygienists licensed in this state for at least five years, and not less
than one registered dental assistant licensed in this state for at least
one year. An executive secretary to the board shall be appointed by the
board of regents on recommendation of the commissioner and shall be a
dentist licensed in this state.
 § 6604. Requirements for a license as a dentist. To qualify for a
license as a dentist, an applicant shall fulfill the following
requirements:
 (1) Application: file an application with the department;
 (2) Education: have received an education, including a doctoral degree
in dentistry, in accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 (3) Experience: have experience satisfactory to the board and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations, provided that such
experience shall consist of satisfactory completion of a postdoctoral
general practice or specialty dental residency program, of at least one
year's duration, in a hospital or dental facility accredited for
teaching purposes by a national accrediting body approved by the
department, provided, further that any such residency program shall
include a formal outcome assessment evaluation of the resident's
competence to practice dentistry acceptable to the department;
 (4) Examination: pass a written examination satisfactory to the board
and in accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 (5) Age: be at least twenty-one years of age;
 (6) Citizenship or immigration status: be a United States citizen or a
noncitizen lawfully admitted for permanent residence in the United
States; provided, however, that the board of regents may grant a three
year waiver for a noncitizen to practice in an area which has been
designated a federal dental health professions shortage area, except
that the board of regents may grant an additional extension not to
exceed six years to a noncitizen to enable him or her to secure
citizenship or permanent resident status, provided such status is being
actively pursued;
 (7) Character: be of good moral character as determined by the
department; and
 (8) Fees: pay a fee of two hundred twenty dollars to the department
for admission to a department conducted examination and for an initial
license, a fee of one hundred fifteen dollars for each reexamination, a
fee of one hundred thirty-five dollars for an initial license for
persons not requiring admission to a department conducted examination,
and a fee of two hundred ten dollars for each triennial registration
period.
 § 6604-a. Mandatory continuing education for dentists. 1. (a) Each
dentist, licensed pursuant to this article, required to register
triennially with the department to practice in this state shall comply
with the provisions of the mandatory continuing education requirements,
except as set forth in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this subdivision.
Dentists who do not satisfy the mandatory continuing education
requirements shall not practice until they have met such requirements
and have been issued a registration or conditional registration
certificate.
 (b) Dentists shall be exempt from the mandatory continuing education
requirement for the triennial registration period during which they are
first licensed. In accordance with the intent of this section,
adjustments to the mandatory continuing education requirement may be
granted by the department for reasons of health, certified by a
physician, for extended active duty with the armed forces of the United
States, or for other good cause acceptable to the department which may
prevent compliance.
 (c) A licensed dentist not engaged in public practice as an individual
practitioner, a partner of a partnership, a shareholder of a
professional service corporation, or an employee of such practice units,
shall be exempt from the mandatory continuing education requirement upon
the filing of a statement with the department declaring such status. Any
licensee who returns to the public practice of dentistry during the
triennial registration period shall notify the department prior to
reentering the profession and shall meet such mandatory continuing
education requirements as shall be prescribed by regulation of the
commissioner.
 2. During each triennial registration period an applicant for
registration shall complete a minimum of sixty hours of acceptable
formal continuing education, a maximum of eighteen hours of which may be
self-instructional coursework as approved by the department. Beginning
with the first registration renewal period for any dentist occurring on
or after January first, two thousand two, and before the occurrence of
the second registration renewal period following that date, a dentist
shall have completed on a one-time basis, as part of the sixty hours of
acceptable formal continuing education required by this section, no
fewer than two hours of coursework and training regarding the chemical
and related effects and usage of tobacco and tobacco products and the
recognition, diagnosis, and treatment of the oral health effects,
including but not limited to cancers and other diseases, caused by
tobacco and tobacco products, provided that any dentist who provides
written proof satisfactory to the department that the dentist has
completed, at any time subsequent to the effective date of this section,
an approved mandatory continuing education course of not less than two
hours in the same or substantially similar subject matter shall be
deemed to have met this requirement, and further provided that dentists
who are exempt from the mandatory continuing education requirement for
the triennial registration period during which they are first licensed
shall also be exempt from this requirement for that period. Any dentist
whose first registration date following the effective date of this
section occurs less than three years from such effective date, but on or
after January first, nineteen hundred ninety-eight and before July
first, two thousand eight, shall complete continuing education hours on
a prorated basis at the rate of one and one-quarter hours per month for
the period beginning January first, nineteen hundred ninety-seven up to
the first registration date thereafter. For any registration period
beginning before July first, two thousand eight and ending on or after
such date, each dentist shall complete continuing education hours on a
pro rata basis at a rate of one and one-quarter hours per month for the
period ending June thirtieth, two thousand eight and at a rate of one
and two-thirds hours per month for the period beginning July first, two
thousand eight up to the first registration date thereafter. A licensee
who has not satisfied the mandatory continuing education requirements
shall not be issued a triennial registration certificate by the
department and shall not practice unless and until a conditional
registration certificate is issued as provided in subdivision three of
this section. The individual licensee shall determine the selection of
courses or programs of study pursuant to subdivision four of this
section.
 3. The department, in its discretion, may issue a conditional
registration to a licensee who fails to meet the continuing education
requirements established in subdivision two of this section but who
agrees to make up any deficiencies and take any additional education
which the department may require. The fee for such a conditional
registration shall be the same as, and in addition to, the fee for the
triennial registration. The duration of such conditional registration
shall be determined by the department. Any licensee who is notified of
the denial of registration for failure to submit evidence, satisfactory
to the department, of completion of required continuing education and
who practices dentistry without such registration, may be subject to
disciplinary proceedings pursuant to section sixty-five hundred ten of
this title.
 4. As used in this section, "acceptable formal continuing education"
shall mean formal programs of learning which contribute to professional
practice and which meet the standards prescribed by regulations of the
commissioner. To fulfill the mandatory continuing education requirement,
programs must be taken from sponsors having at least one full-time
employee and the facilities, equipment, and financial and physical
resources to provide continuing education courses, approved by the
department, pursuant to the regulations of the commissioner.
 5. The mandatory continuing education fee shall be forty-five dollars,
shall be payable on or before the first day of each triennial
registration period, and shall be paid in addition to the triennial
registration fee required by section six thousand six hundred four of
this article.
 6. On or after the effective date of this subdivision, and no later
than the end of the first registration period commencing on or after
such date during which he or she is required to comply with the
continuing education requirements of this section, each dentist shall
have completed on a one-time basis, as part of the mandatory hours of
acceptable formal continuing education required by this section, no
fewer than three hours in a course approved by the department in dental
jurisprudence and ethics, which shall include the laws, rules,
regulations and ethical principles relating to the practice of dentistry
in New York state, provided that postgraduate dental students enrolled
in New York state dental residency programs may satisfy the requirements
of this subdivision by taking such an approved course during the period
of their dental residency prior to their initial licensure.
 § 6604-b. Restricted dental faculty license. 1. The department may
issue a restricted dental faculty license to a full-time faculty member
employed at an approved New York state school of dentistry. The holder
of such restricted dental faculty license shall have the authority to
practice dentistry, as defined in this article, but such practice of
dentistry shall be limited to the school's facilities or the school's
clinics, or facilities or clinics with relationships to the school
confirmed by formal affiliation agreements. Nothing in this section
shall be construed to authorize such holder of a restricted dental
faculty license to engage in the private practice of dentistry at any
other site.
 2. To qualify for a restricted dental faculty license the applicant
shall present satisfactory evidence of the following:
 (a) The completion of a total of no less than six academic years of
pre-professional and professional education, including:
 i. courses in general chemistry, organic chemistry, biology or zoology
and physics; and
 ii. not less than four academic years of professional dental education
satisfactory to the department culminating in a degree, diploma or
certificate in dentistry recognized by the appropriate civil authorities
of the jurisdiction in which the school is located as acceptable for
entry into practice in the jurisdiction in which the school is located.
 (b) Within the last five years, have two years of satisfactory
practice as a dentist or have satisfactorily completed an advanced
education program in general dentistry or in a dental specialty,
provided such program is accredited by an organization accepted by the
department as a reliable authority for the purpose of accrediting such
programs (such as the commission on dental accreditation); and
 (c) Possesses good moral character as determined by the department.
 3. The dean of the dental school shall notify the department in
writing upon the submission of an initial license application and yearly
thereafter that the holder of the dental faculty license is employed
full-time at the dental school. Full-time employment means the holder of
such dental faculty license devotes at least four full working days per
week in teaching or patient care, research or administrative duties at
the dental school where employed. The dean of the dental school and the
holder of such dental faculty license shall each notify the department
in writing within thirty days of the termination of full-time
employment.
 4. In order to continue to practice dentistry, the holder of a
restricted dental faculty license shall apply for and hold a current
triennial registration which shall be subject to the same registration
requirements as apply to holders of unrestricted dental licenses, except
that such registration shall be issued only upon the submission of
documentation satisfactory to the department of the holder's continued
status as a full-time dental faculty member, provided that such
registration shall immediately terminate and the holder shall no longer
be authorized to practice if the holder ceases to be a full-time dental
faculty member at an approved New York state school of dentistry.
 5. The holder of this restricted dental faculty license shall be
subject to the professional misconduct provisions set forth in article
one hundred thirty of this chapter and in the rules of the board of
regents and the regulations of the commissioner.
 6. The fee for each restricted dental faculty license shall be three
hundred dollars, and the fee for initial registration and each
subsequent re-registration shall be three hundred dollars.
 7. In order to be eligible for a restricted dental faculty license an
applicant must be a United States citizen or a noncitizen lawfully
admitted for permanent residence in the United States; provided,
however, that the department may grant a three year waiver for a
noncitizen who otherwise meets all other requirements for a restricted
dental faculty license except that the department may grant an
additional extension not to exceed six years to a noncitizen to enable
him or her to secure citizenship or permanent resident status, provided
such status is being actively pursued. No current faculty member shall
be displaced by the holder of a restricted dental faculty license.
 § 6605. Limited permits. 1. On recommendation of the board, the
department may issue a limited permit to a graduate of a dental college
who meets the educational qualifications for admission to the licensing
examination in dentistry for employment in a hospital or dental facility
approved by an appropriate agency, while under the direction or
supervision of a licensed dentist. No such permit shall be issued or
renewed unless such graduate has a bona fide offer of a position in such
a hospital or dental facility.
 2. On recommendation of the board, the department may issue a limited
permit for instructing in dentistry to a dentist not licensed under this
article to be employed by a registered school of dentistry or dental
hygiene to instruct and supervise clinical dentistry or dental hygiene
for students in such a registered school in the state, and in so doing
to practice dentistry as defined in this article, but only on the
premises of such registered school or such other premises as may be used
for instruction in the program of education conducted by such
institution. No person shall be permitted or authorized to instruct and
supervise clinical dentistry for students unless such person is licensed
in this state or holds the foregoing limited permit for instructing in
dentistry.
 3. The holder of a limited permit under this section may practice
dentistry, as defined in this article, but only in the performance of
duties required by the position for which the limited permit is issued.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize such unlicensed
dentist to engage in the private practice of dentistry.
 4. A limited permit under this section shall be valid for one year or
until ten days after notification of denial of an application for
license. A limited permit may be renewed for one year, except if the
applicant is serving in a residency program in a hospital or school of
dentistry in this state. A limited permit may be renewed annually for
the duration of such residency program. The fee for each limited permit
and for each renewal shall be one hundred five dollars.
 5. Notwithstanding subdivision one of this section, dental school
graduates who meet the license requirement for education pursuant to
subdivision two of section sixty-six hundred four of this article shall
be deemed to be exempt persons pursuant to section sixty-six hundred ten
of this article and shall not be required to obtain a limited permit,
provided that they are employed in an approved residency program for the
purpose of fulfilling initial licensure requirements pursuant to section
sixty-six hundred four of this article. Not later than sixty days after
entry into an approved residency program, the dental resident shall
register on a form acceptable to the commissioner and pay to the
department a residency registration fee established by the department,
which residency registration fee shall be reasonable and shall not
exceed the limited permit fee specified in subdivision four of this
section. All persons deemed exempt pursuant to this section shall be
subject to all provisions of article one hundred thirty of this title,
including but not limited to having disciplinary action taken against
their residency registration status.
 § 6605-a. Dental anesthesia certificate. 1. A licensed dentist shall
not employ conscious sedation, deep sedation or general anesthesia in
the practice of dentistry, at any location other than a general
hospital, without a dental anesthesia certificate issued by the
department.
 2. The commissioner shall promulgate regulations, establishing
standards and procedures for the issuance of certificates. Such
standards shall require completion of an educational program and/or
course of training or experience sufficient to ensure that a dentist is
specifically trained in the use and administration of conscious
sedation, deep sedation or general anesthesia and in the possible
effects of such use, and in the recognition of and response to possible
emergency situations. Such regulations may also establish standards and
safeguards for the use of conscious sedation, deep sedation or general
anesthesia.
 3. Nothing in this section shall limit a dentist's use of local
anesthesia, a dentist's use of nitrous oxide, or a dentist's use of any
other substance or agent for a purpose other than achieving deep
sedation, conscious sedation, or general anesthesia.
 4. The fee for a dental anesthesia certificate shall be one hundred
dollars and shall be paid on a triennial basis upon renewal of such
certificate. A certificate may be suspended or revoked in the same
manner as a license to practice dentistry.
 § 6605-b. Dental hygiene restricted local infiltration
anesthesia/nitrous oxide analgesia certificate. 1. A dental hygienist
shall not administer or monitor nitrous oxide analgesia or local
infiltration anesthesia in the practice of dental hygiene without a
dental hygiene restricted local infiltration anesthesia/nitrous oxide
analgesia certificate and except under the personal supervision of a
dentist and in accordance with regulations promulgated by the
commissioner. Personal supervision, for purposes of this section, means
that the supervising dentist remains in the dental office where the
local infiltration anesthesia or nitrous oxide analgesia services are
being performed, personally authorizes and prescribes the use of local
infiltration anesthesia or nitrous oxide analgesia for the patient and,
before dismissal of the patient, personally examines the condition of
the patient after the use of local infiltration anesthesia or nitrous
oxide analgesia is completed. It is professional misconduct for a
dentist to fail to provide the supervision required by this section, and
any dentist found guilty of such misconduct under the procedures
prescribed in section sixty-five hundred ten of this title shall be
subject to the penalties prescribed in section sixty-five hundred eleven
of this title.
 2. The commissioner shall promulgate regulations establishing
standards and procedures for the issuance of such certificate. Such
standards shall require completion of an educational program and/or
course of training or experience sufficient to ensure that a dental
hygienist is specifically trained in the administration and monitoring
of nitrous oxide analgesia and local infiltration anesthesia, the
possible effects of such use, and in the recognition of and response to
possible emergency situations.
 3. The fee for a dental hygiene restricted local infiltration
anesthesia/nitrous oxide analgesia certificate shall be twenty-five
dollars and shall be paid on a triennial basis upon renewal of such
certificate. A certificate may be suspended or revoked in the same
manner as a license to practice dental hygiene.
 * § 6606. Definition of practice of dental hygiene. 1. The practice
of the profession of dental hygiene is defined as the performance of
dental services which shall include removing calcareous deposits,
accretions and stains from the exposed surfaces of the teeth which begin
at the epithelial attachment and applying topical agents indicated for a
complete dental prophylaxis, removing cement, placing or removing rubber
dam, removing sutures, placing matrix band, providing patient education,
applying topical medication, placing and exposing diagnostic dental
X-ray films, performing topical fluoride applications and topical
anesthetic applications, polishing teeth, taking medical history,
charting caries, taking impressions for study casts, placing and
removing temporary restorations, administering and monitoring nitrous
oxide analgesia and administering and monitoring local infiltration
anesthesia, subject to certification in accordance with section
sixty-six hundred five-b of this article, and any other function in the
definition of the practice of dentistry as may be delegated by a
licensed dentist in accordance with regulations promulgated by the
commissioner. The practice of dental hygiene may be conducted in the
office of any licensed dentist or in any appropriately equipped school
or public institution but must be done either under the supervision of a
licensed dentist or, in the case of a registered dental hygienist
working for a hospital as defined in article twenty-eight of the public
health law, pursuant to a collaborative arrangement with a licensed and
registered dentist who has a formal relationship with the same hospital
in accordance with regulations promulgated by the department in
consultation with the department of health. Such collaborative
arrangement shall not obviate or supersede any law or regulation which
requires identified services to be performed under the personal
supervision of a dentist. When dental hygiene services are provided
pursuant to a collaborative agreement, such dental hygienist shall
instruct individuals to visit a licensed dentist for comprehensive
examination or treatment.
 2. The commissioner shall promulgate regulations defining the
functions a dental hygienist may perform that are consistent with the
training and qualifications for a license as a dental hygienist.
 * NB Effective until June 19, 2027
 * § 6606. Definition of practice of dental hygiene. 1. The practice of
the profession of dental hygiene is defined as the performance of dental
services which shall include removing calcareous deposits, accretions
and stains from the exposed surfaces of the teeth which begin at the
epithelial attachment and applying topical agents indicated for a
complete dental prophylaxis, removing cement, placing or removing rubber
dam, removing sutures, placing matrix band, providing patient education,
applying topical medication, placing and exposing diagnostic dental
X-ray films, performing topical fluoride applications and topical
anesthetic applications, polishing teeth, taking medical history,
charting caries, taking impressions for study casts, placing and
removing temporary restorations, administering and monitoring nitrous
oxide analgesia and administering and monitoring local infiltration
anesthesia, subject to certification in accordance with section
sixty-six hundred five-b of this article, and any other function in the
definition of the practice of dentistry as may be delegated by a
licensed dentist in accordance with regulations promulgated by the
commissioner. The practice of dental hygiene may be conducted in the
office of any licensed dentist or in any appropriately equipped school
or public institution but shall be done either under the supervision of
a licensed dentist or may be performed by a registered dental hygienist
designated as a registered dental hygienist, collaborative practice in
collaboration with a licensed dentist provided such services are
performed in accordance with a written practice agreement and written
practice protocols to be known as a collaborative practice agreement.
Under a collaborative practice agreement, dental hygienists may perform
all services which are designated in regulation under general
supervision without prior evaluation of a dentist or medical
professional and may be performed without supervision in an authorized
setting as defined in subdivision four of this section. Such
collaborative agreements shall not obviate or supersede any law or
regulation which requires identified services to be performed under the
personal supervision of a dentist.
 2. The collaborative practice agreement shall:
 (a) be signed and maintained by the dentist, the dental hygienist and
authorized setting;
 (b) be reviewed annually by the dentist and dental hygienist;
 (c) include consideration for medically compromised patients, specific
medical conditions, and age- and procedure-specific practice protocols,
including, but not limited to recommended intervals for the performance
of dental hygiene services and a periodicity in which an examination by
a dentist should occur; and
 (d) be made available to the department and other interested parties
upon request.
 3. Before performing services pursuant to a collaborative practice
agreement, a dental hygienist, collaborative practice shall provide the
patient with a written statement advising the patient that the dental
hygiene services provided are not a substitute for a dental examination
by a licensed dentist. If the dental hygienist makes any referrals to
the patient for further procedures, the dental hygienist shall fill out
a referral form and provide a copy of the form to the collaborating
dentist.
 4. The performance of services pursuant to a collaborative agreement
is authorized in the following settings: a hospital as defined in
article twenty-eight of the public health law, a voluntary foster care
agency health facility licensed pursuant to article twenty-nine-I of the
public health law, an appropriately equipped school, a federally
qualified health center, a long-term care facility, a group home
servicing people with intellectual and developmental disabilities, a
facility serving veterans, a temporary housing facility, a prison, a
drug treatment facility, a domestic violence shelter, and appropriate
settings in which homebound residents are unable to be relocated for
necessary treatment.
 5. A registered dental hygienist, collaborative practice shall have no
more than one collaborative agreement with a dentist at one time.
 6. A dentist shall not have a collaborative agreement with more than
six registered dental hygienists, collaborative practice at one time.
The department may grant an exception to such limitation for public
health settings on a case-by-case basis.
 7. A dental hygienist shall file an application with the department to
practice as a registered dental hygienist, collaborative practice and
pay a fee determined by the department. As a condition of collaborative
practice, the dental hygienist shall have been engaged in practice for
three years with a minimum of four thousand five hundred practice hours
and shall complete an eight-hour continuing education program that
includes instruction in medical emergency procedures, risk management,
dental hygiene jurisprudence and professional ethics.
 8. The commissioner shall promulgate regulations defining the
functions a dental hygienist may perform that are consistent with the
training and qualifications for a license as a dental hygienist.
 * NB Effective June 19, 2027
 § 6607. Practice of dental hygiene and use of title "dental
hygienist". Only a person licensed under section sixty-six hundred nine
of this article or exempt shall practice dental hygiene or use the title
"dental hygienist".
 * § 6608. Definition of practice of registered dental assisting. The
practice of registered dental assisting is defined as providing
supportive services to a dentist in such dentist's performance of dental
services authorized under this article. Such support shall include
providing patient education, taking preliminary medical histories and
vital signs to be reviewed by the dentist, placing and removing rubber
dams, selecting and prefitting provisional crowns, selecting and
prefitting orthodontic bands, removing orthodontic arch wires and
ligature ties, placing and removing matrix bands, taking impressions for
study casts or diagnostic casts, removing periodontal dressings, placing
and removing temporary restorations, application of topical fluoride
varnish, and such other dental supportive services authorized by the
dentist consistent with regulations promulgated by the commissioner,
provided that such functions are performed under the direct personal
supervision of a licensed dentist in the course of the performance of
dental services. Such services shall not include diagnosing and/or
performing surgical procedures, irreversible procedures or procedures
that would alter the hard or soft tissue of the oral and maxillofacial
area or any other procedures determined by the department. The practice
of registered dental assisting may be conducted in the office of any
licensed dentist or in any appropriately equipped school or public
institution but must be done under the direct personal supervision of a
licensed dentist. Direct personal supervision, for purposes of this
section, means supervision of dental procedures based on instructions
given by a licensed dentist in the course of a procedure who remains in
the dental office where the supportive services are being performed,
personally diagnoses the condition to be treated, personally authorizes
the procedures, and before dismissal of the patient, who remains the
responsibility of the licensed dentist, evaluates the services performed
by the registered dental assistant. Nothing herein authorizes a
registered dental assistant to perform any of the services or functions
defined as part of the practice of dental hygiene in accordance with the
provisions of subdivision one of section sixty-six hundred six of this
article, except those functions authorized pursuant to this section. All
dental supportive services provided in this section may be performed by
currently registered dental hygienists either under a dentist's
supervision, as defined in regulations of the commissioner, or, in the
case of a registered dental hygienist working for a hospital as defined
in article twenty-eight of the public health law, pursuant to a
collaborative arrangement with a licensed dentist in accordance with
subdivision one of section sixty-six hundred six of this article. Such
collaborative arrangement shall not obviate or supersede any law or
regulation which requires identified services to be performed under the
personal supervision of a dentist.
 * NB Effective until June 19, 2027
 * § 6608. Definition of practice of registered dental assisting. The
practice of registered dental assisting is defined as providing
supportive services to a dentist in such dentist's performance of dental
services authorized under this article. Such support shall include
providing patient education, taking preliminary medical histories and
vital signs to be reviewed by the dentist, placing and removing rubber
dams, selecting and prefitting provisional crowns, selecting and
prefitting orthodontic bands, removing orthodontic arch wires and
ligature ties, placing and removing matrix bands, taking impressions for
study casts or diagnostic casts, removing periodontal dressings, placing
and removing temporary restorations, application of topical fluoride
varnish, and such other dental supportive services authorized by the
dentist consistent with regulations promulgated by the commissioner,
provided that such functions are performed under the direct personal
supervision of a licensed dentist in the course of the performance of
dental services. Such services shall not include diagnosing and/or
performing surgical procedures, irreversible procedures or procedures
that would alter the hard or soft tissue of the oral and maxillofacial
area or any other procedures determined by the department. The practice
of registered dental assisting may be conducted in the office of any
licensed dentist or in any appropriately equipped school or public
institution but must be done under the direct personal supervision of a
licensed dentist. Direct personal supervision, for purposes of this
section, means supervision of dental procedures based on instructions
given by a licensed dentist in the course of a procedure who remains in
the dental office where the supportive services are being performed,
personally diagnoses the condition to be treated, personally authorizes
the procedures, and before dismissal of the patient, who remains the
responsibility of the licensed dentist, evaluates the services performed
by the registered dental assistant. Nothing herein authorizes a
registered dental assistant to perform any of the services or functions
defined as part of the practice of dental hygiene in accordance with the
provisions of subdivision one of section sixty-six hundred six of this
article, except those functions authorized pursuant to this section. All
dental supportive services provided in this section may be performed by
currently registered dental hygienists either under a dentist's
supervision, as defined in regulations of the commissioner, or, in the
case of a registered dental hygienist performing services in a practice
setting authorized under subdivision four of section sixty-six hundred
six of this article, pursuant to a collaborative arrangement with a
licensed dentist in accordance with section sixty-six hundred six of
this article. Such collaborative arrangement shall not obviate or
supersede any law or regulation which requires identified services to be
performed under the personal supervision of a dentist.
 * NB Effective June 19, 2027
 § 6608-a. Practice of registered dental assisting and use of title
"registered dental assistant". Only a person certified under section
sixty-six hundred eight-b of this article or exempt pursuant to section
sixty-six hundred ten of this article shall practice registered dental
assisting. Only a person certified pursuant to section sixty-six hundred
eight-b of this article shall use the title "registered dental
assistant".
 § 6608-b. Requirements for certification as a registered dental
assistant. To qualify for certification as a registered dental
assistant, an applicant shall fulfill the following requirements:
 (1) Application: file an application with the department;
 (2) Age: be at least eighteen years of age;
 (3) Fees: pay a fee of forty-five dollars to the department for
initial certification and a fee of fifty dollars for each triennial
registration period;
 (4) Education and experience: (A) have received a high school diploma,
or its equivalent, and (B) have successfully completed, in accordance
with the commissioner's regulations, (i) an approved one-year course of
study in dental assisting in a degree-granting institution or a board of
cooperative educational services program which includes at least two
hundred hours of clinical experience, or an equivalent approved course
of study in dental assisting in a non-degree granting institution which
shall not be a professional association or professional organization or
(ii) an alternate course of study in dental assisting acceptable to the
department which shall be provided by a degree-granting institution or a
board of cooperative educational services program which includes at
least one thousand hours of relevant work experience;
 (5) Examination: pass an examination in dental assisting given by an
organization which administers such examinations and which is acceptable
to the department; and
 (6) Character: be of good moral character as determined by the
department.
 § 6608-c. Exempt persons. Nothing in this article shall be construed
to affect or prevent a student from engaging in any procedure authorized
under section sixty-six hundred eight of this article in clinical
practice as part of a course of study approved by the department
pursuant to subdivision four of section sixty-six hundred eight-b of
this article.
 § 6608-d. Limited permits. The department shall issue a limited
permit to an applicant who meets all requirements for admission to the
licensing examination. All practice under a limited permit shall be
under the direct personal supervision of a licensed dentist. Limited
permits shall be for one year and may be renewed at the discretion of
the department for one additional year. The fee for each limited permit
and for each renewal shall be forty dollars.
 § 6609. Requirements for a license as a dental hygienist. To qualify
for a license as a dental hygienist, an applicant shall fulfill the
following requirements:
 (1) Application: file an application with the department;
 (2) Education: have received an education, including high school
graduation and completion of a program in dental hygiene, in accordance
with the commissioner's regulations;
 (3) Experience: have experience satisfactory to the board and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 (4) Examination: pass an examination satisfactory to the board and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 (5) Age: be at least seventeen years of age;
 (6) Citizenship or immigration status: be a United States citizen or a
noncitizen lawfully admitted for permanent residence in the United
States; provided, however, that the board of regents may grant a three
year waiver for a noncitizen to practice in an area which has been
designated a federal dental health professions shortage area, except
that the board of regents may grant an additional extension not to
exceed six years to a noncitizen to enable him or her to secure
citizenship or permanent resident status, provided such status is being
actively pursued;
 (7) Character: be of good moral character as determined by the
department; and
 (8) Fees: pay a fee of one hundred fifteen dollars to the department
for admission to a department conducted examination and for an initial
license, a fee of fifty dollars for each reexamination, a fee of seventy
dollars for an initial license for persons not requiring admission to a
department conducted examination, and a fee of fifty dollars for each
triennial registration period.
 § 6609-a. Mandatory continuing education for dental hygienists. 1.
(A) Each dental hygienist, licensed pursuant to this article and
required to register triennially with the department to practice in this
state shall comply with the provisions of the mandatory continuing
education requirements, except as set forth in paragraphs (B) and (C) of
this subdivision. Dental hygienists who do not satisfy the mandatory
continuing education requirements shall not practice until they have met
such requirements and have been issued a registration or conditional
registration certificate.
 (B) Dental hygienists shall be exempt from the mandatory continuing
education requirement for the triennial registration period during which
they are first licensed. In accordance with the intent of this section,
adjustments to the mandatory continuing education requirement may be
granted by the department for reasons of health, certified by a
physician, for extended active duty with the Armed Forces of the United
States, or for other good cause acceptable to the department which may
prevent compliance.
 (C) A licensed dental hygienist not engaged in the practice of dental
hygiene shall be exempt from the mandatory continuing education
requirement upon the filing of a statement with the department declaring
such status. Any licensee who returns to the practice of dental hygiene
during the triennial registration period shall notify the department
prior to reentering the profession and shall meet such mandatory
continuing education requirements as shall be prescribed by regulation
of the commissioner.
 2. During each triennial registration period an applicant for
registration shall complete a minimum of twenty-four hours of acceptable
formal continuing education including currently mandated child abuse
reporting instruction and infection control training as approved by the
department. Of these twenty-four hours a maximum of ten hours may be
self-instructional coursework as approved by the department. Any dental
hygienist whose first registration date following the effective date of
this section occurs less than three years from such effective date, but
on or after January first, nineteen hundred ninety-eight, shall complete
continuing education hours on a prorated basis at the rate of one and
one-quarter hours per month for the period beginning January first,
nineteen hundred ninety-seven up to the first registration date
thereafter. A licensee who has not satisfied the mandatory continuing
education requirements shall not be issued a triennial registration
certificate by the department and shall not practice unless and until a
conditional registration certificate is issued as provided in
subdivision three of this section. The individual licensee shall
determine the selection of courses or programs of study pursuant to
subdivision four of this section.
 3. The department, in its discretion, may issue a conditional
registration to a licensee who fails to meet the continuing education
requirements established in subdivision two of this section but who
agrees to make up any deficiencies and take any additional education
which the department may require. The fee for such a conditional
registration shall be the same as, and in addition to, the fee for the
triennial registration. The duration of such conditional registration
shall be determined by the department. Any licensee who is notified of
the denial of registration for failure to submit evidence, satisfactory
to the department, of completion of required continuing education and
who practices dental hygiene without such registration, may be subject
to disciplinary proceedings pursuant to section sixty-five hundred ten
of this title.
 4. As used in this section, "acceptable formal continuing education"
shall mean formal programs of learning which contribute to professional
practice and which meet the standards prescribed by regulations of the
commissioner. To fulfill the mandatory continuing education requirement,
programs must be taken from sponsors approved by the department,
pursuant to the regulations of the commissioner.
 5. The mandatory continuing education fee of thirty dollars shall be
payable on or before the first day of each triennial registration
period, and shall be paid in addition to the triennial registration fee
required by section sixty-six hundred nine of this article.
 § 6609-b. Limited permit to practice dental hygiene. 1. A limited
permit to practice dental hygiene may be granted to an individual who
has, to the satisfaction of the department, met all the requirements of
section six thousand six hundred nine of this article, but has not yet
passed the examination required by subdivision four of such section.
 2. A limited permit shall authorize the holder to practice dental
hygiene as defined in section sixty-six hundred six of this article, but
only under the personal supervision of a licensed dentist, as defined in
regulations promulgated by the commissioner.
 3. Limited permits shall be issued for a period of one year and may be
renewed at the discretion of the department for one additional year.
 4. The fee for a limited permit and for each renewal shall be fifty
dollars.
 § 6610. Exempt persons. Nothing in this article shall be construed
to affect or prevent:
 1. An unlicensed person from performing solely mechanical work upon
inert matter in a dental office or on a dental laboratory prescription
of a dentist holding a license or limited permit;
 2. A student from engaging in clinical practice as part of a
registered program operated by a school of dentistry under supervision
of a dentist holding a license or limited permit for instructing in
dentistry in a school of dentistry:
 3. A student from engaging in any procedure authorized under section
sixty-six hundred six of this article in clinical practice as part of a
registered program in dental hygiene under supervision of a dentist
holding a license or a limited permit for instructing in dentistry in a
school of dental hygiene;
 4. An employee of a federal agency from using the title of and
practicing as a dentist or dental hygienist insofar as such activities
are required by his salaried position;
 5. A dentist or a dental hygienist licensed in some other state or
country from making a teaching clinical demonstration before a regularly
organized dental or medical society or group, or from meeting licensed
dentists in this state for consultation, provided such activities are
limited to such demonstration or consultation.
 6. A dentist licensed in another state or country who is employed on a
full-time basis by a registered dental school as a faculty member with
the rank of assistant professor or higher from conducting research and
clinical demonstrations as a part of such employment, under the
supervision of a licensed dentist and on the premises of the school. No
fee may be charged for the practice of dentistry authorized by this
subdivision.
 7. A dentist licensed in another state or country who is visiting an
approved dental school or any other entity operating a residency program
that has been accredited by a national accrediting body approved by the
department to receive dental instruction for a period not to exceed
ninety days from engaging in clinical practice, provided such practice
is limited to such instruction and is under the direct supervision of a
licensed dentist.
 8. Any student matriculated in an accredited dental school located
outside New York state from engaging in appropriately supervised
clinical practice as part of the school's dental program in a teaching
hospital which has a teaching affiliation agreement with the student's
dental school.
 § 6611. Special provisions. 1. Except upon the written dental
laboratory prescription of a licensed dentist and except by the use of
impressions or casts made by a licensed dentist, no dental laboratory
shall furnish, supply, construct, reproduce, place, adjust, or repair
any dental prosthesis, device, or appliance. A dental laboratory
prescription shall be made out in duplicate. It shall contain such data
as may be prescribed by the commissioner's regulations. One copy shall
be retained by the practitioner of dentistry for a period of one year.
The other copy shall be issued to the person, firm or corporation
engaged in filling dental laboratory prescriptions, who or which shall
each retain and file in their respective offices or places of business
their respective copies for a period of one year.
 2. The department is empowered to inspect and to have access to all
places, including the office or offices of a licensed dentist, where
copies of dental laboratory prescriptions issued by him are retained as
required by this section, and to all places where dental laboratory
prescriptions are filled or to any workroom or workrooms in which
prosthetic restorations, prosthetic dentures, bridges, orthodontic or
other appliances or structures to be used as substitutes for natural
teeth or tissue or for the correction of malocclusion or deformities are
made, repaired or altered, with power to subpoena and examine records of
dental laboratory prescriptions. A person who fails to grant access to
such places or who fails to maintain prescriptions as required by this
section shall be guilty of a class A misdemeanor.
 3. The department may arrange for the conduct of clinical examinations
in the clinic of any school of dentistry or dental hygiene within or
outside the state for dental or dental hygiene candidates.
 4. A not-for-profit dental or medical expense indemnity corporation or
hospital service corporation organized under the insurance law or
pursuant to special legislation may enter into contracts with dentists
or partnerships of dentists to provide dental care on its behalf for
persons insured under its contracts or policies.
 5. Legally incorporated dental corporations existing and in operation
prior to January first, nineteen hundred sixteen, may continue to
operate through licensed dentists while conforming to the provisions of
this title. Any such corporation which shall be dissolved or cease to
exist or operate for any reason whatsoever shall not be permitted to
resume operations. No such corporation shall change its name or sell its
franchise or transfer its corporate rights directly or indirectly, by
transfer of capital stock control or otherwise, to any person or to
another corporation without permission from the department, and any
corporation so changing its name or so transferring its franchise or
corporate rights without such permission shall be deemed to have
forfeited its rights to exist and may be dissolved by an action brought
by the attorney general.
 6. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of any general, special
or local law, any licensed dentist who voluntarily and without the
expectation of monetary compensation renders first aid or emergency
treatment at the scene of an accident or other emergency, outside of a
hospital or any other place having proper and necessary medical equipment, to a person who is unconscious, ill or injured shall not be liable
for damages for injuries alleged to have been sustained by such person
or for damages for the death of such person alleged to have occurred by
reason of an act or omission in the rendering of such first aid or
emergency treatment unless it is established that such injuries were or
such death was caused by gross negligence on the part of such dentist.
Nothing in this subdivision shall be deemed or construed to relieve a
licensed dentist from liability for damages for injuries or death caused
by an act or omission on the part of a dentist while rendering
professional services in the normal and ordinary course of practice.
 7. Any dentist or dental hygienist, who in the performance of dental
services, x-rays the mouth or teeth of a patient shall during the
performance of such x-rays shield the torso and thyroid area of such
patient including but not limited to the gonads and other reproductive
organs with a lead apron thyroid collar, or other similar protective
garment or device. Notwithstanding the provisions of this subdivision,
if in the dentist's professional judgment the use of a thyroid collar
would be inappropriate under the circumstances, because of the nature of
the patient, the type of x-ray being taken, or other factors, the
dentist or dental hygienist need not shield the thyroid area.
 8. An unlicensed person may provide supportive services to a dentist
incidental to and concurrent with such dentist personally performing a
service or procedure. Nothing in this subdivision shall be construed to
allow an unlicensed person to provide any service which constitutes the
practice of dentistry or dental hygiene as defined in this article.
 9. There shall be no monetary liability on the part of, and no cause
of action for damages shall arise against, any person, partnership,
corporation, firm, society, or other entity on account of the
communication of information in the possession of such person or entity,
or on account of any recommendation or evaluation, regarding the
qualifications, fitness, or professional conduct or practices of a
dentist, to any governmental agency, dental or specialists society, or
hospital as defined in article twenty-eight of the public health law.
The foregoing shall not apply to information which is untrue and
communicated with malicious intent.
 10. Each dentist and registered dental hygienist working for a
hospital as defined in article twenty-eight of the public health law who
practices in collaboration with a licensed dentist shall become
certified in cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) from an approved
provider and thereafter maintain current certification, which shall be
included in the mandatory hours of continuing education acceptable for
dentists to the extent provided in the commissioner's regulations. In
the event the dentist or registered dental hygienist cannot physically
perform CPR, the commissioner's regulations shall allow the dentist or
registered dental hygienist to make arrangements for another individual
in the office to administer CPR. All dental facilities shall have an
automatic external defibrillator or other defibrillator at the facility.
 § 6612. Identification of removable full or partial prosthetic
devices. 1. Except as provided herein, every dentist licensed in this
state making or directing to be made a removable prosthetic denture,
bridge, appliance or other structure to be used and worn as a substitute
for natural teeth, shall offer to the patient for whom the prosthesis is
intended the opportunity to have such prosthesis marked with the
patient's name or initials. Such markings shall be accomplished at the
time the prosthesis is made and the location and methods used to apply
or implant them shall be determined by the dentist or the person acting
on behalf of the dentist. Such marking shall be permanent, legible and
cosmetically acceptable.
 2. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if in the judgment of the dentist or
the person making the prosthesis, such identification is not practicable
or clinically safe, the identification marks may be omitted entirely.
 3. The commissioner shall adopt rules and regulations and provide
standards necessary to carry out the provisions of this section.
 § 6613. Nitrous oxide equipment. Any machine used in a dental office
for the administration of nitrous oxide to a patient shall be equipped
with a scavenging system that appropriately minimizes leakage of nitrous
oxide.
 ARTICLE 134
 LICENSED PERFUSIONISTS
Section 6630. Definitions.
 6631. Practice of perfusion and use of title "licensed
 perfusionist".
 6632. Requirements for licensure as a perfusionist.
 6633. Special provisions.
 6634. State committee for perfusion.
 6635. Limited permits.
 6636. Exempt persons.
 § 6630. Definitions. As used in this article: 1. The term
"perfusionist" means a person who is licensed to practice perfusion
pursuant to this article.
 2. The term "registered program" means a program for the education of
perfusionists which has been registered by the department or determined
by the department to be the substantial equivalent.
 3. The term "perfusion" means the provision of extracorporeal or
intracorporeal patient care services to support or replace the
circulatory or respiratory function of a patient, including the
administration of pharmacological and therapeutic agents, and blood
products, and the management, treatment and monitoring of the
physiological status of a patient during the operation of extracorporeal
circulation equipment or intracorporeal equipment that replaces or
support circulatory or respiratory functions.
 All perfusion services shall be pursuant to the order and direction of
a physician. Perfusion services may be performed in a general hospital
licensed pursuant to article twenty-eight of the public health law or
during the transport of patients or organs supported by extracorporeal
or intracorporeal equipment.
 4. The term "committee" means the state committee for perfusion
created by section sixty-six hundred thirty-four of this article.
 § 6631. Practice of perfusion and use of title "licensed
perfusionist". Only a person licensed or exempt under this article shall
practice perfusion. Only persons licensed as perfusionists may use the
title "licensed perfusionist".
 § 6632. Requirements for licensure as a perfusionist. To qualify for
licensure as a "licensed perfusionist", an applicant shall fulfill the
following requirements:
 1. Application: file an application with the department;
 2. Education:
 a. has successfully completed a baccalaureate or higher degree in
perfusion registered by the department, or the substantial equivalent as
determined by the department; or
 b. has completed a baccalaureate or higher degree and a credit bearing
certificate program in perfusion acceptable to the department; or
 c. until two years from the effective date of this article, has
completed a baccalaureate or higher degree and an accredited training
program in perfusion acceptable to the department pursuant to
regulations.
 3. examination: has obtained a passing score on an examination
acceptable to the department;
 4. age: at the time of application is at least twenty-one years of
age;
 5. character: be of good moral character as determined by the
department;
 6. Fee: pay a fee determined by the department for an initial license
and for each triennial registration period.
 § 6633. Special provisions. An individual who meets the requirements
for a license as a licensed perfusionist except for examination,
experience and education and who meets the requirements enumerated under
subdivisions one or two of this section may be licensed without meeting
additional requirements provided that such individual submits an
application to the department within two years of the effective date of
this section:
 1. Applicants may be licensed if they have been practicing as a
perfusionist for five years in the past ten years in an inpatient unit
that provides cardiac surgery services in a hospital approved by the
department of health or a substantially equivalent accrediting body
acceptable to the committee and the department at least three of such
years of experience having occurred during the past five years;
 2. Applicants who possess certification from a national certification
organization acceptable to the committee and the department may be
licensed if they have been employed as a perfusionist for three of the
past five years.
 § 6634. State committee for perfusion. 1. A state committee for
perfusion shall be appointed by the board of regents upon the
recommendation of the commissioner as a committee of the board for
medicine to advise solely in matters relating to perfusion and shall
assist on matters of licensure and professional conduct.
 2. The committee shall consist of no fewer than eight individuals, to
be composed of a minimum of the following:
 a. four licensed perfusionists;
 b. two licensed physicians and
 c. two representatives of the public at large.
 § 6635. Limited permits. 1. Eligibility. A person who fulfills all
requirements for licensure as a perfusionist except that relating to the
examination shall be eligible for a limited permit.
 2. Limit of practice. A permittee shall be authorized to practice as a
perfusionist only under the supervision of a licensed perfusionist and
pursuant to the order and direction of a physician.
 3. Duration. A limited permit shall expire one year from the date of
issuance. A limited permit may be extended for one additional year for
good cause as determined by the department.
 4. Fees. The fee for each limited permit shall be one hundred five
dollars.
 § 6636. Exempt persons. This article shall not prohibit:
 1. The practice of perfusion by any student who is engaged in clinical
training in a general hospital licensed pursuant to article twenty-eight
of the public health law or during the transport of patients or organs
supported by extracorporeal or intracorporeal equipment and who is
enrolled in a perfusion program approved by the department, provided
such practice is limited to such clinical training which shall be
carried out under the direct supervision of a licensed perfusionist and
pursuant to the order and direction of a physician; or
 2. The performance of any of the tasks or responsibilities included in
the definition of perfusion by any other person licensed under this
title, provided that such tasks or responsibilities are authorized by
the article governing the profession pursuant to which said person is
licensed; or
 3. The practice of perfusion by any legally qualified perfusionist of
any other state or territory who is serving in the armed forces or the
public health service of the United States or who is employed by the
veterans administration, while engaged in the performance of his or her
duties.
 ARTICLE 135
 VETERINARY MEDICINE AND ANIMAL HEALTH TECHNOLOGY
Section 6700. Introduction.
 6701. Definition of practice of veterinary medicine.
 6702. Practice of veterinary medicine and use of title
 "veterinarian".
 6703. State board for veterinary medicine.
 6704. Requirements for a professional license as a
 veterinarian.
 6704-a. Mandatory continuing education for veterinarians.
 6705. Exempt persons.
 6705-a. Emergency veterinarian service; limited liability.
 6706. Corporate practice.
 6707. Limited permits to engage in the practice of veterinary
 medicine.
 6708. Definition of practice of veterinary technology.
 6709. Practice of veterinary technology and use of title
 "veterinary technician".
 6711. Requirements for a professional license as an veterinary
 technician.
 6711-a. Limited permits to engage in the practice of veterinary
 technology.
 6711-b. Mandatory continuing education for veterinary
 technicians.
 6712. Exempt persons.
 6713. Special provisions.
 6714. Treatment records.
 6715. Dispensing information to be provided by veterinarians.
 § 6700. Introduction. This article applies to the profession of
veterinary medicine and veterinary technology. The general provisions
for all professions contained in article one hundred thirty of this
title apply to this article.
 § 6701. Definition of practice of veterinary medicine. The practice of
the profession of veterinary medicine is defined as diagnosing,
treating, operating, or prescribing for any animal disease, pain,
injury, deformity or dental or physical condition, or the subcutaneous
insertion of a microchip intended to be used to identify an animal.
"Animal" includes every living creature except a human being.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, no provisions
of this section shall be construed to include the floating of equine
teeth as being within the practice of veterinary medicine.
 § 6702. Practice of veterinary medicine and use of title
"veterinarian". 1. Only a person licensed or exempt under this article
shall practice veterinary medicine or use the title "veterinarian".
 2. A licensed veterinarian or a professional service corporation
organized for the practice of veterinary medicine may employ veterinary
technicians to assist them in the practice of their profession in such
capacities as are prescribed by law and as from time to time may be set
by the commissioner or the state board of veterinary medicine. A
veterinarian or professional service corporation may not employ
veterinary technicians in a ratio exceeding three technicians per
supervising licensed veterinarian. Nothing in this section shall be
construed as prohibiting a veterinarian from employing unlicensed lay
persons for the performance of non-technical duties.
 § 6703. State board for veterinary medicine. A state board for
veterinary medicine shall be appointed by the board of regents on
recommendation of the commissioner for the purpose of assisting the
board of regents and the department on matters of professional licensing
and professional conduct in accordance with section sixty-five hundred
eight of this title. The board shall be composed of not less than seven
veterinarians licensed in the state and not more than two veterinary
technicians licensed in the state. An executive secretary to the board
shall be appointed by the board of regents on recommendation of the
commissioner. The participation of the licensed veterinary technicians
shall be limited to issues concerning the licensure of veterinary
technology including but not limited to qualifications, employment,
scope of practice, and discipline.
 § 6704. Requirements for a professional license as a veterinarian. To
qualify for a license as a veterinarian, an applicant shall fulfill the
following requirements:
 (1) Application: file an application with the department;
 (2) Education: have received an education, including a doctoral degree
in veterinary medicine, in accordance with the commissioner's
regulations;
 (3) Experience: have experience satisfactory to the board and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 (4) Examination: pass an examination satisfactory to the board and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 (5) Age: be at least twenty-one years of age;
 (6) Citizenship or immigration status: be a United States citizen or a
noncitizen lawfully admitted for permanent residence in the United
States; provided, however that the board of regents may grant a one-time
three-year waiver for a veterinarian who otherwise meets the
requirements of this article and who has accepted an offer to practice
veterinary medicine in a county in the state which the department has
certified as having a shortage of qualified applicants to fill existing
vacancies in veterinary medicine, and provided further that the board of
regents may grant an extension of such three-year waiver of not more
than one year;
 (7) Character: be of good moral character as determined by the
department; and
 (8) Fees: pay a fee of two hundred sixty dollars to the department for
admission to a department conducted examination and for an initial
license, a fee of one hundred thirty-five dollars for each
reexamination, a fee of one hundred thirty dollars for an initial
license for persons not requiring admission to a department conducted
examination, and a fee of two hundred ten dollars for each triennial
registration period.
 § 6704-a. Mandatory continuing education for veterinarians. 1. (a)
Each veterinarian, licensed pursuant to this article, required to
register triennially with the department to practice in this state shall
comply with the provisions of the mandatory continuing education
requirements, except as set forth in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this
subdivision. Veterinarians who do not satisfy the mandatory continuing
education requirements shall not practice until they have met such
requirements and have been issued a registration or conditional
registration certificate.
 (b) Veterinarians shall be exempt from the mandatory continuing
education requirement for the triennial registration period during which
they are first licensed. In accordance with the intent of this section,
adjustments to the mandatory continuing education requirement may be
granted by the department for reasons of health, certified by a
physician, for extended active duty with the armed forces of the United
States, or for other good cause acceptable to the department which may
prevent compliance. Veterinarians engaged on a full-time basis in the
teaching of veterinary medicine at a veterinary education program
registered by the department or accredited or approved by an acceptable
accrediting organization shall be exempt from the requirements of this
section.
 (c) A licensed veterinarian not engaged in professional practice shall
be exempt from the mandatory continuing education requirement upon the
filing of a statement with the department declaring such status. Any
licensee who returns to the practice of veterinary medicine shall notify
the department prior to reentering the profession and shall meet such
mandatory continuing education requirements as shall be prescribed by
regulation of the commissioner.
 2. (a) During each triennial registration period an applicant for
registration shall complete a minimum of forty-five hours of acceptable
formal continuing education, a maximum of twenty-two and one-half hours
of which may be self-instructional coursework acceptable to the
department.
 (i) Self-instructional coursework may include free spaying and
neutering and other veterinary services in conjunction with a
municipality, duly incorporated not-for-profit society for the
prevention of cruelty to animals, duly incorporated humane society, or
duly incorporated animal protection association or persons who would
otherwise be eligible under paragraph (a) of subdivision three of
section one hundred seventeen-a of the agriculture and markets law,
provided that such services be administered at practices, facilities and
properties that are appropriately equipped and staffed to provide such
services.
 (ii) The department may offset up to three hours of the requisite
number of hours of continuing education required pursuant to this
paragraph by the number of free spaying and neutering services rendered
by an applicant, at a rate of one-half of one hour of continuing
education for each hour of free spaying and neutering services, provided
that a veterinarian shall be required to provide follow-up service for
any post-operative complications related to the surgery that arise
within twenty-four hours of performing the surgery, and shall also be
required to complete the core requirements established by the
department.
 (b) Any veterinarian whose first registration date following the
effective date of this section occurs less than three years from such
effective date, but on or after January first, two thousand twelve,
shall complete continuing education hours on a prorated basis at the
rate of one and one-quarter hours per month for the period beginning
January first, two thousand twelve up to the first registration date
thereafter. A licensee who has not satisfied the mandatory continuing
education requirements shall not be issued a triennial registration
certificate by the department and shall not practice unless and until a
conditional registration certificate is issued as provided in
subdivision three of this section, or until he or she has otherwise met
the requirements of this section. The individual licensee shall
determine the selection of courses or programs of study pursuant to
subdivision four of this section.
 3. The department, in its discretion, may issue a conditional
registration to a licensee who fails to meet the continuing education
requirements established in subdivision two of this section but who
agrees to make up any deficiencies and take any additional education
which the department may require. The fee for such a conditional
registration shall be the same as, and in addition to, the fee for the
triennial registration. The duration of such conditional registration
shall be determined by the department. Any licensee who is notified of
the denial of registration for failure to submit evidence, satisfactory
to the department, of completion of required continuing education and
who practices veterinary medicine without such registration, may be
subject to disciplinary proceedings pursuant to section sixty-five
hundred ten of this title.
 4. As used in this section, "acceptable formal continuing education"
shall mean formal programs of learning which contribute to professional
practice of veterinary medicine which are offered by sponsors of
veterinary continuing education approved by the department, in
consultation with the state board for veterinary medicine, to fulfill
the mandatory continuing education requirement. Sponsors of veterinary
continuing education shall include state or national professional
associations established to further the veterinary professions, and
shall include any affiliates of such associations including local
veterinary medical societies and generally recognized state, national
and international veterinary conferences at which professional
continuing education is a major component of such conferences, as well
as universities and colleges offering programs leading to licensure in
the veterinary medical professions. Sponsors of veterinary medicine
continuing education shall file an application with the department and
pay a fee of nine hundred dollars.
 5. The mandatory continuing education fee shall be established by the
department, and shall be payable on or before the first day of each
triennial registration period, and shall be paid in addition to the
triennial registration fee required by section sixty-seven hundred four
of this article.
 § 6705. Exempt persons. The following persons under the following
limitations may practice veterinary medicine within the state without a
license:
 1. Any commissioned veterinary medical officer serving in the United
States armed forces or in the United States Agricultural Research
Service while so commissioned, provided such practice is limited to such
service;
 2. Any person rendering gratuitous services in cases of emergency;
 3. Any veterinarian who is licensed in another state or country and
who is meeting a veterinarian licensed in this state for purposes of
consultation provided such practice is limited to such consultation;
 4. Any veterinarian who is licensed in a bordering state and who
resides near a border of this state, provided such practice is limited
in this state to the vicinity of such border and provided such
veterinarian does not maintain an office or place to meet patients or
receive calls within this state;
 5. Any intern or resident who practices veterinary medicine in any
college in this state offering a program in veterinary medicine
registered by the department, and who is a graduate of a school of
veterinary medicine accredited in any state or country, provided such
practice is limited to such duties as intern or resident and is under
the supervision of a licensed or otherwise authorized veterinarian.
 6. Any faculty member who is a graduate of a school of veterinary
medicine accredited in any state or country and whose practice of
veterinary medicine is incidental to his or her course of instruction
while serving as a faculty member in a veterinary college offering a
program registered by the department;
 7. Any student who engages in clinical practice under supervision of a
licensed or otherwise authorized veterinarian in a school of veterinary
medicine in this state registered by the department.
 8. Any dentist duly licensed in this state who provides dental care to
an animal at the request and under the immediate personal supervision of
a licensed veterinarian.
 9. Any student enrolled and in good standing in a school of veterinary
medicine approved by the commissioner, who practices under the general
supervision of a veterinarian licensed and registered under this
article; provided however, that only such students who have completed at
least two and one-half years in an approved veterinary program and
completed all core didactic training may assist in diagnosis, treatment
and surgery in such practice, subject to the following requirements: (a)
assisting in diagnosis and surgery be under the immediate personal
supervision of such veterinarian; (b) assisting in treatment be under
the direct supervision of such veterinarian; and (c) only one such
student shall be supervised, as specified in clauses (a) and (b) of this
subdivision, by one such veterinarian.
 10. Any employee of a not-for-profit pound, shelter, duly incorporated
society for the prevention of cruelty to animals, humane society or dog
or cat protective association may insert a microchip for the purposes of
identification of any animal being held for adoption by such
organization.
 11. A veterinary graduate of an approved program engaging in clinical
practice under the supervision, but not necessarily direct personal
supervision, of a licensed veterinarian, provided the graduate has
passed the required state licensing examination and applied and paid a
fee for the licensing. This exemption shall not extend beyond sixty days
after graduation.
 12. A physician duly licensed to practice medicine in this state, who
is board certified in an area of human medicine equivalent to the
required veterinary specialty in cases in which a veterinary specialist
in the area of medicine required for such animal's care does not exist,
is not available, or cannot be procured in a timely fashion, who
provides medical care to a gibbon or siamang (Hylobatidae, Hylobates
sp.), orangutan (Hominidae Pongindae, Pongo sp.), chimpanzee (Hominidae,
Homininae Pan. sp.), gorilla (Hominidae, Homininae, Gorilla sp.),
macaque (Cercopithecidea, Cercopithecinae, Macaca sp.), baboon
(Cercopithecidae, Cercopithecinae, Papio sp., Theropithecus sp.,
Mandrillus sp.), langur (Cercopithecidae, Colobinac, Presbytis sp.,
Trachypithecus sp.), colobus monkey (Cercopithecidae, Colobinae, Colobus
sp.) or guenon (Cercopithecidae, Cercopithecinae, Cercopithecus sp.)
held by a facility accredited by the American Zoo and Aquarium
Association at the request of and under the immediate personal
supervision of a licensed veterinarian who has personally diagnosed the
condition to be treated or who has specifically delegated such duties to
the physician and who evaluates the services provided by such physician.
 13. Any person certified and currently registered as a certified
euthanasia technician pursuant to subdivision three of section three
hundred seventy-four of the agriculture and markets law or any person
undergoing training for such certification where such training is
conducted in accordance with the requirements of such section, provided
that such practice is limited to such certification or training.
 14. A veterinarian who is licensed in another state, and who is in
good standing in such state, providing services directly in connection
with an investigation by law enforcement of an alleged violation of
federal or state animal fighting or animal cruelty laws, within the
scope of the investigation and/or any related judicial proceedings,
subject to the following requirements: (a) an official invitation has
been extended to the veterinarian for a specified period of time by the
law enforcement authority with jurisdiction over the investigation; and
(b) such law enforcement authority determines that the veterinarian
possesses skills, training, or experience necessary and relevant to such
investigation of alleged incidents of animal fighting or animal cruelty.
Such exemption shall not extend beyond the time period specified by the
law enforcement authority with jurisdiction over such investigation. The
law enforcement authority shall notify the state veterinarian of any
investigation conducted pursuant to this subdivision for the purposes of
facilitating appropriate animal disease control measures, if necessary,
pursuant to articles five and twenty-six of the agriculture and markets
law. Any person practicing as a veterinarian in New York state pursuant
to this subdivision shall be subject to the personal and subject matter
jurisdiction and disciplinary and regulatory authority of the board of
regents as if he or she is a licensee and as if the exemption pursuant
to this subdivision is a license. Such individual shall comply with
applicable provisions of the rules of the board of regents, and the
regulations of the commissioner, relating to professional misconduct,
disciplinary proceedings and penalties for professional misconduct.
 15. A veterinarian who is licensed in another state, and who is in
good standing in such state, providing services during an emergency or
natural disaster within the scope and location of assigned veterinary
medical duties of the response efforts if: (a) an official declaration
of the disaster or emergency has been made by the governor or the
delegated state official; and (b) an official invitation has been
extended to the veterinarian for a specified time by the authority that
has jurisdiction for coordinating the animal/agricultural issues in the
state during emergencies either within or outside the emergency
management assistance compact (EMAC). Any person practicing as a
veterinarian in New York state pursuant to this subdivision shall be
subject to the personal and subject matter jurisdiction and disciplinary
and regulatory authority of the board of regents as if he or she is a
licensee and as if the exemption pursuant to this subdivision is a
license. Such individual shall comply with applicable provisions of the
rules of the board of regents, and the regulations of the commissioner,
relating to professional misconduct, disciplinary proceedings and
penalties for professional misconduct.
 § 6705-a. Emergency veterinarian service; limited liability.
Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of any general, special or
local law, any licensed veterinarian who voluntarily, and without the
expectation of monetary compensation, renders first aid or emergency
treatment to an animal that is ill or injured at the scene of an
accident or other emergency, outside of an animal hospital, clinic,
veterinarian's office or other place having proper and necessary
equipment for the practice of veterinary medicine, shall not be liable
for damages for injuries alleged to have been sustained by such animal
or for damages for the death of such animal alleged to have occurred by
reason of an act or omission in the rendering of such first aid or
emergency treatment unless it is established that such injuries were or
such death was caused by gross negligence on the part of such
veterinarian. Nothing in this section shall be deemed or construed to
relieve a licensed veterinarian from liability for damages for injuries
or death caused by an act or omission on the part of a veterinarian
while rendering professional services in the normal and ordinary course
of his or her business.
 § 6706. Corporate practice. 1. No business corporation, other than a
professional service corporation organized under the business
corporation law, shall hereafter be organized for the practice of
veterinary medicine; no business corporation, other than a professional
service corporation, hereafter organized shall be granted a license to
practice veterinary medicine; and no business corporation, other than a
professional service corporation, hereafter organized shall provide
veterinary medical services.
 2. Any not-for-profit corporation may own property in connection with
an animal hospital or shelter provided that all veterinary practice
conducted in such facilities shall be performed by a veterinarian
licensed and registered under this article.
 § 6707. Limited permits to engage in the practice of veterinary
medicine. Permits limited as to eligibility, practice, and duration,
shall be issued by the department to eligible applicants as follows:
 1. Eligibility. The following persons shall be eligible for a limited
permit:
 (1) A person who fulfills all requirements for a license as a
veterinarian except those relating to the examination and citizenship or
permanent residence in the United States;
 (2) A foreign veterinarian who is in this country on a non-immigration
visa for the continuation of veterinary medical study in a college of
veterinary medicine.
 2. Limit of practice. A permittee shall be authorized to practice
veterinary medicine only under the supervision of a licensed
veterinarian in accordance with regulations of the commissioner. A
licensed veterinarian shall supervise one permittee.
 3. Duration. A limited permit issued pursuant to paragraph one of
subdivision one of this section shall be valid for one year or until the
individual has had the opportunity to take the state veterinarian
licensing examination and receive the results of this examination,
whichever shall occur first. It may be renewed once at the discretion of
the department if the permit holder has not had a reasonable opportunity
to take the state veterinarian licensing examination during the period
for which such limited permit was originally issued. A limited permit
may also be issued or extended for not more than one year to afford an
applicant or permit holder a second opportunity to successfully complete
such examination if such applicant or permit holder has successfully
completed the written subjects and all except one of the practical
subjects of such examination. A limited permit issued pursuant to
paragraph two of subdivision one of this section shall be valid for one
year, and may be renewed at the discretion of the department so long as
the permit holder is a bona fide student at a college of veterinary
medicine, in this state.
 4. Fees. The fee for each limited permit and for each renewal shall be
one hundred five dollars.
 § 6708. Definition of practice of veterinary technology. 1. The
practice of the profession of veterinary technology is defined as the
performance of services within the field of veterinary medicine by a
person who, for compensation or personal profit, is employed by or under
the supervision of a veterinarian to perform such duties as are required
in carrying out medical orders as prescribed by a licensed veterinarian
requiring an understanding of veterinary science, but not requiring
professional service as set forth in section sixty-seven hundred one of
this article.
 2. The commissioner shall promulgate regulations defining the
functions an veterinary technician may perform that are consistent with
the training and qualifications for a license as an veterinary
technician. The commissioner may further require that a licensee may
practice within an area of specialization only upon the successful
completion of an examination established for the purpose of establishing
competence in a specific area of practice in the field of veterinary
technology.
 § 6709. Practice of veterinary technology and use of title "veterinary
technician". Only a person licensed under sections sixty-seven hundred
eleven and sixty-seven hundred eleven-a of this article or exempted from
its provisions by section sixty-seven hundred twelve shall practice
veterinary technology or use the title "veterinary technician".
 § 6711. Requirements for a professional license as an veterinary
technician. To qualify for licensure as an veterinary technician, an
applicant shall fulfill the following requirements:
 1. Application: file an application with the department;
 2. Education: have successfully completed a four-year course of study
in a secondary school approved by the board of regents or its
equivalent;
 3. Have completed a college-level course of study in, and hold a
diploma from a school of veterinary science technology for the training
of animal health technicians, giving a course of not less than eighteen
months, registered by the department as maintaining at the time, a
satisfactory standard, or has completed a college-level course of study
determined by the department to be the equivalent thereof;
 4. Any person who submits an application prior to January first,
nineteen hundred eighty-three and who submits evidence of employment by
a veterinarian or a veterinary facility prior to that date may be
licensed on the basis of this experience if acceptable in the discretion
of the board in accordance with the commissioner's regulations and upon
the successful completion of the licensing examination required by this
section;
 5. Examination: pass an examination satisfactory to the board and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 6. Citizenship or immigration status: be a United States citizen or a
noncitizen lawfully admitted for permanent residence in the United
States; provided, however that the board of regents may grant a one-time
three-year waiver for an animal health technician who otherwise meets
the requirements of this article and provided further that the board of
regents may grant an extension of such three-year waiver of not more
than one year;
 7. Character: be of good moral character as determined by the
department; and
 8. Fees: pay a fee to the department for admission to the examination
and for initial licensure of eighty-five dollars, for each reexamination
forty-five dollars, and a fee of eighty dollars for each triennial
registration period.
 § 6711-a. Limited permits to engage in the practice of veterinary
technology. Permits limited as to eligibility, practice, and duration,
shall be issued by the department to eligible applicants as follows:
 1. Eligibility. Persons shall be eligible for a limited permit who
fulfill all requirements for a license as a veterinary technician except
those relating to the examination and citizenship or permanent residence
in the United States.
 2. Duration. A limited permit issued pursuant to subdivision one of
this section shall be valid for one year or until the individual has had
the opportunity to take the state veterinary technician licensing
examination and receive the results of this examination, whichever shall
occur first. It may be renewed once at the discretion of the department
if the permit holder has not had a reasonable opportunity to take the
state veterinary technician licensing examination during the period for
which such limited permit was originally issued.
 3. Fees. The fee for each limited permit and for each renewal shall be
fifty dollars.
 § 6711-b. Mandatory continuing education for veterinary technicians.
1. (a) Each veterinary technician, licensed pursuant to this article,
required to register triennially with the department to practice in this
state shall comply with the provisions of the mandatory continuing
education requirements, except as set forth in paragraphs (b) and (c) of
this subdivision. Veterinary technicians who do not satisfy the
mandatory continuing education requirements shall not practice until
they have met such requirement and have been issued a registration or
conditional registration certificate.
 (b) Veterinary technicians shall be exempt from the mandatory
continuing education requirement for the triennial registration period
during which they are first licensed. In accordance with the intent of
this section, adjustments to the mandatory continuing education
requirement may be granted by the department for reasons of health,
certified by a physician, for extended active duty with the armed forces
of the United States, or for other good cause acceptable to the
department which may prevent compliance. Veterinary technicians engaged
on a full-time basis in the teaching of veterinary medicine at a
veterinary education program registered by the department or an
accrediting organization acceptable to the department shall be exempt
from the requirements of this section.
 (c) A licensed veterinary technician, not engaged in professional
practice shall be exempt from the mandatory continuing education
requirement upon the filing of a statement with the department declaring
such status. Any licensee who returns to the practice of veterinary
technology shall notify the department prior to reentering the
profession and shall meet such mandatory continuing education
requirements as shall be prescribed by regulation of the commissioner.
 2. During each triennial registration period an applicant for
registration shall complete a minimum of twenty-four hours of acceptable
formal continuing education, a maximum of twelve hours of which may be
self-instructional coursework acceptable to the department. Any
veterinary technician whose first registration date following the
effective date of this section occurs less than three years from such
effective date, but on or after January first, two thousand twelve,
shall complete continuing education hours on a prorated basis at the
rate of one and one-quarter hours per month for the period beginning
January first, two thousand twelve up to the first registration date
thereafter. A licensee who has not satisfied the mandatory continuing
education requirements shall not be issued a triennial registration
certificate by the department and shall not practice unless and until a
conditional registration certificate is issued as provided in
subdivision three of this section, or until he or she has otherwise met
the requirements of this section. The individual licensee shall
determine the selection of courses or programs of study pursuant to
subdivision four of this section.
 3. The department, in its discretion, may issue a conditional
registration to a licensee who fails to meet the continuing education
requirements established in subdivision two of this section but who
agrees to make up any deficiencies and take any additional education
which the department may require. The fee for such a conditional
registration shall be the same as, and in addition to, the fee for the
triennial registration. The duration of such conditional registration
shall be determined by the department. Any licensee who is notified of
the denial of registration for failure to submit evidence, satisfactory
to the department, of completion of required continuing education and
who practices veterinary technology without such registration, may be
subject to disciplinary proceedings pursuant to section sixty-five
hundred ten of this title.
 4. As used in this section, "acceptable formal continuing education"
shall mean formal programs of learning which contribute to professional
practice of veterinary technology which are offered by sponsors of
veterinary technician continuing education approved by the department,
in consultation with the state board for veterinary medicine, to fulfill
the mandatory continuing education requirement. Sponsors of veterinary
technician continuing education shall include state or national
professional associations established to further the veterinary
professions and shall include any affiliates of such associations
including local veterinary medical societies and local veterinary
technician societies and generally recognized state, national and
international veterinary and veterinary technician conferences at which
professional continuing education is a major component of such
conferences, as well as universities and colleges offering programs
leading to licensure in the veterinary medical professions. Sponsors of
veterinary technician continuing education shall file an application
with the department and pay a fee of nine hundred dollars.
 5. The mandatory continuing education fee shall be established by the
department, and shall be payable on or before the first day of each
triennial registration period, and shall be paid in addition to the
triennial registration fee required by section sixty-seven hundred
eleven of this article.
 § 6712. Exempt persons. Nothing in this article shall be construed to
affect or prevent the following persons under the following limitations
from practicing veterinary technology within the state without a
license:
 1. Technicians in the performance of more technical procedures in a
research facility, on animals owned by that institution when such work
is under the direct supervision of a qualified professional;
 2. Technicians in the military or naval service of the United States,
United States Department of Agriculture, the United States Veterans
Administration or the United States Public Health Service, in the
practice of such technical procedures in obedience to the requirements
of the laws of the United States, while engaged in the performance of
the actual duties prescribed under the appropriate statutes of the
United States;
 3. Any student engaging in clinical practice under the supervision of
a licensed veterinarian in pursuance of an approved program for the
training of veterinary technology;
 4. A technician who is licensed in another state, and who is in good
standing in such state, providing veterinary technology services
otherwise permissible pursuant to this article directly in connection
with an investigation by law enforcement of an alleged violation of
federal or state animal fighting or animal cruelty laws, within the
scope of the investigation and/or any related judicial proceedings,
subject to the following requirements: (a) an official invitation has
been extended to the technician for a specified period of time by the
law enforcement authority with jurisdiction over the investigation; and
(b) such law enforcement authority determines that the technician
possesses skills, training, or experience necessary and relevant to such
investigation of alleged incidents of animal fighting or animal cruelty.
Such exemption shall not extend beyond the time period specified by the
law enforcement authority with jurisdiction over such investigation. The
law enforcement authority shall notify the state veterinarian of any
investigation conducted pursuant to this section for the purposes of
facilitating appropriate animal disease control measures, if necessary,
pursuant to articles five and twenty-six of the agriculture and markets
law. Any person practicing as a veterinary technician in New York state
pursuant to this subdivision shall be subject to the personal and
subject matter jurisdiction and disciplinary and regulatory authority of
the board of regents as if he or she is a licensee and as if the
exemption pursuant to this subdivision is a license. Such individual
shall comply with applicable provisions of the rules of the board of
regents, and the regulations of the commissioner, relating to
professional misconduct, disciplinary proceedings and penalties for
professional misconduct.
 5. A technician who is licensed in another state, and who is in good
standing in such state, providing veterinary technology services
otherwise permissible pursuant to this article during an emergency or
natural disaster within the scope and location of assigned veterinary
technician duties of the response efforts if: (a) an official
declaration of the disaster or emergency has been made by the governor
or the delegated state official; and (b) an official invitation has been
extended to the technician for a specified time by the authority that
has jurisdiction for coordinating the animal/agricultural issues in the
state during emergencies either within or outside the emergency
management assistance compact (EMAC). Any person practicing as a
veterinary technician in New York state pursuant to this subdivision
shall be subject to the personal and subject matter jurisdiction and
disciplinary and regulatory authority of the board of regents as if he
or she is a licensee and as if the exemption pursuant to this
subdivision is a license. Such individual shall comply with applicable
provisions of the rules of the board of regents, and the regulations of
the commissioner, relating to professional misconduct, disciplinary
proceedings and penalties for professional misconduct.
 § 6713. Special provisions. 1. An unlicensed person may provide
supportive services to a veterinarian, including but not limited to
administering oral or topical medications, incidental to and/or
concurrent with such veterinarian personally performing a service or
procedure, provided such supportive services do not require a knowledge
of veterinary science.
 2. A certified emergency medical technician may perform endotracheal
intubation on an animal under the immediate personal supervision of a
licensed veterinarian or a licensed veterinary technician acting under
the direct supervision of a veterinarian, in lieu of the licensed
veterinarian personally performing the procedure, provided:
 a. the emergency medical technician is enrolled in a course in
advanced emergency medical technology approved under article thirty of
the public health law in which pediatric endotracheal intubation
training is included;
 b. the procedure is performed as part of pediatric endotracheal
intubation training in that course, after didactic and manikin training
in human intubation, and instruction in animal anatomy and the proper
method of animal intubation have been received;
 c. the procedure is medically indicated as part of treating or
operating for any non-emergency disease, pain, injury, deformity, or
physical condition of the animal;
 d. the procedure is performed only when the animal is properly sedated
or anesthetized;
 e. the procedure is performed no more than once per animal by no more
than one certified emergency medical technician;
 f. the animal owner, or where such owner is unknown, the person having
lawful charge or custody of the animal, consents in writing to the
performance of the procedure by a person meeting the qualifications of
this subdivision; and
 g. records kept by the commissioner of health on courses in advanced
emergency medical technology meeting the requirements of this
subdivision indicate whether pediatric endotracheal intubation training
conducted in accordance with the provisions of this subdivision was part
of a course in advanced emergency medical technology; provided, however,
that this subdivision shall not be construed to require endotracheal
intubation on animals, and the commissioner of health shall have
discretion to determine whether endotracheal intubation training on
animals shall be required for accreditation of such courses or for
certification of advanced emergency medical technicians.
 § 6714. Treatment records. 1. Upon written request from the owner of
an animal which has received treatment from or under the supervision of
a veterinarian, such veterinarian shall provide to such owner within a
reasonable time period a copy of all records relating to the treatment
of such animal. For the purposes of this section, the term "records"
shall mean all information concerning or related to the examination or
treatment of the animal kept by the veterinarian in the course of his or
her practice. A veterinarian may impose a reasonable charge for
providing copies of such records. A veterinarian may make available to
the owner either the original or a copy of such record or document
including x-rays, electrocardiograms and other diagnostic tests and may
impose a reasonable fee for the reproduction of such copies.
 2. A veterinarian licensed pursuant to this article, may disclose
records, as defined in this section, concerning a companion animal as
defined in section three hundred fifty of the agriculture and markets
law which has received treatment by such veterinarian without the
consent of the companion animal's owner under the following
circumstances:
 (a) When a veterinarian reasonably and in good faith suspects that a
companion animal's injury, illness or condition is the result of animal
cruelty in violation of section three hundred fifty-one, three hundred
fifty-three or three hundred fifty-three-a of the agriculture and
markets law, the veterinarian shall report the incident and disclose
records concerning the companion animal's condition and treatment to any
officer or agent authorized pursuant to sections three hundred
seventy-one and three hundred seventy-three of the agriculture and
markets law to respond to and investigate complaints of animal cruelty.
The identity of such veterinarian making a report pursuant to this
paragraph shall only be made available to an officer or agent authorized
pursuant to section three hundred seventy-one or three hundred
seventy-three of the agriculture and markets law.
 (b) When a veterinarian reasonably believes that disclosure of records
as defined in this section, is necessary to protect the health or
welfare of a companion animal, a person or the public, the veterinarian
may disclose such records to any officer or agent authorized pursuant to
sections three hundred seventy-one and three hundred seventy-three of
the agriculture and markets law to respond to and investigate complaints
of animal cruelty. The identity of such veterinarian making a disclosure
of records pursuant to this paragraph shall only be made available to an
officer or agent authorized pursuant to section three hundred
seventy-one or three hundred seventy-three of the agriculture and
markets law.
 (c) Any such veterinarian who reports an incident or discloses records
concerning a companion animal's condition and treatment pursuant to
paragraph (a) or (b) of this subdivision shall be entitled to receive
and be provided with, at no cost to such veterinarian, written or
electronic documentation of such report by the agent or officer to whom
such report was made. Such report shall include but not be limited to
the date such report was made, the identity of the individual against
whom such report was made, the species and description of the animal
about which such report was made, the nature of the injuries to the
animal and the name and license number of the veterinarian who made such
report.
 3. A veterinarian acts in good faith within the meaning of this
section when he or she reasonably believes that his or her actions are
necessary to protect the health and welfare of the companion animal or
the public.
 4. A veterinarian who reasonably and in good faith reports or
discloses records in accordance with this section shall be immune from
liability in the form of damages in any civil or criminal proceeding on
account of such reporting or disclosure.
 § 6715. Dispensing information to be provided by veterinarians. 1.
Each time a veterinarian initially prescribes or dispenses a drug to a
dog, cat, or rabbit for use outside the office, the veterinarian shall
provide to the owner of such animal, or his or her agent, the following
information:
 (a) the name and description of the drug;
 (b) directions for use, including, if applicable, any actions to be
taken in the event of a missed dose;
 (c) if available, manufacturer instructions for proper storage;
 (d) any common reasonably anticipated adverse effects associated with
the use of such drug; and
 (e) if available, manufacturer precautions and relevant warnings.
 2. The provisions of paragraphs (d) and (e) of subdivision one of this
section shall only apply when the manufacturer has made available
information for the specific animal species to which such drug is
prescribed or dispensed pursuant to subdivision one of this section.
 3. The information to be provided pursuant to subdivision one of this
section shall be provided in writing or orally and the method of
disclosure shall be noted in the patient medical record.
 ARTICLE 136
 PHYSICAL THERAPY AND PHYSICAL THERAPIST ASSISTANTS
Section 6730. Introduction.
 6731. Definition of physical therapy.
 6732. Practice of physical therapy and the use of title
 "physical therapist".
 6733. State board for physical therapy.
 6734. Requirements for a professional license.
 6735. Limited permits.
 6736. Exempt persons.
 6737. Non-liability of licensed physical therapists for first
 aid or emergency treatment.
 6738. Definition of physical therapist assistant.
 6739. Duties of physical therapist assistants and the use of
 title "physical therapist assistant".
 6740. Requirements for certification as a physical therapist
 assistant.
 6741. Exemption.
 6741-a. Limited permits.
 6742. Special provision.
 6742-a. Mandatory continuing education.
 6743. Validity of existing licenses.
 § 6730. Introduction. This article applies to the profession of
physical therapy and provides for the licensing of physical therapists
and for the certification of physical therapist assistants. The general
provisions for all professions contained in article one hundred thirty
of this title apply to this article.
 § 6731. Definition of physical therapy. Physical therapy is defined
as:
 a. The evaluation, treatment or prevention of disability, injury,
disease, or other condition of health using physical, chemical, and
mechanical means including, but not limited to heat, cold, light, air,
water, sound, electricity, massage, mobilization, and therapeutic
exercise with or without assistive devices, and the performance and
interpretation of tests and measurements to assess pathophysiological,
pathomechanical, and developmental deficits of human systems to
determine treatment, and assist in diagnosis and prognosis.
 b. The use of roentgen rays or radium, or the use of electricity for
surgical purposes such as cauterization shall not be included in the
practice of physical therapy.
 c. Such treatment shall be rendered pursuant to a referral which may
be directive as to treatment by a licensed physician, dentist,
podiatrist, nurse practitioner or licensed midwife, each acting within
his or her lawful scope of practice, and in accordance with their
diagnosis, except as provided in subdivision d of this section.
 d. Such treatment may be rendered by a licensed physical therapist for
ten visits or thirty days, whichever shall occur first, without a
referral from a physician, dentist, podiatrist, nurse practitioner or
licensed midwife provided that:
 (1) The licensed physical therapist has practiced physical therapy on
a full time basis equivalent to not less than three years.
 (2) Each physical therapist licensed pursuant to this article shall
provide written notice to each patient receiving treatment absent a
referral from a physician, dentist, podiatrist, nurse practitioner or
licensed midwife that physical therapy may not be covered by the
patient's health care plan or insurer without such a referral and that
such treatment may be a covered expense if rendered pursuant to a
referral. The physical therapist shall keep on file with the patient's
records a form attesting to the patient's notice of such advice. Such
form shall be in duplicate, with one copy to be retained by the patient,
signed and dated by both the physical therapist and the patient in such
form as prescribed pursuant to regulations promulgated by the
commissioner.
 § 6732. Practice of physical therapy and the use of title "physical
therapist". Only a person licensed or otherwise authorized under this
article shall practice physical therapy or use the title "physical
therapist", "physiotherapist" or "mechanotherapist" or the abbreviation
of "P.T." in connection with his or her name or with any trade name in
the conduct of his profession. Only a person licensed or otherwise
authorized under this article to practice physical therapy, and who has
obtained a doctorate in physical therapy may use the title "doctor of
physical therapy" or abbreviation "D.P.T." in connection with his or her
name or with any trade name to indicate or imply that the person is
licensed or otherwise authorized to practice physical therapy.
 § 6733. State board for physical therapy. A state board for physical
therapy shall be appointed by the board of regents on recommendation of
the commissioner for the purpose of assisting the board of regents and
the department on matters of professional licensing and professional
conduct in accordance with section sixty-five hundred eight of this
title. The board shall be composed of not less than eight licensed
physical therapists and not less than one public representative. An
executive secretary to the board shall be appointed by the board of
regents on recommendation of the commissioner.
 § 6734. Requirements for a professional license. To qualify for a
license as a physical therapist, an applicant shall fulfill the
following requirements:
 a. Application: file an application with the department;
 b. Education: have received an education, including a doctoral degree
in physical therapy or determined to be equivalent, in accordance with
the commissioner's regulations;
 c. Experience: have experience satisfactory to the board in accordance
with the commissioner's regulations;
 d. Examination: pass an examination satisfactory to the board and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 e. Age: be at least twenty-one years of age;
 f. Character: be of good moral character as determined by the
department; and
 g. Fees: pay a fee of one hundred seventy-five dollars to the
department for admission to a department conducted examination and for
an initial license; a fee of eighty-five dollars for each reexamination;
a fee of one hundred fifteen dollars for an initial license for persons
not requiring admission to a department conducted examination; and a fee
of one hundred fifty-five dollars for each triennial registration
period.
 § 6735. Limited permits. a. The department of education shall issue a
limited permit to an applicant who meets all requirements for admission
to the licensing examination.
 b. All practice under a limited permit shall be under the supervision
of a licensed physical therapist in a public hospital, an incorporated
hospital or clinic, a licensed proprietary hospital, a licensed nursing
home, a public health agency, a recognized public or non-public school
setting, the office of a licensed physical therapist, or in the civil
service of the state or political subdivision thereof.
 c. Limited permits shall be for six months and the department may for
justifiable cause renew a limited permit provided that no applicant
shall practice under any limited permit for more than a total of one
year.
 d. Supervision of a permittee by a licensed physical therapist shall
be on-site supervision and not necessarily direct personal supervision
except that such supervision need not be on-site when the supervising
physical therapist has determined, through evaluation, the setting of
goals and the establishment of a treatment plan, that the program is one
of maintenance as defined pursuant to title XVIII of the federal social
security act.
 e. The fee for each limited permit and for each renewal shall be
seventy dollars.
 § 6736. Exempt persons. a. This article shall not be construed to
affect or prevent the administration of physical therapy or the use of
modalities by a person employed by a licensed physician or physical
therapist in his office, or in the civil service of the state or any
political subdivision thereof, or in a hospital or clinic, or in an
infirmary maintained by a person, firm or corporation employing one or
more full-time licensed physicians or physical therapists, provided that
such person was so employed for a period of at least two years prior to
April tenth, nineteen hundred fifty, and has been issued a written
authorization by the department.
 b. This article shall not be construed to affect or prevent:
 (1) a physical therapy student from engaging in clinical practice
under the supervision of a licensed physical therapist as part of a
program conducted in an approved school of physical therapy or in a
clinical facility or health care agency affiliated with the school of
physical therapy and supervision of a physical therapy student by a
licensed physical therapist shall be on-site supervision and not
necessarily direct personal supervision;
 (2) a physical therapist graduate of an approved program from engaging
in clinical practice under the on-site, but not necessarily direct
personal supervision of a licensed physical therapist provided the
graduate has: (a) applied and paid a fee for the licensing and
examination, (b) applied and paid a fee for the temporary permit. This
exemption shall not extend beyond ninety days after graduation;
 (3) a physical therapist licensed in another state or country from
conducting a teaching clinical demonstration in connection with a
program of basic clinical education, graduate education, or
post-graduate education in an approved school of physical therapy or in
its affiliated clinical facility or health care agency, or before a
group of licensed physical therapists who are members of a professional
society;
 (4) a physical therapist who is serving in the armed forces or the
public health service of the United States or is employed by the
veterans administration from practicing the profession of physical
therapy, provided such practice is limited to such service or
employment.
 § 6737. Non-liability of licensed physical therapists for first aid
or emergency treatment. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of
any general, special or local law, any licensed physical therapist who
voluntarily and without the expectation of monetary compensation renders
first aid or emergency treatment at the scene of an accident or other
emergency, outside a hospital, doctor's office or any other place having
proper and necessary physical therapy equipment, to a person who is
unconscious, ill or injured, shall not be liable for damages for
injuries alleged to have been sustained by such person or for damages
for the death of such person alleged to have occurred by reason of an
act or omission in the rendering of such first aid or emergency
treatment unless it is established that such injuries were or such death
was caused by gross negligence on the part of such physical therapist.
Nothing in this section shall be deemed or construed to relieve a
licensed physical therapist from liability for damages for injuries or
death caused by an act or omission on the part of a physical therapist
while rendering professional services in the normal and ordinary course
of his practice.
 § 6738. Definition of physical therapist assistant. * a. A "physical
therapist assistant" means a person licensed in accordance with this
article who works under the supervision of a licensed physical therapist
performing such patient related activities as are assigned by the
supervising physical therapist. Duties of physical therapist assistants
shall not include evaluation, testing, interpretation, planning or
modification of patient programs. Supervision of a physical therapist
assistant by a licensed physical therapist shall be on-site supervision,
but not necessarily direct personal supervision. The number of licensed
physical therapist assistants supervised by one licensed physical
therapist shall not exceed the ratio of four licensed physical therapist
assistants to one licensed physical therapist as shall be determined by
the commissioner's regulations insuring that there be adequate
supervision in the best interest of public health and safety. Nothing in
this section shall prohibit a hospital from employing physical therapist
assistants, provided they work under the supervision of physical
therapists designated by the hospital and not beyond the scope of
practice of a physical therapist assistant. The numerical limitation of
this section shall not apply to work performed in a hospital, provided
that there be adequate supervision in the best interest of public health
and safety.
 * NB Effective until November 21, 2026
 * a. A "physical therapist assistant" means a person licensed in
accordance with this article who works under the direction and
supervision of a licensed physical therapist performing such patient
related activities as are assigned by the supervising physical
therapist. Duties of physical therapist assistants shall not include
evaluation, testing, interpretation, planning or modification of a
patient's plan of care. Supervision by the licensed physical therapist
shall be continuous but shall not necessarily require the physical
presence at the time and place where services are being performed.
Provided further, however, such physical therapist must be available for
consultation with the physical therapist assistant or patient within a
reasonable amount of time pursuant to the commissioner's regulations.
The number of licensed physical therapist assistants supervised by one
licensed physical therapist shall not exceed the ratio of four licensed
physical therapist assistants to one licensed physical therapist as
shall be determined by the commissioner's regulations insuring that
there be adequate supervision in the best interest of public health and
safety. Nothing in this section shall prohibit a hospital from employing
physical therapist assistants, provided they work under the supervision
of physical therapists designated by the hospital and not beyond the
scope of practice of a physical therapist assistant. The numerical
limitation of this section shall not apply to work performed in a
hospital, provided that there be adequate supervision in the best
interest of public health and safety.
 * NB Effective November 21, 2026
 b. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision a of this section,
supervision of a licensed physical therapist assistant by a licensed
physical therapist, (i) in a residential health care facility, as
defined in article twenty-eight of the public health law, (ii) in a
diagnostic and treatment center licensed under article twenty-eight of
the public health law that provides, as its principal mission, services
to individuals with developmental disabilities, (iii) in a facility, as
defined in section 1.03 of the mental hygiene law, or (iv) under a
monitored program of the office for people with developmental
disabilities as defined in subdivision (a) of section 13.15 of the
mental hygiene law, shall be continuous but not necessarily on site when
the supervising physical therapist has determined, through evaluation,
the setting of goals and the establishment of a treatment plan, that the
program is one of maintenance as defined pursuant to title XVIII of the
federal social security act. The provisions of this subdivision shall
not apply to the provision of physical therapy services when the
condition requires multiple adjustments of sequences and procedures due
to rapidly changing physiological status and/or response to treatment,
or to children under five years of age.
 * c. For the purposes of the provision of physical therapist assistant
services in a home care services setting, as such services are defined
in article thirty-six of the public health law, except that the home
care services setting shall not include early intervention services as
defined in title two-A of article twenty-five of the public health law,
whether such services are provided by a home care services agency or
under the supervision of a physical therapist licensed pursuant to this
article, continuous supervision of a licensed physical therapist
assistant, who has had direct clinical experience for a period of not
less than two years, by a licensed physical therapist shall not be
construed as requiring the physical presence of such licensed physical
therapist at the time and place where such services are performed. For
purposes of this subdivision "continuous supervision" shall be deemed to
include: (i) the licensed physical therapist's setting of goals,
establishing a plan of care and determining whether the patient is
appropriate to receive the services of a licensed physical therapist
assistant subject to the licensed physical therapist's evaluation; (ii)
an initial joint visit with the patient by the supervising licensed
physical therapist and the licensed physical therapist assistant; (iii)
periodic treatment and evaluation of the patient by the supervising
licensed physical therapist, as indicated in the plan of care and as
determined in accordance with patient need, but in no instance shall the
interval between such treatment exceed every six patient visits or
thirty days, whichever occurs first; and (iv) a final evaluation by the
supervising licensed physical therapist to determine if the plan of care
shall be terminated. For purposes of this subdivision, the number of
licensed physical therapist assistant's supervised in the home care
services setting by a licensed physical therapist shall not exceed the
ratio of two physical therapist assistants to one licensed physical
therapist.
 * NB Repealed June 30, 2026
 * d. (1) For purposes of the provision of licensed physical therapist
assistant services in public primary or private primary or secondary
schools and for preschool children, as that term is defined in paragraph
i of subdivision one of section forty-four hundred ten of this chapter,
and receiving services thereunder, continuous supervision of a licensed
physical therapist assistant, who has direct clinical experience
providing age appropriate physical therapy services for a period of not
less than two years, by a licensed physical therapist shall not be
construed as requiring the physical presence of such licensed physical
therapist at the time and place where such services are performed. For
purposes of this subdivision "continuous supervision" shall be deemed to
include:
 (i) the licensed physical therapist's setting of the goals,
establishing a plan of care, determining on an initial and ongoing basis
whether the patient is appropriate to receive the services of a licensed
physical therapist assistant, determining the frequency of joint visits
with the patient by both the supervising licensed physical therapist and
the licensed physical therapist assistant, except that in no instance
shall the interval, between joint visits, be more than every ninety
calendar days, subject to the licensed physical therapist's evaluation;
 (ii) an initial joint visit with the patient by the supervising
licensed physical therapist and licensed physical therapist assistant;
 (iii) periodic treatment and evaluation of the patient by the
supervising licensed physical therapist as indicated in the plan of care
and as determined in accordance with patient need, except that in no
instance shall the interval between such treatment exceed every twelfth
visit or thirty days which ever occurs first; and
 (iv) notification of the supervising licensed physical therapist by
the licensed physical therapist assistant whenever there is a change in
status, condition or performance of the patient.
 (2) This subdivision shall not apply to the provision of physical
therapy services when a child's condition requires multiple adjustments
of sequences and procedures due to rapidly changing physiologic status
and/or response to treatment.
 * NB Repealed June 30, 2030
 § 6739. Duties of licensed physical therapist assistants and the use
of title "physical therapist assistant". Only a person licensed or
otherwise authorized under this article shall participate in the
practice of physical therapy as a licensed physical therapist assistant
and only a person licensed under this section shall use the title
"physical therapist assistant".
 § 6740. Requirements for license as a physical therapist assistant. a.
Application: file an application with the department;
 b. Education: have received an education including completion of a
two-year college program in a physical therapist assistant program or
equivalent in accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 c. Experience: have experience satisfactory to the state board for
physical therapy in accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 c-1. Examination: pass an examination satisfactory to the board and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 d. Age: be at least eighteen years of age;
 e. Character: be of good moral character as determined by the
department;
 f. Registration: all licensed physical therapist assistants shall
register triennially with the department in accordance with the
regulations of the commissioner;
 g. Fees: pay a fee for an initial license of forty-five dollars, and
for the biennial registration period ending December thirty-first,
nineteen hundred eighty-two a fee of twenty dollars and a fee of fifty
dollars for each triennial registration period.
 § 6741. Exemption. a. This article shall not be construed to affect or
prevent a physical therapist assistant student from engaging in clinical
assisting under the supervision of a licensed physical therapist as part
of a program conducted in an approved program for physical therapist
assistants or in a clinical facility or health care agency affiliated
with the program for physical therapist assistants.
 b. Supervision of a physical therapist assistant student by a licensed
physical therapist shall be on-site supervision and not necessarily
direct personal supervision.
 c. Nothing in this article is intended to affect the overall medical
direction by a licensed physician of a physical therapist assistant.
 § 6741-a. Limited permits. a. The department shall issue a limited
permit to an applicant who meets all requirements for admission to the
certification examination.
 b. All practice under a limited permit shall be under the supervision
of a licensed physical therapist in a public hospital, an incorporated
hospital or clinic, a licensed proprietary hospital, a licensed nursing
home, a public health agency, a recognized public or non-public school
setting, the office of a licensed physical therapist, or in the civil
service of the state or political subdivision thereof.
 c. Limited permits shall be for six months and the department may for
justifiable cause renew a limited permit provided that no applicant
shall practice under any limited permit for more than a total of one
year.
 d. Supervision of a permittee by a licensed physical therapist shall
be on-site supervision and not necessarily direct personal supervision.
 e. The fee for each limited permit and for each renewal shall be fifty
dollars.
 § 6742. Special provision. 1. Any person who is employed as a
physical therapist assistant in a facility satisfactory to the state
board for a period of not less than two years prior to the effective
date of this article and who does not qualify for certification under
subdivision b of section sixty-seven hundred forty of this article may
be certified as a physical therapist assistant upon successful
completion of an examination approved by the state board of physical
therapy in accordance with the commissioner's regulations.
 2. Application for examination for certification pursuant to this
section must be submitted not later than January first, nineteen hundred
eighty-five. The department shall provide a total of three such
examinations. The third examination shall be given not later than April
first, nineteen hundred eighty-five. The fee for examination or
reexamination shall be twenty-five dollars for each examination. Any
person who qualifies for admission to an examination pursuant to this
section may practice as a physical therapist assistant in the course of
his or her employment in a facility satisfactory to the state board
until thirty days after notification of failure to qualify pursuant to
this section.
 3. Any person who was employed as a physical therapist assistant for
at least two years prior to April first, nineteen hundred eighty-one,
and who had attained permanent civil service status as a physical
therapist assistant prior to that date, shall be issued written
authorization from the department to continue working in that capacity
without examination. This authorization shall remain in effect until the
person leaves the position in which the civil service status had been
granted.
 § 6742-a. Mandatory continuing education. 1. (a) Each licensed
physical therapist and licensed physical therapist assistant required
under this article to register triennially with the department to
practice in the state shall comply with the provisions of the mandatory
continuing education requirements prescribed in subdivision two of this
section except as set forth in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this
subdivision. Licensed physical therapist and licensed physical therapist
assistants who do not satisfy the mandatory continuing education
requirements shall not practice until they have met such requirements,
and they have been issued a registration certificate, except that a
licensed physical therapist or licensed physical therapist assistant may
practice without having met such requirements if he or she is issued a
conditional registration certificate pursuant to subdivision three of
this section.
 (b) Each licensed physical therapist and licensed physical therapist
assistant shall be exempt from the mandatory continuing education
requirement for the triennial registration period during which they are
first licensed. In accordance with the intent of this section,
adjustment to the mandatory continuing education requirement may be
granted by the department for reasons of health certified by an
appropriate health care professional, for extended active duty with the
armed forces of the United States, or for other good cause acceptable to
the department which may prevent compliance.
 (c) A licensed physical therapist and licensed physical therapist
assistant not engaged in practice, as determined by the department,
shall be exempt from the mandatory continuing education requirement upon
the filing of a statement with the department declaring such status. Any
licensee who returns to the practice of physical therapy during the
triennial registration period shall notify the department prior to
reentering the profession and shall meet such mandatory education
requirements as shall be prescribed by regulations of the commissioner.
 2. During each triennial registration period an applicant for
registration as a licensed physical therapist or licensed physical
therapist assistant shall complete a minimum of thirty-six hours of
acceptable formal continuing education, as specified in subdivision four
of this section. Any licensed physical therapist or licensed physical
therapist assistant whose first registration date following the
effective date of this section occurs less than three years from such
effective date, but on or after January first, two thousand ten, shall
complete continuing education hours on a prorated basis at the rate of
one-half hour per month for the period beginning January first, two
thousand ten up to the first registration date thereafter. A licensee
who has not satisfied the mandatory continuing education requirements
shall not be issued a triennial registration certificate by the
department and shall not practice unless and until a conditional
registration certificate is issued as provided for in subdivision three
of this section. Continuing education hours taken during one triennium
may not be transferred to a subsequent triennium.
 3. The department, in its discretion, may issue a conditional
registration to a licensee who fails to meet the continuing education
requirements established in subdivision two of this section but who
agrees to make up any deficiencies and complete any additional education
which the department may require the fee for such a conditional
registration shall be the same as, and in addition to, the fee for the
triennial registration. The duration of such conditional registration
shall be determined by the department but shall not exceed one year. Any
licensee who is notified of the denial of registration for failure to
submit evidence, satisfactory to the department, of required continuing
education and who practices without such registration may be subject to
disciplinary proceedings pursuant to section sixty-five hundred ten of
this title.
 4. As used in subdivision two of this section, "acceptable formal
education" shall mean formal courses of learning which contribute to
professional practice in physical therapy and which meet the standards
prescribed by regulations of the commissioner. Such formal courses of
learning shall include, but not be limited to, collegiate level credit
and non-credit courses, professional development programs and technical
sessions offered by national, state and local professional associations
and other organizations acceptable to the department, and any other
organized educational and technical programs acceptable to the
department. The department may, in its discretion and as needed to
contribute to the health and welfare of the public, require the
completion of continuing education courses in specific subjects to
fulfill this mandatory continuing education requirement. Courses must be
taken from a sponsor approved by the department, pursuant to the
regulations of the commissioner.
 5. Licensed physical therapist or licensed physical therapist
assistant shall maintain adequate documentation of completion of
acceptable formal continuing education and shall provide such
documentation at the request of the department. Failure to provide such
documentation upon the request of the department shall be an act of
misconduct subject to disciplinary proceedings pursuant to section
sixty-five hundred ten of this title.
 6. The mandatory continuing education fee shall be forty-five dollars,
shall be payable on or before the first day of each triennial
registration period, and shall be paid in addition to the triennial
registration fee required by section sixty-seven hundred thirty-four of
this article.
 § 6743. Validity of existing licenses. 1. This article shall not be
construed to affect the validity of existing licenses and permits or the
continuation of any administrative actions or proceedings commenced
prior to the effective date of this article.
 2. Amendments made to the educational requirement of section
sixty-seven hundred thirty-four of this article pursuant to a chapter of
the laws of two thousand eleven which amended this section shall not be
construed to affect the validity of existing licenses and permits.
 3. Amendments to the educational requirement in subdivision b of
section sixty-seven hundred thirty-four of this article made by a
chapter of the laws of two thousand twenty-three shall not be construed
to affect the validity of existing licenses and permits.
 ARTICLE 137
 PHARMACY
Section 6800. Introduction.
 6801. Definition of practice of pharmacy.
 6801-a. Collaborative drug therapy management demonstration
 program.
 6802. Definitions.
 6803. Practice of pharmacy and use of title "pharmacist".
 6804. State board of pharmacy.
 6805. Requirements for a professional license.
 6806. Limited permits.
 6807. Exempt persons; special provisions.
 6808. Registering and operating establishments.
 6808-a. Identification of Pharmacists.
 6808-b. Registration of nonresident establishments.
 6809. Shared pharmacy services.
 6810. Prescriptions.
 6811. Misdemeanors.
 6811-a. Certain drugs to be clearly marked or labeled.
 6811-b. Door-to-door distribution of drugs prohibited.
 6811-c. Patient notification of recalled drugs.
 6811-d. Notification of permanent pharmacy discontinuance.
 6812. Special provisions.
 6813. Seizure:
 6814. Records of shipment.
 6815. Adulterating, misbranding and substituting.
 6816. Omitting to label drugs, or labeling them wrongly.
 6816-a. When substitution is required.
 6817. New drugs.
 6818. Adulterated and misbranded cosmetics.
 6818-a. Cosmetic samples.
 6819. Regulations making exceptions.
 6820. Certification of coal-tar colors for drugs and
 cosmetics.
 6821. Poison schedules; register.
 6822. Examinations and investigations.
 6823. Factory inspection.
 6824. Injunction proceedings.
 6825. Proof required in prosecution for certain violations.
 6826. Drug retail price lists.
 6826-a. Reducing certain copayments.
 6827. Mandatory continuing education.
 6828. Certificates of administration.
 6829. Interpretation and translation requirements for
 prescription drugs and standardized medication
 labeling.
 6830. Standardized patient-centered data elements.
 6831. Special provisions relating to outsourcing facilities.
 6832. Limitations on assistance of an unlicensed person.
 § 6800. Introduction. This article applies to the profession of
pharmacy. The general provisions for all professions contained in
article one hundred thirty of this title apply to this article.
 § 6801. Definition of practice of pharmacy. 1. The practice of the
profession of pharmacy is defined as the administering, preparing,
compounding, preserving, or the dispensing of drugs, medicines and
therapeutic devices on the basis of prescriptions or other legal
authority, and collaborative drug therapy management in accordance with
the provisions of section sixty-eight hundred one-a of this article.
 2. A licensed pharmacist may execute a non-patient specific regimen
prescribed or ordered by a physician licensed in this state or nurse
practitioner certified in this state, pursuant to rules and regulations
promulgated by the commissioner. When a licensed pharmacist administers
an immunizing agent, he or she shall:
 (a) report such administration by electronic transmission or facsimile
to the patient's attending primary health care practitioner or
practitioners, if any, and, to the extent practicable, make himself or
herself available to discuss the outcome of such immunization, including
any adverse reactions, with the attending primary health care
practitioner, and to the statewide immunization registry or the citywide
immunization registry, as established pursuant to and to the extent
permitted by section twenty-one hundred sixty-eight of the public health
law; and
 (b) provide information to the patient or, where applicable, the
person legally responsible for the patient, on the importance of having
a primary health care practitioner, developed by the commissioner of
health; and
 (c) report such administration, absent of any individually
identifiable health information, to the department of health in a manner
required by the commissioner of health; and
 (d) prior to administering the immunization, inform the patient or,
where applicable, the person legally responsible for the patient, of the
total cost of the immunization or immunizations, subtracting any health
insurance subsidization, if applicable. In the case the immunization is
not covered, the pharmacist must inform the patient or, where
applicable, the person legally responsible for the patient, of the
possibility that the immunization may be covered when administered by a
primary care physician or practitioner; and
 (e) administer the immunization or immunizations according to the most
current recommendations by the advisory committee for immunization
practices (ACIP), provided however, that a pharmacist may administer any
immunization authorized under this section when specified by a patient
specific order.
 3. No pharmacist shall administer immunizing agents or injectable
medications for the treatment of mental health and substance use
disorder without receiving training satisfactory to the commissioner and
the commissioner of health which shall include, but not be limited to,
techniques for screening individuals and obtaining informed consent;
techniques of administration; indications, precautions and
contraindications in the use of agent or agents; record keeping of
immunization and information; and handling emergencies, including
anaphylaxis and needlesticks.
 4. When administering an immunization in a pharmacy, the licensed
pharmacist shall provide an area for the immunization that provides for
a patient's privacy. The privacy area should include:
 a. a clearly visible posting of the most current "Recommended Adult
Immunization Schedule" published by the advisory committee for
immunization practices (ACIP); and
 (b) education materials on influenza vaccinations for children as
determined by the commissioner and the commissioner of health.
 5. A licensed pharmacist may execute a non-patient specific order, for
dispensing up to a seven day starter pack of HIV post-exposure
prophylaxis medications for the purpose of preventing human
immunodeficiency virus infection, by a physician licensed in this state
or nurse practitioner certified in this state, pursuant to rules and
regulations promulgated by the commissioner in consultation with the
commissioner of health following a potential human immunodeficiency
virus exposure.
 6. A licensed pharmacist may execute a non-patient-specific regimen of
insulin and related supplies to an individual who has a valid
prescription for insulin and related supplies which has since expired
within the last twelve months. The valid prescription must have been
prescribed or ordered by a physician licensed in this state or nurse
practitioner certified in this state. Execution of a
non-patient-specific regimen shall be on an emergency basis provided the
pharmacist:
 (a) first attempts to obtain an authorization from the prescriber of
the patient-specific prescription and cannot obtain the authorization,
and the prescriber does not object to dispensing to the patient under
the non-patient-specific regimen;
 (b) provides a refill of the patient-specific prescription and the
quantity of that refill is in conformity with the directions for use
under the patient-specific prescription, but limited to an amount not to
exceed a thirty-day emergency supply; and
 (c) notifies, within seventy-two hours of dispensing the refill or
refills, the prescriber of the patient-specific prescription whose
authorization could not be obtained, that an emergency prescription of
insulin has been dispensed.
 * 7. A licensed pharmacist is a qualified health care professional
under section five hundred seventy-one of the public health law for the
purposes of directing a limited service laboratory and ordering and
administering COVID-19 and influenza tests authorized by the Food and
Drug Administration (FDA), subject to certificate of waiver requirements
established pursuant to the federal clinical laboratory improvement act
of nineteen hundred eighty-eight.
 * NB Repealed July 1, 2026
 8. A licensed pharmacist within their lawful scope of practice may
administer injectable medications and medications required for emergency
treatment of anaphylaxis related to such administration, pursuant to
section six thousand eight hundred two of this article, for the
treatment of mental health and substance use disorder, as prescribed or
ordered by a licensed prescriber, acting within their scope of practice
in this state and in accordance with regulations, including but not
limited to regulations promulgated by the commissioner in consultation
with any other state agencies, as necessary.
 9. a. A licensed pharmacist may execute a non-patient specific order
for the dispensing of self-administered hormonal contraceptives
prescribed or ordered by the commissioner of health, a physician
licensed in this state or a nurse practitioner certified in this state
pursuant to rules and regulations promulgated by the commissioner.
 b. Prior to dispensing self-administered hormonal contraceptives to a
patient, and at a minimum of every twelve months for each returning
patient, the pharmacist shall:
 (i) provide the patient with a self-screening risk assessment
questionnaire, developed by the commissioner of health in consultation
with the commissioner, to be reviewed by the pharmacist to identify any
known risk factors and assist the patient's selection of an appropriate
self-administered hormonal contraceptive; and
 (ii) provide the patient with a fact sheet, developed by the
commissioner of health, that includes but is not limited to, the
clinical considerations and recommendations for use of the
self-administered hormonal contraceptive, the appropriate method for
using such hormonal contraceptive, information on the importance of
follow-up health care, health care referral information, and the ability
of the patient to opt out of practitioner reporting requirements.
 c. No pharmacist shall dispense self-administered hormonal
contraceptives under this subdivision without receiving training
satisfactory to the commissioner.
 d. A pharmacist shall notify the patient's primary health care
practitioner, unless the patient opts out of such notification, within
seventy-two hours of dispensing a self-administered hormonal
contraceptive, that such self-administered hormonal contraceptive has
been dispensed. If the patient does not have a primary health care
practitioner, or is unable to provide contact information for their
primary health care practitioner, the pharmacist shall provide the
patient with a written record of the contraceptives dispensed, and
advise the patient to consult an appropriate health care practitioner.
 e. Nothing in this subdivision shall prevent a pharmacist from
refusing to dispense a non-patient specific order of self-administered
hormonal contraceptive pursuant to this subdivision if, in their
professional judgment, potential adverse effects, interactions or other
therapeutic complications could endanger the health of the patient.
 * § 6801-a. Collaborative drug therapy management demonstration
program. 1. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
 a. "Board" shall mean the state board of pharmacy as established by
section sixty-eight hundred four of this article.
 b. "Clinical services" shall mean the collection and interpretation of
patient data for the purpose of initiating, modifying and monitoring
drug therapy with associated accountability and responsibility for
outcomes in a direct patient care setting.
 c. "Collaborative drug therapy management" shall mean the performance
of clinical services by a pharmacist relating to the review, evaluation
and management of drug therapy to a patient, who is being treated by a
physician for a specific disease or associated disease states, in
accordance with a written agreement or protocol with a voluntarily
participating physician and in accordance with the policies, procedures,
and protocols of the facility. Such agreement or protocol as entered
into by the physician and a pharmacist, may include, and shall be
limited to:
 (i) adjusting or managing a drug regimen of a patient, pursuant to a
patient specific order or protocol made by the patient's physician,
which may include adjusting drug strength, frequency of administration
or route of administration. Adjusting the drug regimen shall not include
substituting or selecting a different drug which differs from that
initially prescribed by the patient's physician unless such substitution
is expressly authorized in the written order or protocol. The pharmacist
shall be required to immediately document in the patient record changes
made to the patient's drug therapy and shall use any reasonable means or
method established by the facility to notify the patient's other
treating physicians with whom he or she does not have a written
agreement or protocol regarding such changes. The patient's physician
may prohibit, by written instruction, any adjustment or change in the
patient's drug regimen by the pharmacist;
 (ii) evaluating and, only if specifically authorized by the protocol
and only to the extent necessary to discharge the responsibilities set
forth in this section, ordering disease state laboratory tests related
to the drug therapy management for the specific disease or disease state
specified within the written agreement or protocol; and
 (iii) only if specifically authorized by the written agreement or
protocol and only to the extent necessary to discharge the
responsibilities set forth in this section, ordering or performing
routine patient monitoring functions as may be necessary in the drug
therapy management, including the collecting and reviewing of patient
histories, and ordering or checking patient vital signs, including
pulse, temperature, blood pressure and respiration.
 d. "Facility" shall mean: (i) a teaching hospital or general hospital,
including any diagnostic center, treatment center, or hospital-based
outpatient department as defined in section twenty-eight hundred one of
the public health law; or (ii) a nursing home with an on-site pharmacy
staffed by a licensed pharmacist; provided, however, for the purposes of
this section the term "facility" shall not include dental clinics,
dental dispensaries, residential health care facilities and
rehabilitation centers.
 For the purposes of this section, a "teaching hospital" shall mean a
hospital licensed pursuant to article twenty-eight of the public health
law that is eligible to receive direct or indirect graduate medical
education payments pursuant to article twenty-eight of the public health
law.
 e. "Physician" shall mean the physician selected by or assigned to a
patient, who has primary responsibility for the treatment and care of
the patient for the disease and associated disease states that are the
subject of the collaborative drug therapy management.
 f. "Written agreement or protocol" shall mean a written document,
pursuant to and consistent with any applicable state or federal
requirements, that addresses a specific disease or associated disease
states and that describes the nature and scope of collaborative drug
therapy management to be undertaken by the pharmacists, in collaboration
with the participating physician in accordance with the provisions of
this section.
 2. a. A pharmacist who meets the experience requirements of paragraph
b of this subdivision and who is employed by or otherwise affiliated
with a facility shall be permitted to enter into a written agreement or
protocol with a physician authorizing collaborative drug therapy
management, subject to the limitations set forth in this section, within
the scope of such employment or affiliation.
 b. A participating pharmacist must:
 (i)(A) have been awarded either a master of science in clinical
pharmacy or a doctor of pharmacy degree;
 (B) maintain a current unrestricted license; and
 (C) have a minimum of two years experience, of which at least one year
of such experience shall include clinical experience in a health
facility, which involves consultation with physicians with respect to
drug therapy and may include a residency at a facility involving such
consultation; or
 (ii)(A) have been awarded a bachelor of science in pharmacy;
 (B) maintain a current unrestricted license; and
 (C) within the last seven years, have a minimum of three years
experience, of which at least one year of such experience shall include
clinical experience in a health facility, which involves consultation
with physicians with respect to drug therapy and may include a residency
at a facility involving such consultation; and
 (iii) meet any additional education, experience, or other requirements
set forth by the department in consultation with the board.
 c. Notwithstanding any provision of law, nothing in this section shall
prohibit a licensed pharmacist from engaging in clinical services
associated with collaborative drug therapy management, in order to gain
experience necessary to qualify under clause (C) of subparagraph (i) or
(ii) of paragraph b of this subdivision, provided that such practice is
under the supervision of a pharmacist that currently meets the
referenced requirement, and that such practice is authorized under the
written agreement or protocol with the physician.
 d. Notwithstanding any provision of this section, nothing herein shall
authorize the pharmacist to diagnose disease. In the event that a
treating physician may disagree with the exercise of professional
judgment by a pharmacist, the judgment of the treating physician shall
prevail.
 3. The physician who is a party to a written agreement or protocol
authorizing collaborative drug therapy management shall be employed by
or otherwise affiliated with the same facility with which the pharmacist
is also employed or affiliated.
 4. The existence of a written agreement or protocol on collaborative
drug therapy management and the patient's right to choose to not
participate in collaborative drug therapy management shall be disclosed
to any patient who is eligible to receive collaborative drug therapy
management. Collaborative drug therapy management shall not be utilized
unless the patient or the patient's authorized representative consents,
in writing, to such management. If the patient or the patient's
authorized representative consents, it shall be noted on the patient's
medical record. If the patient or the patient's authorized
representative who consented to collaborative drug therapy management
chooses to no longer participate in such management, at any time, it
shall be noted on the patient's medical record. In addition, the
existence of the written agreement or protocol and the patient's consent
to such management shall be disclosed to the patient's primary physician
and any other treating physician or healthcare provider.
 5. Participation in a written agreement or protocol authorizing
collaborative drug therapy management shall be voluntary, and no
patient, physician, pharmacist, or facility shall be required to
participate.
 6. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to limit the scope of
practice of pharmacy nor be deemed to limit the authority of pharmacists
and physicians to engage in medication management prior to the effective
date of this section and to the extent authorized by law.
 * NB Repealed July 1, 2026
 § 6802. Definitions. 1. "Pharmacy" means any place in which drugs,
prescriptions or poisons are possessed for the purpose of compounding,
preserving, dispensing or retailing, or in which drugs, prescriptions or
poisons are compounded, preserved, dispensed or retailed, or in which
such drugs, prescriptions or poisons are by advertising or otherwise
offered for sale at retail.
 3. "Formulary" means the latest edition of the official national
formulary, and its supplement.
 4. "Pharmacopeia", when not otherwise limited, means the latest
edition of the official United States pharmacopeia, and its supplement.
 5. "Homeopathic pharmacopeia" means the official homeopathic
pharmacopeia of the United States, and its supplement.
 6. "Official compendium" means the official United States
pharmacopeia, official homeopathic pharmacopeia of the United States,
official national formulary, or their supplements.
 7. "Drugs" means:
 a. Articles recognized in the official United States pharmacopeia,
official homeopathic pharmacopeia of the United States, or official
national formulary.
 b. Articles intended for use in the diagnosis, cure, mitigation,
treatment or prevention of disease in man or animals.
 c. Articles (other than food) intended to affect the structure or any
function of the body of man or animals.
 d. Articles intended for use as a component of any article specified
in paragraphs a, b, or c; but does not include devices or their
components, parts or accessories.
 8. "Cosmetics" means:
 a. Articles intended to be rubbed, poured, sprinkled or sprayed on,
introduced into or otherwise applied to the human body for cleansing,
beautifying, promoting attractiveness, or altering the appearance.
 b. Articles intended for use as a component of any such articles;
except that the term shall not include soap.
 9. "Poison", where not otherwise limited, means any drug, chemical or
preparation likely to be destructive to adult human life in quantity of
sixty grains or less.
 10. "Label" means a display of written, printed or pictorial matter
upon the immediate container of any drug, device or cosmetic. Any
requirement made by or under authority of this article, that any word,
statement, or other information appear on the label shall not be
considered to be complied with unless such word, statement or other
information also appears on the outside container or wrapper, if there
be any, of the retail package of such drug, device or cosmetic or is
easily legible through the outside container or wrapper.
 11. "Immediate container" does not include package liners.
 12. "Labeling" means all labels and other written, printed or
pictorial matter:
 a. Upon any drug, device or cosmetic or any of its containers or
wrappers, or
 b. Accompanying such drug, device or cosmetic.
 13. "Misbranding". If a drug, device or cosmetic is alleged to be
misbranded because the labeling is misleading, or if an advertisement is
alleged to be false because it is misleading then in determining whether
the labeling or advertisement is misleading there shall be taken into
account (among other things) not only representations made or suggested
by statement, word, design, device, sound or any combination thereof,
but also the extent to which the labeling fails to reveal facts material
in the light of such representations or material with respect to
consequences which may result from the use of the drug, device, or
cosmetic to which the labeling or advertising relates under the
conditions of use prescribed in the labeling or advertising thereof or
under such conditions of use as are customary or usual. No drug, device
or cosmetic which is subject to, and complies with regulations
promulgated under the provisions of the federal food, drug, and cosmetic
act, relating to adulteration and misbranding shall be deemed to be
adulterated or misbranded in violation of the provisions of this article
because of its failure to comply with the board's regulations, or the
rules of the state board of pharmacy, insofar as the regulations are in
conflict with regulations relating to adulteration and misbranding under
the federal food, drug and cosmetic act.
 14. "Antiseptic". The representation of a drug, device or cosmetic in
its labeling, as an antiseptic, shall be considered to be a
representation that it is a germicide, except in the case of a drug
purporting to be, or represented as, an antiseptic for inhibitory use as
a wet dressing, ointment, dusting powder, or such other use as involves
prolonged contact with the body.
 15. "New drug" means:
 a. Any drug not generally recognized, among experts qualified by
scientific training and experience to evaluate the safety and
effectiveness of drugs, as safe and effective for use under the
conditions prescribed, recommended or suggested by the drug's labeling,
except that such a drug not so recognized shall not be deemed to be a
"new drug" if at any time prior to September first, nineteen hundred
thirty-nine it was subject to the former federal food and drug act of
June thirtieth, nineteen hundred six, as amended, and if at such time
its labeling contained the same representations concerning the
conditions of its use;
 b. Any drug, the composition of which is such that the drug, as a
result of investigations to determine its safety and effectiveness for
use under such conditions, has become recognized, but which has not
otherwise than in such investigations been used to a material extent or
for a material time under such conditions.
 16. "Device" means instruments, apparatus, and contrivances, including
their components, parts and accessories, intended:
 a. For use in the diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment, or
prevention of disease in man or animals; or
 b. To affect the structure or any function of the body of man or
animals.
 17. The term "Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act" means the Federal
Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act of the United States of America, approved
June twenty-fifth, nineteen hundred thirty-eight, officially cited as
public document number seven hundred seventeen-seventy-fifth congress
(chapter six hundred seventy-five--third session), and all its
amendments now or hereafter enacted.
 18. "Wholesaler" means a person who bottles, packs or purchases drugs,
devices or cosmetics for the purpose of selling or reselling to
pharmacies or to other channels as provided in this article.
 19. "Advertisement" means all representations disseminated in any
manner or by any means, other than by labeling, for the purpose of
inducing, or which are likely to induce, directly or indirectly, the
purchase of drugs, devices or cosmetics.
 20. "Controlled substance" means any drug defined as a controlled
substance by article thirty-three of the public health law.
 21. "Manufacturer" means a person who compounds, mixes, prepares,
produces, and bottles or packs drugs, cosmetics or devices for the
purpose of distributing or selling to pharmacies or to other channels of
distribution.
 22. "Administer", for the purpose of section sixty-eight hundred one
of this article, means:
 a. (1) the direct application of an immunizing agent to adults,
whether by injection, ingestion, inhalation or any other means, pursuant
to a patient specific order or non-patient specific regimen prescribed
or ordered by a physician or certified nurse practitioner, for:
immunizations to prevent influenza, pneumococcal, acute herpes zoster,
hepatitis A, hepatitis B, human papillomavirus, measles, mumps, rubella,
varicella, COVID-19, meningococcal, tetanus, diphtheria or pertussis
disease and medications required for emergency treatment of anaphylaxis;
and other immunizations recommended by the advisory committee on
immunization practices of the centers for disease control and prevention
for patients eighteen years of age or older if the commissioner of
health in consultation with the commissioner determines that an
immunization: (i)(A) may be safely administered by a licensed pharmacist
within their lawful scope of practice; and (B) is needed to prevent the
transmission of a reportable communicable disease that is prevalent in
New York state; or (ii) is a recommended immunization for such patients
who: (A) meet age requirements, (B) lack documentation of such
immunization, (C) lack evidence of past infection, or (D) have an
additional risk factor or another indication as recommended by the
advisory committee on immunization practices of the centers for disease
control and prevention. If the commissioner of health determines that
there is an outbreak of disease, or that there is the imminent threat of
an outbreak of disease, then the commissioner of health may issue a
non-patient specific regimen applicable statewide.
 (2) the direct application of an immunizing agent to children between
the ages of two and eighteen years of age, whether by injection,
ingestion, inhalation or any other means, pursuant to a patient specific
order or non-patient specific regimen prescribed or ordered by a
physician or certified nurse practitioner, for immunization to prevent
influenza and medications required for emergency treatment of
anaphylaxis resulting from such immunization. If the commissioner of
health determines that there is an outbreak of influenza, or that there
is the imminent threat of an outbreak of influenza, then the
commissioner of health may issue a non-patient specific regimen
applicable statewide.
 b. The injection of medications for the treatment of mental health and
substance use disorder, as prescribed or ordered by a licensed
prescriber, acting within the scope of their practice in this state and
in accordance with regulations promulgated by the commissioner, in
consultation with the department of health and any other state agencies
as necessary, provided that:
 (1) Such administration is conducted pursuant to a valid
patient-specific prescription or patient-specific order that authorizes
a pharmacist to administer medications approved by the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration for the treatment of mental health and substance use
disorder. The pharmacist shall notify the licensed prescriber that the
administration is complete within five days and shall convey such
information to the prescriber by making an entry into an interoperable
electronic medical records system, an electronic prescribing technology
or a pharmacy record, or by using facsimile, electronic transmission or
other electronic means. If an electronic means described in this
subparagraph is not available to the pharmacist at the time of
communication, the pharmacist or pharmacist's designee may communicate
the information by telephone. Notification shall also be required if a
patient does not receive an administration or if the patient experiences
any side effects or adverse reactions to the medications. Administration
in a pharmacy shall not commence until after the patient has received
the initial injection and is considered eligible for maintenance
treatment by the licensed prescriber.
 (2) Such prescription may be subject to reassessment at appropriate
intervals, as determined by the licensed prescriber.
 (3) Such activity is conducted in accordance with regulations,
promulgated or adopted by the commissioner, in consultation with the
department of health and any other state agencies, as necessary, which
shall include requirements for the following:
 (i) Maintaining continued competency regarding the populations served
and medications administered.
 (ii) Pre-administration patient consent and education regarding common
side effects, drug interactions, injection site reactions and other
information routinely provided to patients upon dispensing. If a patient
is unable to provide consent, the pharmacist must obtain consent from a
person legally responsible when the recipient is incapable of
consenting.
 (iii) When administering an injection in a pharmacy, the pharmacist
shall provide an area for the injection that provides for the patient's
privacy.
 (iv) Ensuring that only U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved
medications are administered.
 23. "Electronic prescription" means a prescription created, recorded,
or stored by electronic means; issued with an electronic signature; and
transmitted by electronic means, in accordance with regulations of the
commissioner and applicable regulations of the commissioner of health
and federal regulations; provided, however, that an original hard copy
prescription that is created electronically or otherwise may be
transmitted from the prescriber to the pharmacist by facsimile and must
be manually signed. "Electronic" means of or relating to technology
having electrical, digital, magnetic, wireless, optical,
electromagnetic, or similar capabilities. "Electronic signature" means
an electronic sound, symbol, or process, attached to or logically
associated with an electronic prescription and executed or adopted by a
person with the intent to sign the prescription, in accordance with
regulations of the commissioner and applicable regulations of the
commissioner of health and federal regulations.
 24. "Compounding" means the combining, admixing, mixing, diluting,
pooling, reconstituting, or otherwise altering of a drug or bulk drug
substance to create a drug with respect to an outsourcing facility under
section 503B of the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act and further
defined in this section.
 25. "Outsourcing facility" means a facility that:
 (a) is engaged in the compounding of sterile drugs;
 (b) is currently registered as an outsourcing facility with the
Secretary of Health and Human Services; and
 (c) complies with all applicable requirements of federal and state
law, including the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act.
 26. "Sterile drug" means a drug that is intended for parenteral
administration, an ophthalmic or oral inhalation drug in aqueous format,
or a drug that is required to be sterile under federal or state law.
 27. "Biological product" means a biological product as defined in
subsection (i) of section 351 of the Public Health Service Act, 42
U.S.C. Section 262(i).
 28. "Interchangeable biological product" means a biological product
licensed by the United States Food and Drug Administration pursuant to
42 U.S.C. Section 262(k)(4) as set forth in the latest edition or
supplement of the United States Food and Drug Administration Lists of
Licensed Biological Products with Reference Product Exclusivity and
Biosimilarity or Interchangeability Evaluations, sometimes referred to
as the "Purple Book," or a biological product determined by the United
States Food and Drug Administration to be therapeutically equivalent as
set forth in the latest edition or supplement of the United States Food
and Drug Administration Approved Drug Products with Therapeutic
Equivalence Evaluations, sometimes referred to as the "Orange Book."
 29. "Self-administered hormonal contraceptives", for the purpose of
section sixty-eight hundred one of this article, means self-administered
contraceptive medications or devices approved by the federal Food and
Drug Administration to prevent pregnancy by using hormones to regulate
or prevent ovulation, and includes oral hormonal contraceptives,
hormonal contraceptive vaginal rings and hormonal contraceptive patches.
 * (30) "Shared pharmacy services" means a system that allows a
registered pharmacist or a registered pharmacy, pursuant to a request
from another registered pharmacist or pharmacy, to process or fill a
prescription or order, pursuant to regulations promulgated by the
commissioner.
 * NB Effective May 22, 2026
 § 6803. Practice of pharmacy and use of title "pharmacist". Only a
person licensed or otherwise authorized under this article shall
practice pharmacy or use the title "pharmacist" or any derivative.
 § 6804. State board of pharmacy. A state board of pharmacy shall be
appointed by the regents on recommendation of the commissioner for the
purpose of assisting the regents and the department on matters of
professional licensing and professional conduct in accordance with
section sixty-five hundred eight of this title. The board shall be
composed of not less than nine pharmacists licensed in this state for at
least five years and two registered pharmacy technicians. The initial
registered pharmacy technician members of the state board of pharmacy
need not be licensed prior to their appointment but shall have met all
other requirements of licensure pursuant to section sixty-eight hundred
forty-two of this title except for filing an application and paying a
fee. An executive secretary to the board shall be appointed by the
regents on recommendation of the commissioner and shall be a pharmacist
licensed in this state for at least five years. The board shall provide
assistance to the department:
 a. To regulate the practice of pharmacy, registered pharmacy
technicians and the employment of interns and employees in pharmacies,
 b. To regulate and control the sale, distribution, character and
standard of drugs, poisons, cosmetics, devices and new drugs,
 c. To prevent the sale or distribution of such drugs, poisons,
cosmetics, devices and new drugs as do not conform to the provisions of
this article or of the public health law,
 d. To investigate alleged violations of the provisions of this
article, and
 e. To issue limited permits or registrations.
 § 6805. Requirements for a professional license. 1. To qualify for a
pharmacist's license, an applicant shall fulfill the following
requirements:
 (1) Application: file an application with the department;
 (2) Education: have received an education, including a bachelor's or
equivalent degree in pharmacy, in accordance with the commissioner's
regulations;
 (3) Experience: have experience satisfactory to the board and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 (4) Examination: pass an examination satisfactory to the board and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 (5) Age: be at least twenty-one years of age;
 (6) Citizenship or immigration status: be a United States citizen or a
noncitizen lawfully admitted for permanent residence in the United
States;
 (7) Character: be of good moral character as determined by the
department; and
 (8) Fees: pay a fee of one hundred seventy-five dollars to the
department for admission to a department conducted examination and for
an initial license, a fee of eighty-five dollars for each
re-examination, a fee of one hundred fifteen dollars for an initial
license for persons not requiring admission to a department conducted
examination, and a fee of one hundred fifty-five dollars for each
triennial registration period.
 2. On or before April first, nineteen hundred seventy-two, any person
who holds a valid license as "druggist" in this state shall make
application and on the payment of fees specified in this title be
licensed by the department as a pharmacist. Such person shall have all
of the rights, privileges, duties and responsibilities of a pharmacist.
 § 6806. Limited permits. 1. The department may issue a limited permit
for employment as a "pharmacy intern" to:
 a. A student enrolled in the last two years of a registered program in
pharmacy, or
 b. A graduate of a program in pharmacy which meets standards
established by the commissioner's regulations who is engaged in meeting
the experience requirements or whose application for initial licensure
is pending with the department.
 2. A pharmacy intern may, as determined by the commissioner's
regulations, practice as a pharmacist under the immediate personal
supervision of a licensed pharmacist. A pharmacy intern may also receive
a certificate of administration if he or she provides satisfactory
evidence to the commissioner that he or she meets the requirements of
subdivision three of this section.
 3. No pharmacy intern shall administer immunizing agents without
receiving training satisfactory to the commissioner and the commissioner
of health, as prescribed in regulations of the commissioner, which shall
include, but not be limited to: techniques for screening individuals and
obtaining informed consent; techniques of administration; indications,
precautions and contraindications in the use of an agent or agents;
recordkeeping of immunization and information; and handling emergencies,
including anaphylaxis and needlestick injuries. To receive a
certification to administer immunizations, the pharmacy intern shall
provide documentation, on a form prescribed by the department, from the
dean or other appropriate official of the registered program that the
intern has completed the required training, pursuant to regulations of
the commissioner.
 4. A limited permit issued to a pharmacy intern shall have an
expiration date of five years from the date of issue. Limited permits
may be renewed once for a period not to exceed two years.
 5. Fees. The fee for each limited permit issued to a pharmacy intern
shall be seventy dollars.
 6. In the case of a pharmacy intern, certified to administer
immunizations, administration must be conducted under the immediate
personal supervision of a licensed pharmacist certified to administer
vaccines. A person receiving a vaccine must be informed that a pharmacy
intern, certified to administer immunizations, will be administering the
vaccine and of the option to receive the vaccination from a certified
pharmacist.
 § 6807. Exempt persons; special provisions. 1. This article shall not
be construed to affect or prevent:
 a. Unlicensed assistants from being employed in licensed pharmacies
for purposes other than the practice of pharmacy;
 b. Any physician, dentist, veterinarian or other licensed health care
provider legally authorized to prescribe drugs under this title who is
not the owner of a pharmacy or who is not in the employ of such owner,
from supplying his patients with such drugs as the physician, dentist,
veterinarian or other licensed health care provider legally authorized
to prescribe drugs under this title deems proper in connection with his
practice, provided, however, that all such drugs shall be dispensed in a
container labeled with the name and address of the dispenser and
patient, directions for use, and date of delivery, and in addition, such
drug shall bear a label containing the proprietary or brand name of the
drug and, if applicable, the strength of the contents, unless the person
issuing the prescription specifically states on the prescription in his
own handwriting, that the name of the drug and the strength thereof
should not appear on the label; provided further that if such drugs are
controlled substances, they shall be dispensed pursuant to the
requirements of article thirty-three of the public health law;
 b-1. Notwithstanding paragraph b of this section, the prescription
label for mifepristone or misoprostol may include the name or address of
the dispensing health care practice instead of the name of the
dispenser.
 c. Any merchant from selling proprietary medicines, except those which
are poisonous, deleterious or habit forming, or materials and devices
specifically exempted by regulations of the department or by the public
health law;
 d. Any personnel in an institution of higher learning from using
prescription-required drugs on the premises for authorized research,
experiments or instruction, in accordance with the department's
regulations and, if such drugs are controlled substances, in accordance
with title III of article thirty-three of the public health law; or
 e. The necessary and ordinary activities of manufacturers and
wholesalers, subject to the provisions of article thirty-three of the
public health law.
 2. a. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph b of subdivision one
of this section, no prescriber who is not the owner of a pharmacy or who
is not in the employ of such owner, may dispense more than a seventy-two
hour supply of drugs, except for:
 (1) persons practicing in hospitals as defined in section twenty-eight
hundred one of the public health law;
 (2) the dispensing of drugs at no charge to their patients;
 (3) persons whose practices are situated ten miles or more from a
registered pharmacy;
 (4) the dispensing of drugs in a clinic, infirmary or health service
that is operated by or affiliated with a post-secondary institution;
 (5) persons licensed pursuant to article one hundred thirty-five of
this title;
 (6) the dispensing of drugs in a medical emergency as defined in
subdivision six of section sixty-eight hundred ten of this article;
 (7) the dispensing of drugs that are diluted, reconstituted or
compounded by a prescriber;
 (8) the dispensing of allergenic extracts; or
 (9) the dispensing of drugs pursuant to an oncological or AIDS
protocol.
 b. The commissioner, in consultation with the commissioner of health,
may promulgate regulations to implement this subdivision and may, by
regulation, establish additional renewable exemptions for a period not
to exceed one year from the provisions of paragraph a of this
subdivision.
 3. A pharmacist may dispense drugs and devices to a registered
professional nurse, and a registered professional nurse may possess and
administer, drugs and devices, pursuant to a non-patient specific
regimen prescribed or ordered by a licensed physician or certified nurse
practitioner, pursuant to regulations promulgated by the commissioner
and the public health law.
 § 6808. Registering and operating establishments. 1. No person, firm,
corporation or association shall possess drugs, prescriptions or poisons
for the purpose of compounding, dispensing, retailing, wholesaling, or
manufacturing, or shall offer drugs, prescriptions or poisons for sale
at retail or wholesale unless registered by the department as a
pharmacy, wholesaler, manufacturer or outsourcing facility.
 2. Pharmacies.
 a. Obtaining a registration. A pharmacy shall be registered as
follows:
 (1) The application shall be made on a form prescribed by the
department.
 (2) The application shall be accompanied by a fee of three hundred
forty-five dollars.
 (3) To secure and retain a registration, a pharmacy must be equipped
with facilities, apparatus, utensils and stocks of drugs and medicines
sufficient to permit the prompt and efficient compounding and dispensing
of prescriptions, as prescribed by regulation.
 b. Renewal of registration. All pharmacy registrations shall be
renewed on dates set by the department. The triennial registration fee
shall be two hundred sixty dollars or a pro rated portion thereof as
determined by the department. At the time of renewal, the owner of every
pharmacy shall report under oath to the department any facts required by
the board of pharmacy.
 c. Display of registration. The registration shall be conspicuously
displayed at all times in the pharmacy. The names of the owner or owners
of a pharmacy shall be conspicuously displayed upon the exterior of such
establishment. The names so displayed shall be presumptive evidence of
ownership of such pharmacy by such person or persons. In the event that
the owner of a licensed pharmacy is not a licensed pharmacist, the
pharmacy registration issued shall also bear the name of the licensed
pharmacist having personal supervision of the pharmacy. In the event
that such licensed pharmacist shall no longer have personal supervision
of the pharmacy, the owner shall notify the department of such fact and
of the name of the licensed pharmacist replacing the pharmacist named on
the license and shall apply for an amended registration showing the
change. The amended registration must be attached to the original
registration and displayed in the same manner. Both the owner and the
supervising pharmacist shall be responsible for carrying out the
provisions of this article.
 d. Change of location. In the event that the location of a pharmacy
shall be changed, the owner shall apply to the department for inspection
of the new location and endorsement of the registration for the new
location. The fee for inspection and endorsement shall be fifty dollars,
unless it appears to the satisfaction of the department that the change
in location is of temporary nature due to fire, flood or other disaster.
 e. Conduct of a pharmacy. Every owner of a pharmacy is responsible for
the strength, quality, purity and the labeling thereof of all drugs,
toxic substances, devices and cosmetics, dispensed or sold, subject to
the guaranty provisions of this article and the public health law. Every
owner of a pharmacy or every pharmacist in charge of a pharmacy shall be
responsible for the proper conduct of this pharmacy. Every pharmacy
shall be under the immediate supervision and management of a licensed
pharmacist at all hours when open. No pharmacist shall have personal
supervision of more than one pharmacy at the same time.
 f. A pharmacy as a department. When a pharmacy is operated as a
department of a larger commercial establishment, the area comprising the
pharmacy shall be physically separated from the rest of the
establishment, so that access to the pharmacy and drugs is not available
when a pharmacist is not on duty. Identification of the area within the
pharmacy by use of the words "drugs", "medicines", "drug store", or
"pharmacy" or similar terms shall be restricted to the area licensed by
the department as a pharmacy.
 g. Limited pharmacy registration. (1) When, in the opinion of the
department, a high standard of patient safety, consistent with good
patient care, can be provided by the registering of a pharmacy within a
hospital, nursing home or extended care facility which does not meet all
of the requirements for registration as a pharmacy, the department may
waive any requirements pertaining to full-time operation by a licensed
pharmacist, minimum equipment, minimum space and waiting area, provided
that when the waiver of any of the above requirements is granted by the
board, the pharmaceutical services to be rendered by the pharmacy shall
be limited to furnishing drugs to patients registered for treatment by
the hospital, and to in-patients for treatment by the nursing home or
extended care facility.
 (2) When in the opinion of the department, a high standard of patient
safety, consistent with good patient care, can be provided by the
registering of a pharmacy within a facility distributing dialysis
solutions for patients suffering from end stage renal disease and where
the pharmaceutical services to be rendered by the pharmacy shall be
limited to furnishing dialysis solutions to patients for whom such has
been prescribed by a duly authorized prescriber, the department may
waive certain requirements, including, but not limited to, full-time
operation by a licensed pharmacist, minimum equipment, and minimum space
and waiting area. Such solutions shall only be dispensed by employees
who have completed an approved training program and who have
demonstrated proficiency to perform the task or tasks of assemblying,
labeling or delivering a patient order and who work under the general
supervision of a licensed pharmacist who shall be responsible for the
distribution, record keeping, labeling and delivery of all dialysis
solutions dispensed by the distributor as required by the department.
 (3) The department shall promulgate such rules or regulations
consistent with this paragraph as are necessary to ensure the safe
distribution of such dialysis solution, including establishment
registration and proper record keeping, storage, and labeling.
 (4) The initial registration fee and renewal fee for a limited
pharmacy shall be three hundred forty-five dollars for each triennial
registration period.
 h. Applicant registration. An applicant for registration as a pharmacy
shall be of good moral character, as determined by the department. In
the case of a corporate applicant, the requirement shall extend to all
officers and directors and to stockholders having a ten percent or
greater interest in the corporation.
 4. Wholesaler's or manufacturer's registration.
 a. Obtaining a registration. A wholesaler or manufacturer shall be
registered as follows:
 (1) The application shall be made on a form prescribed by the
department.
 (2) The application shall be accompanied by a fee of eight hundred
twenty-five dollars.
 b. Renewal of registration. All wholesalers' and manufacturers'
registrations shall be renewed on dates set by the department. The
triennial registration fee shall be five hundred twenty dollars or a pro
rated portion thereof as determined by the department.
 c. Display of registration. The registration shall be displayed
conspicuously at all times in the place of business.
 d. Change of location. In the event that the location of such place of
business shall be changed, the owner shall apply to the department for
inspection of the new location and endorsement of the registration for
the new location. The fee for inspection and endorsement shall be one
hundred seventy dollars, unless it appears to the satisfaction of the
department that the change in location is of a temporary nature due to
fire, flood or other disaster.
 5. Outsourcing facility's registration.
 a. Obtaining a registration. An outsourcing facility shall be
registered as follows:
 (1) An application for initial registration or renewal of registration
shall be made on a form prescribed by the department.
 (2) An application for initial registration shall be accompanied by a
fee of eight hundred twenty-five dollars.
 b. Renewal of registration. All outsourcing facilities' registrations
shall be renewed on a date set by the department. The triennial
registration fee shall be five hundred twenty dollars or a pro rated
portion thereof as determined by the department.
 c. Display of registration. The registration shall be displayed
conspicuously in the place of business.
 d. Change of location. In the event that the location of such place of
business shall be changed, the owner shall apply to the department for
inspection of the new location and endorsement of the registration for
the new location. The fee for inspection and endorsement shall be one
hundred seventy-five dollars, unless it appears to the satisfaction of
the department that the change in location is of a temporary nature due
to fire, flood or other disaster.
 e. Report. Upon initially registering as an outsourcing facility and
every six months thereafter, each outsourcing facility shall submit to
the executive secretary of the state board of pharmacy a report:
 (1) identifying the drugs compounded by such outsourcing facility
during the previous 6-month period; and
 (2) with respect to each drug identified under subparagraph one of
this paragraph, providing the active ingredient; the source of such
active ingredient; the National Drug Code number of the source drug or
bulk active ingredient, if available; the strength of the active
ingredient per unit; the dosage form and route of administration; the
package description; the number of individual units produced; and the
National Drug Code number of the final product, if assigned.
 f. Conduct of outsourcing facility. Every owner of an outsourcing
facility is responsible for the strength, quality, purity and labeling
thereof of all compounded drugs, subject to the guaranty provisions of
this article and the public health law. Every outsourcing facility shall
be under the immediate supervision and management of a pharmacist
licensed to practice in New York state.
 g. Applicant for registration. An applicant for registration of an
outsourcing facility shall be of good moral character, as determined by
the department. In the case of a corporate applicant, the requirement
shall extend to all officers and directors and stakeholders having a ten
percent or greater interest in the corporation.
 6. Inspection. The state board of pharmacy and the department of
education, and their employees designated by the commissioner, shall
have the right to enter any pharmacy, wholesaler, manufacturer,
outsourcing facility or vehicle and to inspect, at reasonable times,
such factory, warehouse, establishment or vehicle and all records
required by this article, pertinent equipment, finished and unfinished
materials, containers, and labels.
 7. Penalties. A pharmacy, wholesaler, manufacturer or outsourcing
facility registered under this section shall be under the supervision of
the board of regents and shall be subject to disciplinary proceedings
and penalties in accordance with article one hundred thirty of this
chapter in the same manner and to the same extent as individuals and
professional service corporations with respect to their licenses and
registrations, provided that failure to comply with the requirements of
this section shall constitute professional misconduct.
 8. Sale of drugs at auction. No controlled substance or substances and
no poisonous or deleterious drugs or drugs in bulk or in opened
containers shall be sold at auction unless the place where such drugs
are sold at auction shall have been registered by the board, and unless
such sale shall be under the personal supervision of a licensed
pharmacist. Drugs in open containers shall not be sold at auction unless
the seller shall have in his possession a certificate of the board
showing that such drugs have been inspected and meet the requirements of
this article. In the event that the drug so sold is one as to which this
article or any federal statute or any regulation adopted pursuant to
this article or an applicable federal statute require that the
expiration date be stated on each package, such drug may not be sold at
auction after such expiration date or when such expiration date will
occur within a period of thirty days or less from the date of sale.
 9. Supervision requirements for wholesalers transfilling medical
oxygen. Wholesalers registered under this section which transfill
medical oxygen shall ensure any person responsible for supervising the
transfilling of medical oxygen is:
 a. a respiratory therapist certified by a national accrediting body;
 b. a person holding a bachelor's degree in chemistry, microbiology,
chemical engineering or a related field;
 c. a person having two years of education beyond high school and two
years experience in the handling of compressed medical gases
satisfactory to the state board of pharmacy; or
 d. a person having training in accordance with the requirements
established in section 211.25 of title 21 of the code of federal
regulations.
 § 6808-a. Identification of Pharmacists. Every pharmacist on duty
shall be identified by a badge designed by the state board of pharmacy,
which shall contain his name and title.
 § 6808-b. Registration of nonresident establishments. * 1.
Definition. The term "nonresident establishment" shall mean any
pharmacy, manufacturer, wholesaler, or outsourcing facility located
outside of the state that ships, mails or delivers prescription drugs or
devices to other establishments, authorized prescribers and/or patients
residing in this state. Such establishments shall include, but not be
limited to, pharmacies that transact business through the use of the
internet.
 * NB Effective until May 22, 2026
 * 1. Definition. The term "nonresident establishment" shall mean any
pharmacy located outside of the state that participates in shared
pharmacy services for registered pharmacies and/or patients residing in
this state or pharmacy, manufacturer, wholesaler, or outsourcing
facility located outside of the state that ships, mails or delivers
prescription drugs or devices to other establishments, authorized
prescribers and/or patients residing in this state. Such establishments
shall include, but not be limited to, pharmacies that transact business
through the use of the internet.
 * NB Effective May 22, 2026
 * 2. Registration. All nonresident establishments that ship, mail, or
deliver prescription drugs and/or devices to other registered
establishments, authorized prescribers, and/or patients into this state
shall be registered with the department; except that such registration
shall not apply to intra-company transfers between any division,
affiliate, subsidiaries, parent or other entities under complete common
ownership and control. The provisions of this subdivision shall apply
solely to nonresident establishments and shall not affect any other
provision of this article.
 * NB Effective until May 22, 2026
 * 2. Registration. All nonresident establishments that participate in
shared pharmacy services for registered pharmacies and/or patients
residing in this state or that ship, mail, or deliver prescription drugs
and/or devices to other registered establishments, authorized
prescribers, and/or patients into this state shall be registered with
the department; except that such registration shall not apply to
intra-company transfers between any division, affiliate, subsidiaries,
parent or other entities under complete common ownership and control.
The provisions of this subdivision shall apply solely to nonresident
establishments and shall not affect any other provision of this article.
 * NB Effective May 22, 2026
 * 3. Agent of record. Each nonresident establishment that ships, mails
or delivers drugs and/or devices into this state shall designate a
resident agent in this state for service of process pursuant to rule
three hundred eighteen of the civil practice law and rules.
 * NB Effective until May 22, 2026
 * 3. Agent of record. Each nonresident establishment that participates
in shared pharmacy services or ships, mails or delivers drugs and/or
devices into this state shall designate a resident agent in this state
for service of process pursuant to rule three hundred eighteen of the
civil practice law and rules.
 * NB Effective May 22, 2026
 4. Conditions of registration. As a condition of registration, a
nonresident establishment shall comply with the following requirements:
 a. Be licensed and/or registered and in good standing with the state
of residence;
 b. Maintain, in readily retrievable form, records of drugs and/or
devices shipped into this state;
 c. Supply, upon request, all information needed by the department to
carry out the department's responsibilities under the laws and rules and
regulations pertaining to nonresident establishments;
 d. Comply with all statutory and regulatory requirements of the state
where the nonresident establishment is located, for prescription drugs
or devices shipped, mailed or delivered into this state, except that for
controlled substances shipped, mailed or delivered into this state, the
nonresident pharmacy shall follow federal law and New York law relating
to controlled substances;
 e. The application shall be made in the manner and form prescribed by
the department;
 f. The application of establishments to be registered as a
manufacturer, wholesaler or outsourcing facility of drugs and/or devices
shall be accompanied by a fee as provided in section sixty-eight hundred
eight of this article; and
 g. The application of establishments to be registered as a nonresident
pharmacy shall be accompanied by a fee of three hundred forty-five
dollars and shall be renewed triennially at a fee of two hundred sixty
dollars.
 5. Additional requirements. Nonresident pharmacies registered pursuant
to this section shall:
 a. Provide a toll-free telephone number that is available during
normal business hours and at least forty hours per week, to enable
communication between a patient in this state and a pharmacist at the
pharmacy who has access to the patient's records; and
 b. Place such toll-free telephone number on a label affixed to each
drug or device container.
 6. Disciplinary action. Except in emergencies that constitute an
immediate threat to public health, the department shall not prosecute a
complaint or otherwise take formal action against a nonresident
establishment based upon delivery of a drug into this state or a
violation of law, rule, or regulation of this state if the agency having
jurisdiction in the state where the nonresident establishment is based
commences action on the violation complained of within one hundred
twenty days from the date that the violation was reported; provided
however, that the department may prosecute a complaint or take formal
action against a nonresident establishment if it determines that the
agency having jurisdiction in the state where the nonresident
establishment is based has unreasonably delayed or otherwise failed to
take prompt and appropriate action on a reported violation.
 7. Revocation or suspension. A nonresident establishment that fails to
comply with the requirements of this section shall be subject to
revocation or suspension of its registration and other applicable
penalties in accordance with the provisions of article one hundred
thirty of this chapter.
 8. Exception. The department may grant an exception from the
registration requirements of this section on the application of a
nonresident establishment that restricts its sale or dispensing of drugs
and/or devices to residents of this state to isolated transactions.
 9. Rules and regulations. The department shall promulgate rules and
regulations to implement the provisions of this section.
 * § 6809. Shared pharmacy services. 1. General requirements. No
pharmacist or pharmacy shall provide shared pharmacy services unless
they are registered in accordance with sections sixty-eight hundred
five, sixty-eight hundred eight, or sixty-eight hundred eight-b of this
article, and are in compliance with the provisions of this section.
 2. Qualification. A pharmacy may provide or engage in shared pharmacy
services only if the pharmacies involved:
 a. (i) have the same owner; or
 (ii) have a written contract or agreement that outlines the services
provided and the shared responsibilities of each pharmacy in complying
with all applicable federal and state statutory and regulatory
requirements; and
 b. share a common electronic file or technology that allows access to
information necessary or required to perform shared pharmacy services in
compliance with all applicable federal and state statutory and
regulatory requirements.
 3. Operations. A pharmacy or pharmacist engaged in shared pharmacy
services shall:
 a. maintain records that identify, individually for each prescription
or order filled or processed, the name and if applicable, the license or
registration number of each pharmacy and individual who took part in the
processing or filling of the prescription or order. Such records shall
be maintained in accordance with subdivision five of section sixty-eight
hundred ten of this article and made available to the department upon
request. Records of prescriptions for controlled substances shall be
maintained pursuant to the requirements of article thirty-three of the
public health law;
 b. maintain a system for the tracking of each prescription or order
during each step of the process including, but not limited to, the name
and if applicable, the license and registration number of each pharmacy
and individual taking part in the processing or filling of the
prescription or order;
 c. notify the department, in writing, within thirty days of any
disciplinary action taken by another state's regulatory agency involving
shared pharmacy services as defined in this article;
 d. ensure that the labels for all prescriptions filled utilizing
shared pharmacy services identify the names and registration numbers of
the pharmacies involved in the dispensing and filling of the
prescriptions. All labels shall conform to sections sixty-eight hundred
twenty-nine and sixty-eight hundred thirty of this article and the
regulations promulgated thereunder. The labeling of prescriptions for
controlled substances shall be subject to additional requirements
provided in article thirty-three of the public health law. The
provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to hospitals as defined in
article twenty-eight of the public health law when furnishing drugs to
patients registered for treatment by the hospital;
 e. maintain a system that adequately protects the confidentiality and
integrity of protected patient information; and
 f. maintain processes for the storage, processing and dispensing of
controlled substances in accordance with article thirty-three of the
public health law.
 4. Notification to patients. a. Pharmacies participating in shared
pharmacy services shall:
 (i) notify patients or the patients' authorized representative that
pending their consent, a portion or all of their prescriptions may be
processed or filled off premises. Such notification shall be conveyed
using conspicuously posted signage at or adjacent to the place in the
pharmacy where prescriptions are presented for compounding and
dispensing, in the waiting area for customers, or the area where
prescribed drugs are dispensed. Pharmacies that transact business
through the use of the internet shall conspicuously provide such
notification on their website; and
 (ii) obtain an initial onetime consent to fill current and future
prescriptions through shared pharmacy services from the patient or
patient's authorized representative prior to the dispensing of one or
more prescriptions for the patient. For the purposes of this section,
such consent shall be obtained in writing or electronically and noted
within the patient's medication profile.
 b. Nothing in this subdivision shall prohibit a patient or the
patients' authorized representative from opting out of having the
patients' prescription processed or filled via shared pharmacy services
at any time.
 c. The provisions of this subdivision shall not apply to a hospital as
defined in article twenty-eight of the public health law which is
furnishing drugs to patients registered for treatment by the hospital.
 5. Drug storage and security. a. Drugs shall be stored and transported
in a secure manner in compliance with all applicable federal and state
statutory and regulatory requirements.
 b. Access to the area where drugs are stored shall be limited to
authorized personnel.
 c. Pharmacies participating in shared pharmacy services shall have
adequate security that complies with all applicable federal and state
statutory and regulatory requirements and protects the confidentiality
and integrity of protected patient information.
 6. Policies and procedures. a. Each pharmacy participating in shared
pharmacy services shall jointly develop, implement, review, revise, and
comply with joint policies and procedures for shared pharmacy services.
Such policies and procedures shall be made available to the department
upon request and maintained pursuant to regulations promulgated by the
commissioner.
 b. The policies and procedures shall:
 (i) outline the responsibilities of each pharmacy;
 (ii) include a list of the names, addresses, telephone numbers, and
all registration numbers of the pharmacies involved in shared pharmacy
services; and
 (iii) include policies and procedures for:
 (A) notifying the patients or the patients' authorized representative
that the patients' prescriptions may be processed or filled off premises
and providing the names and registration numbers of the other pharmacies
involved in the filling or processing of the prescriptions;
 (B) protecting the confidentiality and integrity of protected patient
information;
 (C) dispensing a prescription when a prescription filled utilizing
shared pharmacy services is not received or the patient comes in before
such prescription is received;
 (D) maintaining a required manual or electronic records to track the
prescription or order through each step of the process including, but
not limited to, the names and, if applicable, the license or
registration numbers of each individual who participated in shared
pharmacy services; and
 (E) complying with all applicable federal and state statutory and
regulatory requirements; and
 (iv) policies and procedures for hospitals as defined in the public
health law are exempt from the requirements of clauses (A) and (C) of
subparagraph (iii) of this paragraph, when furnishing drugs to patients
registered for treatment by the hospital.
 7. Individual practice. For the purpose of shared pharmacy services,
persons licensed or otherwise authorized under this article and article
one hundred thirty-seven-a of this title, employed by or under contract
with a pharmacy, acting within their respective scopes of practice, may
access that pharmacy's electronic database from inside or outside the
pharmacy and perform prescription or order processing functions, if both
of the following requirements are met:
 a. the pharmacy establishes controls to protect the confidentiality
and integrity of protected patient information; and
 b. no part of the database is duplicated, downloaded, or removed from
the pharmacy's electronic database.
 8. Effect. Failure to meet any or all of the requirements of this
section may result in a denial of renewal of registration.
 * NB Effective May 22, 2026
 § 6810. Prescriptions. 1. No drug for which a prescription is required
by the provisions of the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act or by the
commissioner of health shall be distributed or dispensed to any person
except upon a prescription written by a person legally authorized to
issue such prescription. Such drug shall be compounded or dispensed by a
licensed pharmacist, and no such drug shall be dispensed without
affixing to the immediate container in which the drug is sold or
dispensed a label bearing the name and address of the owner of the
establishment in which it was dispensed, the date compounded, the number
of the prescription under which it is recorded in the pharmacist's
prescription files, the name of the prescriber, the name and address of
the patient, and the directions for the use of the drug by the patient
as given upon the prescription. All labels shall conform to such rules
and regulations as promulgated by the commissioner pursuant to section
sixty-eight hundred twenty-nine of this article. The prescribing and
dispensing of a drug which is a controlled substance shall be subject to
additional requirements provided in article thirty-three of the public
health law. The words "drug" and "prescription required drug" within the
meaning of this article shall not be construed to include soft or hard
contact lenses, eyeglasses, or any other device for the aid or
correction of vision. Nothing in this subdivision shall prevent a
pharmacy from furnishing a drug to another pharmacy which does not have
such drug in stock for the purpose of filling a prescription.
 1-a. Notwithstanding subdivision one of this section, at the
prescriber's request, the prescription label for mifepristone or
misoprostol shall include the name or address of the prescribing health
care practice instead of the name of the prescriber.
 2. (a) A prescription may not be refilled unless it bears a contrary
instruction and indicates on its face the number of times it may be
refilled. A prescription may not be refilled more times than allowed on
the prescription. The date of each refilling must be indicated on the
original prescription. Prescriptions for controlled substances shall be
refilled only pursuant to article thirty-three of the public health law.
 A pharmacy registered with the department pursuant to section
sixty-eight hundred eight or sixty-eight hundred eight-b of this article
may not deliver a new or refilled prescription off premises without the
consent of the patient or an individual authorized to consent on the
patient's behalf. For the purposes of this section, consent may be
obtained in the same manner and process by which consent is deemed
acceptable under the federal Medicare Part D program.
 (b) Pharmacy providers who deliver medication without patient or
authorized individual consent will be required to accept the return of
the medication from the patient, provide that patient credit for any
charges they may have paid, and will be required to destroy those
medications sent without consent on delivery in accordance with
applicable state and federal law. Nothing in this section shall be
deemed to interfere with the requirements for refill reminder or
medication adherence programs. Nothing in this section is intended to
apply to long-term care pharmacy dispensing and delivery.
 3. A copy of a prescription for a controlled substance shall not be
furnished to the patient but may be furnished to any licensed
practitioner authorized to write such prescription. Copies of other
prescriptions shall be furnished to the patient at his request, but such
copies are issued for the informational purposes of the prescribers
only, and shall be so worded.
 4. (a) Oral prescriptions for controlled substances shall be filled
pursuant to article thirty-three of the public health law. A pharmacist
may fill an oral prescription for a drug, other than a controlled
substance, made by a practitioner legally authorized to prescribe drugs.
An oral authorization for the refill of a prescription, other than a
prescription for a controlled substance, may be made by a practitioner
legally authorized to prescribe drugs. The pharmacist receiving such
oral authorization for the refill of a prescription shall write on the
reverse side of the original prescription the date, time, and name of
the practitioner authorizing the refill of the prescription. An oral
prescription or an oral authorization for the refill of a prescription
for the drug, other than a controlled substance, may be communicated by
an employee of the prescribing practitioner; provided, however, the
pharmacist shall:
 (i) contemporaneously reduce such prescription to writing;
 (ii) dispense the substance in conformity with the labeling
requirements applicable to a written prescription; and
 (iii) make a good faith effort to verify the employee's identity if
the employee is unknown to the pharmacist.
 (b) Oral prescriptions for patients in general hospitals, nursing
homes, residential health care facilities as defined in section
twenty-eight hundred one of the public health law, hospitals as defined
in subdivision ten of section 1.03 of the mental hygiene law, or
facilities operated by the office for people with developmental
disabilities, may be communicated to a pharmacist serving as a vendor of
pharmaceutical services based upon a contractual arrangement by an agent
designated by and under the direction of the prescriber or the
institution. Such agent shall be a health care practitioner currently
licensed and registered under this title.
 5. Records of all prescriptions filled or refilled shall be maintained
for a period of at least five years and upon request made available for
inspection and copying by a representative of the department. Such
records shall indicate date of filling or refilling, prescriber's name,
patient's name and address and the name or initials of the pharmacist
who prepared, compounded, or dispensed the prescription. Records of
prescriptions for controlled substances shall be maintained pursuant to
requirements of article thirty-three of the public health law.
 6. (a) Every prescription written in this state by a person authorized
to issue such prescription shall be on prescription forms containing one
line for the prescriber's signature. The prescriber's signature shall
validate the prescription. Every electronic prescription shall provide
for the prescriber's electronic signature, which shall validate the
electronic prescription. Imprinted conspicuously on every prescription
written in this state in eight point upper case type immediately below
the signature line shall be the words: "THIS PRESCRIPTION WILL BE FILLED
GENERICALLY UNLESS PRESCRIBER WRITES 'd a w' IN THE BOX BELOW". Unless
the prescriber writes d a w in such box in the prescriber's own
handwriting or, in the case of electronic prescriptions, inserts an
electronic direction to dispense the drug as written, the prescriber's
signature or electronic signature shall designate approval of
substitution by a pharmacist of a drug product pursuant to paragraph (o)
of subdivision one of section two hundred six of the public health law.
No other letters or marks in such box shall prohibit substitution. No
prescription forms used or intended to be used by a person authorized to
issue a prescription shall have 'd a w' preprinted in such box. Such box
shall be placed directly under the signature line and shall be
three-quarters inch in length and one-half inch in height, or in
comparable form for an electronic prescription as may be specified by
regulation of the commissioner. Immediately below such box shall be
imprinted in six point type the words "Dispense As Written".
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no state official, agency,
board or other entity shall promulgate any regulation or guideline
modifying those elements of the prescription form's contents specified
in this subdivision. To the extent otherwise permitted by law, a
prescriber may modify only those elements of the prescription form's
contents not specified in this subdivision. Notwithstanding any other
provision of this section or any other law, when a generic drug is not
available and the brand name drug originally prescribed is available and
the pharmacist agrees to dispense the brand name product for a price
that will not exceed the price that would have been charged for the
generic substitute had it been available, substitution of a generic drug
product will not be required. If the generic drug product is not
available and a medical emergency situation, which for purposes of this
section is defined as any condition requiring alleviation of severe pain
or which threatens to cause disability or take life if not promptly
treated, exists, then the pharmacist may dispense the brand name product
at his regular price. In such instances the pharmacist must record the
date, hour and nature of the medical emergency on the back of the
prescription and keep a copy of all such prescriptions.
 (b) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section or any other
law, when an interchangeable biological product is not available and the
biological product originally prescribed is available and the pharmacist
agrees to dispense the prescribed biological product for a price that
will not exceed the price that would have been charged for the
interchangeable biological substitute had it been available,
substitution of an interchangeable biological product will not be
required. If the interchangeable biological product is not available and
a medical emergency situation, which for purposes of this section is
defined as any condition requiring alleviation of severe pain or which
threatens to cause disability or take life if not promptly treated,
exists, then the pharmacist may dispense the prescribed biological
product at his regular price. In such instances the pharmacist must
record the date, hour and nature of the medical emergency on the back of
the prescription and keep a copy of all such prescriptions.
 (c) The prescriber shall inform the patient whether he or she has
prescribed a brand name or its generic equivalent drug product or
interchangeable biological product.
 (d) The provisions of this subdivision shall not apply to a hospital
as defined in article twenty-eight of the public health law.
 (e) No prescriber shall be subjected to civil liability arising solely
from authorizing, in accordance with this subdivision, the substitution
by a pharmacist of a drug product pursuant to paragraph (o) of
subdivision one of section two hundred six of the public health law.
 7. (a) No prescription for a drug written in this state by a person
authorized to issue such prescription shall be on a prescription form
which authorizes the dispensing or compounding of any other drug. No
drug shall be dispensed by a pharmacist when such prescription form
includes any other drug.
 (b) With respect to drugs other than controlled substances, the
provisions of this subdivision shall not apply to pharmacists employed
by or providing services under contract to general hospitals, nursing
homes, residential health care facilities as defined in section
twenty-eight hundred one of the public health law, hospitals as defined
in subdivision ten of section 1.03 of the mental hygiene law, or
facilities operated by the office for people with developmental
disabilities, who dispense drugs in the course of said employment or in
the course of providing such services under contract. With respect to
such pharmacists, each prescription shall be transcribed on a patient
specific prescription form.
 8. Every prescription (whether or not for a controlled substance)
written in this state by a person authorized to issue such prescription
and containing the prescriber's signature shall, in addition to such
signature, be imprinted or stamped legibly and conspicuously with the
printed name of the prescriber who has signed the prescription. The
imprinted or stamped name of the signing prescriber shall appear in an
appropriate location on the prescription form and shall not be entered
in or upon any space or line reserved for the prescriber's signature.
The imprinted or stamped name shall not be employed as a substitute for,
or fulfill any legal requirement otherwise mandating that the
prescription be signed by the prescriber.
 9. No person, corporation, association or other entity, not licensed
to issue a prescription pursuant to this title, shall wilfully cause
prescription forms, blanks or facsimiles thereof to be disseminated to
any person other than a person who is licensed to issue a prescription
pursuant to this title. A violation of this subdivision shall be a class
B misdemeanor punishable in accordance with the provisions of the penal
law.
 10. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section or any other
law to the contrary, effective three years subsequent to the date on
which regulations establishing standards for electronic prescriptions
are promulgated by the commissioner of health, in consultation with the
commissioner pursuant to subdivision three of section two hundred
eighty-one of the public health law, no practitioner shall issue any
prescription in this state, unless such prescription is made by
electronic prescription from the practitioner to a pharmacy, except for
prescriptions: (a) issued by veterinarians; (b) issued or dispensed in
circumstances where electronic prescribing is not available due to
temporary technological or electrical failure, as set forth in
regulation; (c) issued by practitioners who have received a waiver or a
renewal thereof for a specified period determined by the commissioner of
health, not to exceed one year, from the requirement to use electronic
prescribing, pursuant to a process established in regulation by the
commissioner of health, in consultation with the commissioner due to
economic hardship, technological limitations that are not reasonably
within the control of the practitioner, or other exceptional
circumstance demonstrated by the practitioner; (d) issued by a
practitioner under circumstances where, notwithstanding the
practitioner's present ability to make an electronic prescription as
required by this subdivision, such practitioner reasonably determines
that it would be impractical for the patient to obtain substances
prescribed by electronic prescription in a timely manner, and such delay
would adversely impact the patient's medical condition, provided that if
such prescription is for a controlled substance, the quantity that does
not exceed a five day supply if the controlled substance was used in
accordance with the directions for use; or (e) issued by a practitioner
to be dispensed by a pharmacy located outside the state, as set forth in
regulation.
 10-a. A pharmacy that receives an electronic prescription from the
person issuing the prescription may, if the prescription has not been
dispensed and at the request of the patient or a person authorized to
make the request on behalf of the patient, immediately transfer or
forward such prescription to an alternative pharmacy designated by the
requesting party.
 11. In the case of a prescription issued by a practitioner under
paragraph (b) of subdivision ten of this section, the practitioner shall
be required to indicate in the patient's health record that the
prescription was issued other than electronically due to temporary
technological or electrical failure.
 12. In the case of a prescription issued by a practitioner under
paragraph (d) or (e) of subdivision ten of this section, the
practitioner shall, upon issuing such prescription, indicate in the
patient's health record either that the prescription was issued other
than electronically because it (a) was impractical to issue an
electronic prescription in a timely manner and such delay would have
adversely impacted the patient's medical condition, or (b) was to be
dispensed by a pharmacy located outside the state.
 13. The waiver process established in regulation pursuant to paragraph
(c) of subdivision ten of this section shall provide that a practitioner
prescribing under a waiver must notify the department of health in
writing promptly upon gaining the capability to use electronic
prescribing, and that a waiver shall terminate within a specified period
of time after the practitioner gains such capability.
 14. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no
outsourcing facility may distribute or dispense any drug to any person
pursuant to a prescription unless it is also registered as a pharmacy in
this state and meets all other applicable requirements of federal and
state law.
 * 15. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section or any
other law to the contrary, a practitioner shall not be required to issue
prescriptions electronically if he or she certifies to the department of
health, in a manner specified by the department of health, that he or
she will not issue more than twenty-five prescriptions during a twelve
month period. Prescriptions in both oral and written form for both
controlled substances and non-controlled substances shall be included in
determining whether the practitioner will reach the limit of twenty-five
prescriptions.
 (a) A certification shall be submitted in advance of the twelve-month
certification period, except that a twelve-month certification submitted
on or before on July first,two thousand sixteen, may begin March
twenty-seventh, two thousand sixteen.
 (b) A practitioner who has made a certification under this subdivision
may submit an additional certification on or before the expiration of
the current twelve-month certification period, for a maximum of three
twelve-month certifications.
 (c) A practitioner may make a certification under this subdivision
regardless of whether he or she has previously received a waiver under
paragraphs (c) of subdivision ten of this section.
 * NB Repealed June 1, 2026
 § 6811. Misdemeanors. It shall be a class A misdemeanor for:
 1. Any person knowingly or intentionally to prevent or refuse to
permit any board member or department representative to enter a pharmacy
or any other establishment for the purpose of lawful inspection;
 2. Any person whose license has been revoked to refuse to deliver the
license;
 3. Any pharmacist to display his license or permit it to be displayed
in a pharmacy of which he is not the owner or in which he is not
employed, or any owner to fail to display in his pharmacy the license of
the pharmacist employed in said pharmacy;
 4. Any holder of a license to fail to display the license;
 5. Any owner of a pharmacy to display or permit to be displayed in his
pharmacy the license of any pharmacist not employed in said pharmacy;
 6. Any person to carry on, conduct or transact business under a name
which contains as a part thereof the words "drugs", "medicines", "drug
store", "apothecary", or "pharmacy", or similar terms or combination of
terms, or in any manner by advertisement, circular, poster, sign or
otherwise describe or refer to the place of business conducted by such
person, or describe the type of service or class of products sold by
such person, by the terms "drugs", "medicine", "drug store",
"apothecary", or "pharmacy", unless the place of business so conducted
is a pharmacy licensed by the department;
 7. Any person to enter into an agreement with a physician, dentist,
podiatrist or veterinarian for the compounding or dispensing of secret
formula (coded) prescriptions;
 9. Any person to manufacture, sell, deliver for sale, hold for sale or
offer for sale of any drug, device or cosmetic that is adulterated or
misbranded;
 10. Any person to adulterate or misbrand any drug, device or cosmetic;
 11. Any person to receive in commerce any drug, device or cosmetic
that is adulterated or misbranded, and to deliver or proffer delivery
thereof for pay or otherwise;
 12. Any person to sell, deliver for sale, hold for sale, or offer for
sale any drug, device or cosmetic in violation of this article;
 13. Any person to disseminate any false advertisement;
 14. Any person to refuse to permit entry or inspection as authorized
by this article;
 15. Any person to forge, counterfeit, simulate, or falsely represent,
or without proper authority using any mark, stamp, tag, label or other
identification device authorized or required by rules and regulations
promulgated under the provisions of this article;
 16. Any person to use for his own advantage, or reveal, other than to
the commissioner or his duly authorized representative, or to the courts
when relevant in any judicial proceedings under this article, any
information acquired under authority of this article or concerning any
method or process, which is a trade secret;
 17. Any person to alter, mutilate, destroy, obliterate or remove the
whole or any part of the labeling of, or the doing of any other act with
respect to a drug, device, or cosmetic, if such act is done while such
article is held for sale and results in such article being misbranded;
 18. Any person to use on the labeling of any drug or in any
advertising relating to such drug any representation or suggestion that
an application with respect to such drug is effective under section
sixty-eight hundred seventeen of this chapter or that such is in
compliance with the provisions of such section;
 19. Any person to violate any of the provisions of section sixty-eight
hundred ten of this article;
 20. Any person to violate any of the provisions of section sixty-eight
hundred sixteen of this article;
 21. Any person, to sell at retail or give away in tablet form
bichloride of mercury, mercuric chloride or corrosive sublimate, unless
such bichloride of mercury, mercuric chloride or corrosive sublimate,
when so sold, or given away, shall conform to the provisions of national
formulary XII. Nothing contained in this paragraph shall be construed to
prohibit the sale and dispensing of bichloride of mercury in any form,
shape, or color, when combined or compounded with one or more other
drugs or excipients, for the purposes of internal medication only, or
when sold in bulk in powder form, or to any preparation containing
one-tenth of a grain or less of bichloride of mercury;
 22. Any pharmacy to fail to properly post the list required by section
sixty-eight hundred twenty-six of this article;
 23. Any pharmacy to change its current selling price without changing
the listed price as provided by section sixty-eight hundred twenty-six
of this article;
 24. Any person to refuse to permit access to or copying of any record
as required by this article; or
 25. Any manufacturer to sell or offer for sale any drug not
manufactured, prepared or compounded under the personal supervision of a
chemist or licensed pharmacist or not labeled with the full name of the
manufacturer or seller.
 26. Any outsourcing facility to sell or offer to sell any drug that is
not both compounded under the personal supervision of a licensed
pharmacist and labeled with the full name of the outsourcing facility.
 § 6811-a. Certain drugs to be clearly marked or labeled. 1. Except as
otherwise authorized in the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, no drug
for which a prescription is required by the provisions of the Federal
Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act or by the commissioner of health may be
manufactured or commercially distributed within this state in tablet or
capsule form unless it has clearly marked or imprinted on each such
tablet or capsule in conformance with the applicable plan required by
subdivision three of this section:
 (a) an individual symbol, number, company name, words, letters,
marking or National Drug Code (hereinafter referred to as N. D. C.)
number identifying the manufacturer or distributor of the drug; and
 (b) an N. D. C. number, symbol, number, letters, words or marking
identifying such drug or combination of drugs.
 2. Except as otherwise authorized in the Federal Food, Drug and
Cosmetic Act, no drug for which any prescription is required by the
provisions of the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act or by the
commissioner of health contained within a bottle, vial, carton or other
container, or in any way affixed or appended to or enclosed within a
package of any kind, and designed or intended for delivery in such
container or package to an ultimate consumer, shall be manufactured or
distributed within this state unless such container or package has
clearly and permanently marked or imprinted upon it in conformance with
the applicable plan required by subdivision three of this section:
 (a) an individual symbol, N. D. C. number, company name, number,
letters, words or marking identifying the manufacturer or distributor of
the drug;
 (b) an N. D. C. number, symbol, number, letters, words or marking
identifying such drug or combination of drugs; and
 (c) whenever the distributor of the prescription drug product does not
also manufacture the product the names and places of business of both
shall appear on the label in words clearly distinguishing each.
 3. (a) Each manufacturer and distributor shall prepare and submit to
the commissioner of health a proposed plan of the manufacturer or
distributor, as the case may be, to have its products comply with the
marking and labeling requirements of this section.
 (b) Such plan shall be in writing and shall give the respective dates
by which the various products manufactured or distributed will each
contain the required mark or label. The plan shall state the reasons why
the projected date of compliance has been proposed and such other
information deemed relevant or that the commissioner of health shall
require.
 (c) The commissioner may either approve the plan as proposed or, after
consultation with the manufacturer or distributor, require an amendment
or the commissioner may promulgate a plan for the manufacturer or
distributor. No plan or amendment to the plan shall be effective until
approved or promulgated by the commissioner of health upon a finding by
him that the time limitations provided for therein are reasonable and
will best carry out the intendment of this section.
 4. Each manufacturer and/or distributor shall publish and make
available, upon request, to the department of education, to each
physician, dentist, pharmacy, hospital or other institution wherein such
drugs may be used, a printed material which will identify each imprint
used by the manufacturer or distributor. Updated materials shall be
provided as changes occur, upon the filing of an annual request. The
provisions of this subdivision shall be deemed to be complied with when
a prescription drug product is included in the Physician's Desk
Reference.
 5. Every person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this
section for any prescription drug product shall be guilty of an offense
punishable by a fine of not less than twenty-five hundred dollars nor
more than ten thousand dollars. Any prescription drug product prepared
or manufactured in violation of this section shall be contraband and
subject to seizure either by the state board of pharmacy or by any law
enforcement officer of the state.
 6. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any tablet or
capsule which contains a controlled substance as that term is defined by
article thirty-three of the public health law or which is prepared or
manufactured by a pharmacist duly licensed by the state which is made by
him for the purpose of retail sale from his principal place of business
and not intended for resale.
 7. The commissioner of health may exempt a particular tablet or
capsule from the requirements of this section, upon application by a
manufacturer, on the grounds that labeling such a tablet or capsule is
unfeasible because of size or texture or other unique characteristics.
 8. (a) As used in this section, the term "distributor" means the
person, firm, corporation or other entity which is not the actual
manufacturer of a prescription drug product but which distributes such
product for resale under the label of such person, firm, corporation or
entity.
 (b) For purposes of subdivision four "drug product" means the entire
supply of the finished dosage form of the drug.
 § 6811-b. Door-to-door distribution of drugs prohibited. It shall be
a violation, punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred fifty
dollars, for a manufacturer, distributor, or seller of drugs or an
employee or agent thereof to distribute a free sample of any drug, other
than a cosmetic not intended for ingestion, to any residential dwelling
unless the sample is given directly to a person who is, or reasonably
appears to be, over the age of eighteen. This section shall not be
construed to permit distribution where otherwise prohibited by this
chapter or any other law.
 § 6811-c. Patient notification of recalled drugs. 1. For purposes of
this section the term "class I recall" shall mean a situation in which
the United States food and drug administration deems there is reasonable
probability that the use of or exposure to a violative product will
cause serious adverse health consequences or death.
 2. Where there has been a class I recall of a prescription drug,
pharmacies shall make a reasonable attempt to notify all patients that
have been prescribed and who are currently taking such recalled drug
dispensed from such pharmacy by phone or by mail within three days of
the pharmacy being notified by the United States food and drug
administration, a manufacturer, a wholesaler or by other notice of such
recall.
 3. The notification required by this section may be provided by an
individual pharmacy or by a central office in the case of a pharmacy
that is part of a chain.
 § 6811-d. Notification of permanent pharmacy discontinuance. 1. Every
registered pharmacy that sells prescription drugs at retail shall
provide public notice at least thirty days prior to its permanent
discontinuance. Such notice shall:
 (a) be provided, to the extent possible, to customers who have had a
prescription filled at the pharmacy within the year prior to its
discontinuance through the customer's primary means of communication
with such pharmacy; and
 (b) be conspicuously posted at or adjacent to the place in the
pharmacy where prescriptions are presented for compounding and
dispensing, in the waiting area for customers, or the area where
prescribed drugs are dispensed.
 2. The notification required pursuant to subdivision one of this
section shall include, but not be limited to:
 (a) the date of such pharmacy's discontinuance;
 (b) the names, addresses, and phone numbers of the five nearest
pharmacies, including independently owned pharmacies, if applicable;
 (c) instructions on transferring any existing prescriptions to another
pharmacy; and
 (d) information regarding the disposition of prescription records if a
customer fails to transfer a prescription prior to such pharmacy's
discontinuance.
 § 6812. Special provisions. 1. Where any pharmacy, manufacturer,
wholesaler or outsourcing facility registered by the department is
damaged by fire the board shall be notified within a period of
forty-eight hours, and the board shall have power to impound all drugs
for analysis and condemnation, if found unfit for use. Where a pharmacy
is discontinued, the owner of its prescription records shall notify the
department as to the disposition of said prescription records, and in no
case shall records be sold or given away to a person who does not
currently possess a registration to operate a pharmacy.
 2. Nothing in this article shall be construed as requiring the
prosecution or the institution of injunction proceedings for minor
violations of this article whenever the public interest will be
adequately served by a suitable written notice of warning.
 3. The executive secretary of the state board of pharmacy is
authorized to conduct examinations and investigations for the purposes
of this article through officers and employees of the United States, or
through any health, food, or drug officer or employee of any city,
county or other political subdivision of this state.
 § 6813. Seizure: 1. Any drug, device or cosmetic that is adulterated,
misbranded or may not be sold under the provisions of this chapter, may
be seized on petition or complaint of the board and condemned in the
supreme court of any county in which it is found. Seizure shall be made:
 a. by process pursuant to the petition or complaint, or
 b. if the secretary or other officer designated by him has probable
cause to believe that the article
 (1) is one which may not be sold under the provisions of section
sixty-eight hundred seventeen of this chapter, or
 (2) is adulterated, or
 (3) is so misbranded as to be dangerous to health.
The article shall be seized by order of such officer. The order shall
describe the article to be seized, the place where the article is
located, and the officer or employee making the seizure. The officer, in
lieu of taking actual possession, may affix a tag or other appropriate
marking to the article giving notice that the article has been
quarantined and warning all persons not to remove or dispose of it by
sale or otherwise until permission for removal or disposal is given by
the officer or the court. In case of seizures or quarantine, pursuant to
such order, the jurisdiction of such court shall attach upon such
seizure or quarantine, and a petition or complaint for condemnation
shall be filed promptly.
 2. The procedure for cases under this section shall conform as much as
possible to the procedure for attachment. Any issue of fact joined in
any case under this section shall be tried by jury on the demand of
either party. The court at any time after seizure and up to the time of
trial shall allow by order any party or his agent or attorney to obtain
a representative sample of the condemned material, a true copy of the
analysis on which the proceeding was based, and the identifying marks or
numbers, if any, on the packages from which the samples analyzed were
obtained.
 3. Any drug, device or cosmetic condemned under this section shall be
disposed of by destruction or sale as the court may direct after the
decree in accordance with the provisions of this section. The proceeds
of the sale, if any, shall be paid into the state treasury after
deduction for legal costs and charges. However, the drug, device or
cosmetic shall not be sold contrary to the provisions of this article.
After entry of the decree, if the owner of the condemned articles pays
the costs of the proceeding and posts a sufficient bond as security that
the articles will not be disposed of contrary to the provisions of this
article, the court may by order direct that the seized articles be
delivered to the owner to be destroyed or brought into conformance with
this article under supervision of the secretary. The expenses of the
supervision shall be borne by the person obtaining the release under
bond. Any drug condemned by reason of its being a new drug which may not
be sold under this article shall be disposed of by destruction.
 4. When the decree of condemnation is entered, court costs and fees,
storage and other expense shall be awarded against the person, if any,
intervening as claimant of the condemned articles.
 5. In any proceeding against the board, or the secretary, or an agent
of either, because of seizure, or quarantine, under this section, the
board, or the secretary, or such agent shall not be liable if the court
finds that there was probable cause for the acts done by them.
 § 6814. Records of shipment. For the purpose of enforcing provisions
of this article, carriers engaged in commerce, and persons receiving
drugs, devices or cosmetics in commerce or holding such articles so
received, shall, upon the request of an officer duly assigned by the
secretary, permit such officer, at reasonable times, to have access to
and to copy all records showing the movement in commerce of any drug,
device or cosmetic, or the holding thereof during or after such
movement, and the quantity, shipper, and consignee thereof: and it shall
be unlawful for any such carrier or person to fail to permit such access
to and copying of any such record so requested when such request is
accompanied by a statement in writing specifying the nature or kind of
drug, device or cosmetic to which such request relates: Provided, that
evidence obtained under this section shall not be used in a criminal
prosecution of the person from whom obtained: Provided further, that
carriers shall not be subject to the other provisions of this article by
reason of their receipt, carriage, holding or delivery of drugs, devices
or cosmetics in the usual course of business as carriers.
 § 6815. Adulterating, misbranding and substituting. 1. Adultered
drugs. A drug or device shall be deemed to be adulterated:
 a. (1) If it consists in whole or in part of any filthy, putrid, or
decomposed substance; or (2) if it has been prepared, packed, or held
under insanitary conditions whereby it may have been contaminated with
filth, or whereby it may have been rendered injurious to health; or (3)
if it is a drug and its container is composed, in whole or in part, of
any poisonous or deleterious substance which may render the contents
injurious to health; or (4) if it is a drug and it bears or contains,
for purposes of coloring only, a coal-tar color other than one from a
batch that has been certified in accordance with regulations provided in
this article.
 b. If it purports to be, or is represented as, a drug the name of
which is recognized in an official compendium, and its strength differs
from, or its quality or purity falls below, the standard set forth in
such compendium. Such determination as to strength, quality or purity
shall be made in accordance with the tests or methods of assay set forth
in such compendium, or, in the absence or inadequacy of such tests or
methods of assay, then in accordance with tests or methods of assay
prescribed by regulations of the board of pharmacy as promulgated under
this article. Deviations from the official assays may be made in the
quantities of samples and reagents employed, provided they are in
proportion to the quantities stated in the official compendium. No drug
defined in an official compendium shall be deemed to be adulterated
under this paragraph because (1) it exceeds the standard of strength
therefor set forth in such compendium, if such difference is plainly
stated on its label; or (2) it falls below the standard of strength,
quality, or purity therefor set forth in such compendium if such
difference is plainly stated on its label, except that this clause shall
apply only to such drugs, or classes of drugs, as are specified in regulations which the board shall promulgate when, as applied to any drug,
or class of drugs, the prohibition of such difference is not necessary
for the protection of the public health. Whenever a drug is recognized
in both the United States pharmacopoeia and the homeopathic
pharmacopoeia of the United States, it shall be subject to the
requirements of the United States pharmacopoeia unless it is labeled and
offered for sale as a homeopathic drug, in which case it shall be
subject to the provisions of the homeopathic pharmacopoeia of the United
States and not to those of the United States pharmacopoeia.
 c. If it is not subject to the provisions of paragraph b of this
subdivision and its strength differs from, or its purity or quality
falls below, that which it purports or is represented to possess.
 d. If it is a drug and any substance has been (1) mixed or packed
therewith so as to reduce its quality or strength or (2) substituted
wholly or in part therefor.
 e. If it is sold under or by a name not recognized in or according to
a formula not given in the United States pharmacopoeia or the national
formulary but that is found in some other standard work on pharmacology
recognized by the board, and it differs in strength, quality or purity
from the strength, quality or purity required, or the formula prescribed
in, the standard work.
 2. Misbranded and substituted drugs and devices. A drug or device
shall be deemed to be misbranded:
 a. If its labeling is false or misleading in any particular.
 b. If in package form, unless it bears a label containing (1) the name
and place of business of the manufacturer, packer, or distributor; and
(2) an accurate statement of the quantity of the contents in terms of
weight, measure, or numerical count: Provided, that under clause (2) of
this paragraph the board may establish reasonable variations as to
quantity and exemptions as to small packages.
 c. If any word, statement, or other information required by or under
authority of this article to appear on the label or labeling is not
prominently placed thereon with such conspicuousness (as compared with
other words, statements, designs, or devices, in the labeling) and in
such terms as to render it likely to be read and understood by the
ordinary individual under customary conditions of purchase and use.
 d. If it is for use by man and contains any quantity of the narcotic
or hypnotic substance alpha eucaine, barbituric acid, beta eucaine,
bromal, cannabis, carbromal, chloral, coca, cocaine, codeine, heroin,
marihuana, morphine, opium, paraldehyde, peyote, or sulphonmethane; or
any chemical derivative of such substance, which derivative has been by
the secretary, after investigation, found to be, and by regulations
under this article, or by regulations promulgated by the board,
designated as, habit forming; unless its label bears the name and
quantity, or proportion, of such substance or derivative and in
juxtaposition therewith the statement "Warning--May be habit forming."
 e. If it is a drug and is not designated solely by a name recognized
in an official compendium unless its label bears (1) the common or usual
name of the drug, if such there be; and (2) in case it is fabricated
from two or more ingredients, the common or usual name of each active
ingredient, including the kind and quantity by percentage or amount of
any alcohol, and also including, whether active or not, the name and
quantity or proportion of any bromides, ether, chloroform, acetanilid,
acetphenetidin, amidopyrine, antipyrine, atropine, hyoscine,
hyoscyamine, arsenic, digitalis, digitalis glucosides, mercury, ouabain,
strophanthin, strychnine, thyroid, or any derivative or preparation of
any such substances, contained therein: Provided, that, to the extent
that compliance with the requirements of clause (2) of this paragraph is
impracticable, exemptions shall be established by regulations
promulgated by the board.
 f. Unless its labeling bears (1) adequate directions for use; and (2)
such adequate warnings against use in those pathological conditions or
by children where its use may be dangerous to health, or against unsafe
dosage or methods or duration of administration or application, in such
manner and form, as are necessary for the protection of users: Provided,
that, where any requirement of clause (1) of this paragraph, as applied
to any drug or device, is not necessary for the protection of the public
health, the board shall promulgate regulations exempting such drug or
device from such requirement.
 g. If it purports to be a drug the name of which is recognized in an
official compendium, unless it is packaged and labeled as prescribed
therein: Provided, that, the method of packing may be modified with the
consent of the secretary in accordance with regulations promulgated by
the board. Whenever a drug is recognized in both the United States
pharmacopoeia and the homeopathic pharmacopoeia of the United States, it
shall be subject to the requirements of the United States pharmacopoeia
with respect to packaging and labeling unless it is labeled and offered
for sale as a homeopathic drug, in which case it shall be subject to the
provisions of the homeopathic pharmacopoeia of the United States, and
not to those of the United States pharmacopoeia.
 h. (1) If it is a drug and its container is so made, formed or filled
as to be misleading; (2) if it is an imitation of another drug; (3) if
it is offered for sale under the name of another drug; or (4) if it
bears a copy, counterfeit, or colorable imitation of the trademark,
label, container or identifying name or design of another drug.
 i. If it is dangerous to health when used in the dosage, or with the
frequency or duration prescribed, recommended or suggested in the
labeling thereof.
 j. Except as required by article thirty-three of the public health
law, the labeling provisions of this article shall not apply to the
compounding and dispensing of drugs on the written prescription of a
physician, a dentist, a podiatrist or a veterinarian, which prescription
when filled shall be kept on file for at least five years by the
pharmacist or druggist. Such drug shall bear a label containing the name
and place of business of the dispenser, the serial number and date of
the prescription, directions for use as may be stated in the
prescription, name and address of the patient and the name of the
physician or other practitioner authorized by law to issue the
prescription. In addition, such label shall contain the proprietary or
brand name of the drug and, if applicable, the strength of the contents,
unless the person issuing the prescription explicitly states on the
prescription, in his own handwriting, that the name of the drug and the
strength thereof should not appear on the label.
 § 6816. Omitting to label drugs, or labeling them wrongly. 1. a. Any
person, who, in putting up any drug, medicine, or food or preparation
used in medical practice, or making up any prescription, or filling any
order for drugs, medicines, food or preparation puts any untrue label,
stamp or other designation of contents upon any box, bottle or other
package containing a drug, medicine, food or preparation used in medical
practice, or substitutes or dispenses a different article for or in lieu
of any article prescribed, ordered, or demanded, except where required
pursuant to section sixty-eight hundred sixteen-a of this article, or
puts up a greater or lesser quantity of any ingredient specified in any
such prescription, order or demand than that prescribed, ordered or
demanded, except where required pursuant to paragraph (g) of subdivision
two of section three hundred sixty-five-a of the social services law, or
otherwise deviates from the terms of the prescription, order or demand
by substituting one drug for another, except where required pursuant to
section sixty-eight hundred sixteen-a of this article, is guilty of a
misdemeanor; provided, however, that except in the case of physicians'
prescriptions, nothing herein contained shall be deemed or construed to
prevent or impair or in any manner affect the right of an apothecary,
druggist, pharmacist or other person to recommend the purchase of an
article other than that ordered, required or demanded, but of a similar
nature, or to sell such other article in place or in lieu of an article
ordered, required or demanded, with the knowledge and consent of the
purchaser. Upon a second conviction for a violation of this section the
offender must be sentenced to the payment of a fine not to exceed one
thousand dollars and may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not to
exceed one year. The third conviction of a violation of any of the
provisions of this section, in addition to rendering the offender liable
to the penalty prescribed by law for a second conviction, shall forfeit
any right which he may possess under the law of this state at the time
of such conviction, to engage as proprietor, agent, employee or
otherwise, in the business of an apothecary, pharmacist, or druggist, or
to compound, prepare or dispense prescriptions or orders for drugs,
medicines or foods or preparations used in medical practice; and the
offender shall be by reason of such conviction disqualified from
engaging in any such business as proprietor, agent, employee or
otherwise or compounding, preparing or dispensing medical prescriptions
or orders for drugs, medicines, or foods or preparations used in medical
practice.
 b. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the practice of a
practitioner who is not the proprietor of a store for the dispensing or
retailing of drugs, medicines and poisons, or who is not in the employ
of such a proprietor, and shall not prevent practitioners from supplying
their patients with such articles as they may deem proper, and except as
to the labeling of poisons shall not apply to the sale of medicines or
poisons at wholesale when not for the use or consumption by the
purchaser; provided, however, that the sale of medicines or poisons at
wholesale shall continue to be subject to such regulations as from time
to time may be lawfully made by the board of pharmacy or by any
competent board of health.
 c. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a limited
pharmacy which prepares a formulary containing the brand names and the
generic names of drugs and of manufacturers which it stocks, provided
that it furnishes a copy of such formulary to each physician on its
staff and the physician signs a statement authorizing the hospital to
supply the drug under any generic or non-proprietary name listed therein
and in conformity with the regulations of the commissioner of education.
 2. For the purposes set forth in this section, the terms prescription,
order or demand shall apply only to those items subject to provisions of
subdivision one of section sixty-eight hundred ten of this chapter. The
written order of a physician for items not subject to provisions of
subdivision one of section sixty-eight hundred ten of this chapter shall
be construed to be a direction, a fiscal order or a voucher.
 § 6816-a. When substitution is required. 1. A pharmacist shall
substitute a less expensive drug product containing the same active
ingredients, dosage form and strength as the drug product prescribed,
ordered or demanded, provided that the following conditions are met:
 (a) The prescription is written on a form which meets the requirements
of subdivision six of section sixty-eight hundred ten of this article
and the prescriber does not prohibit substitution, or in the case of
oral prescriptions, the prescriber must expressly state whether
substitution is to be permitted or prohibited. Any oral prescription
that does not include such an express statement shall not be filled; and
 (b) The substituted drug product is contained in the list of drug
products established pursuant to paragraph (o) of subdivision one of
section two hundred six of the public health law; and
 (c) The pharmacist shall indicate on the label affixed to the
immediate container in which the drug is sold or dispensed the name and
strength of the drug product and its manufacturer unless the prescriber
specifically states otherwise. The pharmacist shall record on the
prescription form the brand name or the name of the manufacturer of the
drug product dispensed.
 2. In the event a patient chooses to have a prescription filled by an
out of state dispenser, the laws of that state shall prevail.
 3. A pharmacist shall substitute a less expensive biological product
for a prescribed biological product provided that all of the following
conditions are met:
 (a) the substituted biological product is either an interchangeable
biological product for the prescribed product or the substituted
biological product is one for which the prescribed product is an
interchangeable biological product;
 (b) the prescriber does not designate that a substitution is
prohibited as described in subdivision six of section sixty-eight
hundred ten of this article; and
 (c) the pharmacist indicates on the label affixed to the immediate
container in which the biological product is sold or distributed the
name and strength of the product and its manufacturer unless the
prescriber specifically states otherwise.
 4. (a) Within five business days following the dispensing of a
substituted biological product, the dispensing pharmacist or the
pharmacist's designee shall communicate to the prescriber the specific
product provided to the patient, including the name of the product and
the manufacturer. The communication shall be conveyed to the prescriber
(i) by making an entry that is electronically accessible to the
prescriber through an interoperable electronic medical records system,
an electronic prescribing technology or a pharmacy record; or (ii) by
using facsimile, electronic transmission or other electronic means. If
an electronic means described in this paragraph is not available to the
pharmacist at the time of communication, the dispensing pharmacist or
the pharmacist's designee may communicate the information by telephone.
 (b) Communication under paragraph (a) of this subdivision shall not be
required where:
 (i) there is no FDA-approved interchangeable biological product for
the product prescribed; or
 (ii) a refill prescription is not changed from the product dispensed
on the prior filling of the prescription.
 5. The department shall maintain a link on its web site to the current
list of all biological products determined by the Federal Food and Drug
Administration to be an interchangeable biological product for a
specific biological product.
 § 6817. New drugs. 1. Except as otherwise provided in the Federal
Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, no person shall sell, deliver, offer for
sale, hold for sale, or give away any new drug, unless:
 a. an application with respect thereto has become effective, or in the
case of an investigational drug the sponsor has complied with the
applicable requirements, under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act,
or
 b. when not subject to such act, such drug has been tested and has not
been found to be unsafe or ineffective for use under the conditions
prescribed, recommended or suggested in the labeling thereof, and, prior
to selling or offering for sale such drug, there has been filed with the
department an application setting forth
 (1) full reports of investigations which have been made to show
whether or not such drug is safe and effective for use;
 (2) a full list of the ingredients used as components of such drug;
 (3) a full statement of the composition of such drug;
 (4) a full description of the methods used in, and the facilities and
controls used for, the manufacture, processing and packing of such
drugs;
 (5) such samples of such drug and of the ingredients used as
components thereof as the board or secretary may require; and
 (6) specimens of the labeling proposed to be used for such drug.
 2. An application provided for in paragraph b of subdivision one shall
become effective on the one hundred eightieth day after the filing
thereof, except that if the secretary or board finds, after due notice
to applicant and giving him an opportunity for a hearing, that the drug
is not safe and effective for use under the conditions prescribed,
recommended, or suggested in the proposed labeling thereof, he shall,
prior to the effective date of the application, issue an order refusing
to permit the application to become effective.
 3. A drug dispensed on a written or oral prescription of a physician,
dentist, podiatrist or veterinarian (except a controlled substance),
shall be exempt from the requirements of this section if such drug bears
a label containing the name and place of business of the dispenser, the
serial number and date of the prescription, directions for use as may be
stated in the prescription and the name of the physician, dentist,
podiatrist or veterinarian issuing the prescription and the name of the
patient. In addition, such drug shall bear a label containing the
proprietary or brand name of the drug and, if applicable, the strength
of the contents, unless the person issuing the prescription explicitly
states on the prescription, in his own handwriting, that the name of the
drug and the strength thereof should not appear on the label.
 4. The board shall promulgate regulations for exempting from the
operation of this section drugs (and with the concurrence of the
commissioner of health, pursuant to article thirty-three of the public
health law, controlled substances) intended solely for investigational
use by experts qualified by scientific training and experience to
investigate the safety and efficacy of drugs and labeled "For
Investigational Use Only". Such regulations may, within the discretion
of the board, among other conditions relating to the protection of the
public health, provide for conditioning such exemptions upon:
 a. The submission to the secretary before any clinical testing of a
new drug is undertaken of reports by the manufacturer or sponsor of the
investigation of such drug, of preclinical tests, including tests on
animals of such drug adequate to justify the proposed clincial testing.
 b. The manufacturer or the sponsor of the investigation of a new drug
proposed to be distributed to investigators for clinical testing
obtaining a signed agreement from each of such investigators that
patients to whom the drug is administered will be under his personal
supervision, or under the supervision of investigators responsible to
him, and that he will not supply such drug to any other investigator or
to clinics for administration to human beings; and
 c. The establishment and maintenance of such records and the making of
such reports to the board by the manufacturer or the sponsor of the
investigation of such drugs of data including, but not limited to,
analytical reports by investigators obtained as the result of such
investigational use of such drug as the board finds will enable it to
evaluate the safety and effectiveness of such drug in the event of the
filing of an application pursuant to subdivision one of this section.
 5. This section shall not apply to any drug which was licensed under
the federal virus, serum, and toxin act of July first, nineteen hundred
two (32 Stat. 728) or is licensed under section two hundred sixty-two of
the public health service act of July first, nineteen hundred forty-four
(58 Stat. 682), or under the federal virus, serums, toxins, antitoxins
and analogous products act of March fourth, nineteen hundred thirteen
(37 Stat. 832).
 § 6818. Adulterated and misbranded cosmetics. 1. A cosmetic shall be
deemed to be adulterated:
 a. If it bears or contains any poisonous or deleterious substance
which may render it injurious to users under the conditions of use
prescribed in the labeling thereof, or under such conditions of use as
are customary or usual: Provided, that this provision shall not apply to
coal-tar hair dye, the label of which bears the following legend
conspicuously displayed thereon "Caution--this product contains
ingredients which may cause skin irritation on certain individuals and a
preliminary test according to accompanying directions should first be
made. This product must not be used for dying the eyelashes or eyebrows;
to do so may cause blindness", and the labeling of which bears adequate
directions for such preliminary testing. For the purposes of this
paragraph and paragraph e the term "hair dye" shall not include eyelash
dyes or eyebrow dyes.
 b. If it consists in whole or in part of any filthy, putrid, or
decomposed substance.
 c. If it has been prepared, packaged, packed, shipped or held in any
insanitary condition or in any other condition whereby it may have been
rendered injurious to health.
 d. If its container is composed, in whole or in part, of any poisonous
or deleterious substance which may render the contents injurious to
health.
 e. If it is not a hair dye and it bears or contains a coal-tar color
other than one from a batch that has been certified in accordance with
regulations as provided by this article.
 2. A cosmetic shall be deemed to be misbranded:
 a. If its labeling is false or misleading in any particular.
 b. If in package form, unless it bears a label containing (1) the name
and place of business of the manufacturer, packer, or distributor; and
(2) an accurate statement of the quantity of the contents in terms of
weight, measure, or numerical count: Provided, that under clause (2) of
this paragraph reasonable variations shall be permitted, and exemptions
as to small packages shall be established by regulations.
 c. If any word, statement, or other information required by or under
authority of this article to appear on the label or labeling is not
prominently placed thereon with such conspicuousness (as compared with
other words, statements, designs, or devices in the labeling) and in
such terms as to render it likely to be read and understood by the
ordinary individual under customary conditions of purchase and use.
 d. (1) If its container is so made, formed, or filled as to be
misleading; or (2) if it bears a copy, counterfeit, or colorable
imitation of a trademark, label, or identifying name or design of
another cosmetic.
 § 6818-a. Cosmetic samples. 1. No person engaged in the business of
selling cosmetics shall provide for the use by or application to
customers of any cosmetics, except for use or application to the hand or
arm as a sample if such immediate container of cosmetics is to be used
by or applied to more than one customer. For the purposes of this
section, the term "cosmetic" shall not include perfume or cologne; or
samples removed from the immediate container with a single use
disposable applicator furnished to each customer; or samples dispensed
from a tube, pump, spray or shaker container; or samples or applicators
that have been cleansed before each use or application. The provisions
of this section shall be deemed to have been satisfied if written
instructions on the use or application of cosmetic samples pursuant to
this section are clearly and visibly posted at or near the place of
display of cosmetic samples. Nothing contained in this section shall
prohibit the use or application of cosmetic samples by persons trained
to apply cosmetics to customers in accordance with the provisions of
this section.
 2. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, a violation of
this section shall result in a civil penalty of one hundred dollars for
the first offense and a civil penalty of two hundred fifty dollars for a
second or subsequent offense.
 § 6819. Regulations making exceptions. The board shall promulgate
regulations exempting from any labeling requirement of this article
drugs, devices and cosmetics which are, in accordance with the practice
of the trade, to be processed, labeled, or repacked in substantial
quantities at establishments other than those where originally processed
or packed, on condition that such drugs, devices and cosmetics are not
adulterated or misbranded under the provisions of this article upon
removal from such processing, labeling, or repacking establishment.
 § 6820. Certification of coal-tar colors for drugs and cosmetics. The
board shall promulgate regulations providing for the listing of coal-tar
colors which are harmless and suitable for use in drugs for purposes of
coloring only and for use in cosmetics and for the certification of
batches of such colors, with or without harmless diluents.
 § 6821. Poison schedules; register. 1. The following schedules shall
remain in force until revised by the board and approved by the
department.
 Schedule A. Arsenic, atropine, corrosive sublimate, potassium cyanide,
chloral hydrate, hydrocyanic acid, strychnine and all other poisonous
vegetable alkaloids and their salts and oil of bitter almond containing
hydrocyanic acid.
 Schedule B. Aconite, belladonna, cantharides, colchicum, conium cotton
root, digitalis, ergot, hellebore, henbane, phytolacca, strophanthus,
oil of savin, oil of tansy, veratrum viride and their pharmaceutical
preparations, arsenical solutions, carbolic acid, chloroform, creosote,
croton oil, white precipitate, methyl or wood alcohol, mineral acids,
oxalic acid, paris green, salts of lead, salts of zinc, or any drug,
chemical or preparation which is liable to be destructive to adult human
life in quantities of sixty grains or less.
 2. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell at retail or to furnish
any of the poisons of schedules A and B without affixing or causing to
be affixed to the bottle, box, vessel or package, a label with the name
of the article and the word "poison" distinctly shown and with the name
and place of business of the seller all printed in red ink together with
the name of such poisons printed or written thereupon in plain, legible
characters.
 3. Manufacturers and wholesale dealers in drugs, medicines,
pharmaceutical preparations, chemicals or poisons shall affix or cause
to be affixed to every bottle, box, parcel or outer inclosure of any
original package containing any of the articles of schedule A a suitable
label or brand in red ink with the word "poison" upon it.
 4. Every person who disposes of or sells at retail or furnishes any
poisons included in schedule A shall before delivering the same enter in
a book kept for that purpose the date of sale, the name and address of
the purchaser, the name and the quantity of the poison, the purpose for
which it is purchased and the name of the dispenser. The poison register
must be always open for inspection by the proper authorities and must be
preserved for at least five years after the last entry. Such person
shall not deliver any of the poisons of schedule A or schedule B until
he has satisfied himself that the purchaser is aware of its poisonous
character and that the poison is to be used for a legitimate purpose.
The provisions of this paragraph do not apply to the dispensing of drugs
or poisons on a doctor's prescription.
 5. The board may add to or may delete from any of the schedules from
time to time as such action becomes necessary for the protection of the
public.
 § 6822. Examinations and investigations. The secretary is authorized
to conduct examinations and investigations for the purposes of this
article through officers and employees of the United States, or through
any health, food, or drug officer or employee of any city, county or
other political subdivision of this state, duly commissioned by the
secretary as an officer of the board.
 § 6823. Factory inspection. For purposes of enforcement of this
article, officers duly designated by the secretary are authorized:
 (1) to enter, at reasonable times, any factory, warehouse or
establishment in which drugs, devices or cosmetics are manufactured,
processed, packed, or held, for introduction into commerce or are held
after such introduction, or to enter any vehicle being used to transport
or hold such drugs, devices or cosmetics in commerce; and
 (2) to inspect, at reasonable times, such factory, warehouse,
establishment or vehicle and all pertinent equipment, finished and
unfinished materials, containers, and labeling therein.
 § 6824. Injunction proceedings. In addition to the remedies
hereinafter provided, the secretary is hereby authorized to apply to the
court of the proper venue for an injunction to restrain any person from
(a) introducing or causing to be introduced into commerce any
adulterated or misbranded drug, device or cosmetic; or (b) from
introducing or causing to be introduced in commerce any new drug which
does not comply with the provisions of this article; or (c) from
disseminating or causing to be disseminated a false advertisement,
without being compelled to allege or prove that an adequate remedy at
law does not exist.
 § 6825. Proof required in prosecution for certain violations. 1. In
an action or proceeding, civil or criminal, against a person for
violating such provisions of this article which relate to the possession
of, compounding, retailing or dispensing of misbranded, substituted or
imitated drugs, poisons or cosmetics, when it shall be necessary that an
analysis be made for the purpose of establishing the quality of such
drug, poison or cosmetic so as to determine the fact of misbranding,
substituting or imitating, then it shall be required to prove at the
trial or hearing of such action or proceeding, that the person, taking
the same for analysis separated it into two representative parts,
hermetically or otherwise effectively and completely sealed, delivered
one such sealed part to the seller, manufacturer, wholesaler,
pharmacist, or druggist from whose premises such sample was taken and
delivered the other part so sealed to the chemist designated by the
state board of pharmacy; and the facts herein required to be proven
shall be alleged in the complaint or information by which such action or
proceeding was begun. The rules of the board shall be proven prima facie
by the certificate of the secretary.
 2. Any person accused of violation of any of the provisions of this
article relating to adulterating, misbranding, substitution or imitation
shall not be prosecuted or convicted or suffer any of the penalties,
fines or forfeitures for such violation, if he establishes upon the
hearing or trial that the drug, device or cosmetic alleged to be
adulterated, misbranded, substituted or imitated was purchased by him
under a written guaranty of the manufacturer or seller to the effect
that said drug, device or cosmetic was not adulterated or misbranded,
within the meaning of this article and proves that he has not
adulterated, misbranded, substituted or imitated the same, provided the
seller has taken due precaution to maintain the standard set for the
drug, device or cosmetic. A guaranty, in order to be a defense to a
prosecution or to prevent conviction or to afford protection, must state
that the drug, device or cosmetic to which it refers is not adulterated,
misbranded, substituted or imitated within the meaning of the provisions
of this article and must state also the full name and place of business
of the manufacturer, wholesaler, jobber or other person from whom the
drug, device or cosmetic was purchased, and the date of purchase. The
act, omission or failure of any officer, agent or other employee acting
for or employed by any person within the scope of his authority or
employment shall in every case be the act, omission or failure of such
person as well as that of the officer, agent or other employee, and such
person shall be equally liable for violations of this article by a
partnership, association or corporation, and every member of the
partnership or association and the directors and general officers of the
corporation and the general manager of the partnership, association or
corporation shall be individually liable and any action, prosecution or
proceeding authorized by this article may be brought against any or all
of such persons. When any prosecution under this article is made on the
complaint of the board, any fines collected shall be paid into the state
treasury as provided by this article.
 3. No publisher, radio-broadcast licensee, advertising agency, or
agency or medium for the dissemination of advertising, except the
manufacturer, packer, distributor, or seller of the commodity to which
the false advertisement relates, shall be subject to the penalties
provided by this article by reason of the dissemination by him of any
false advertisement, unless he has refused, on the request of the
secretary, to furnish the secretary the name and post-office address of
the manufacturer, packer, distributor, seller or advertising agency, who
caused him to disseminate such advertisement.
 § 6826. Drug retail price lists. 1. Every pharmacy shall compile a
drug retail price list, which shall contain the names of the drugs on
the list provided by the board, the pharmacy's corresponding retail
prices for each drug. Every pharmacy shall update its drug retail list
at least weekly and provide the time and date that the list was updated.
Every pharmacy shall provide the drug retail price list to any person
upon request.
 2. a. The list provided by the board shall be prepared at least
annually by the board and distributed to each pharmacy in the state. The
list shall be a compendium of the one hundred fifty most frequently
prescribed drugs together with their usual dosages for which a
prescription is required by the provisions of the "Federal Food, Drug,
and Cosmetic Act" (21 U.S.C. 301, et seq.; 52 Stat. 1040, et seq.), as
amended, or by the commissioner of health. The board shall make the
compendium list available to each pharmacy free of charge, both in
printed form and in an electronic form that can be used to produce the
pharmacy's drug retail list. The board shall provide the compendium list
to the department of health.
 b. The drug retail price list shall contain an advisory statement by
the department alerting consumers to the need to tell their health care
practitioner and pharmacist about all the medications they may be taking
and to ask them how to avoid harmful interactions between drugs, if any.
A pharmacy may include on its drug retail price list a statement: (a)
concerning discounts from its listed retail prices that may be available
to consumers and (b) any limitations that the pharmacy may have as to
what group or groups of customers it serves.
 3. The pharmacy's corresponding retail price means the actual price to
be paid by a retail purchaser to the pharmacy for any listed drug at the
listed dosage. However, upon implementation of the prescription drug
retail price list database by the department of health under section two
hundred seventy-six-a of the public health law, the pharmacy's
corresponding retail price shall mean the price sent to it by the
department of health under that section.
 4. Pharmacies shall have a sign notifying people of the availability
of the drug retail price list and the availability of the department of
health prescription drug retail price list database and the web address
of that database, conspicuously posted at or adjacent to the place in
the pharmacy where prescriptions are presented for compounding and
dispensing, in the waiting area for customers, or in the area where
prescribed drugs are delivered.
 5. Nothing contained herein shall prevent a pharmacy from changing and
charging the current retail price at any time, provided that the listed
price is updated at least weekly to reflect the new retail price.
 6. The commissioner shall make regulations necessary to implement this
section, including how this section is applied to mail-order and
internet pharmacies.
 § 6826-a. Reducing certain copayments. 1. Where an insured's copayment
for a drug exceeds the corresponding retail price for the same drug on
the pharmacy's drug retail price list, the pharmacist shall notify the
insured of this occurrence and charge no greater than the pharmacy's
corresponding retail price.
 2. Where the drug being purchased is not on the drug retail price
list, and the copayment for the drug exceeds the pharmacy's usual and
customary price for that drug, the pharmacist shall notify the insured
of this occurrence and charge the lesser of the insured's copayment and
the pharmacy's usual and customary price for that drug.
 § 6827. Mandatory continuing education. 1. (a) Each licensed
pharmacist required under article one hundred thirty of this chapter to
register triennially with the department to practice in the state shall
comply with provisions of the mandatory continuing education
requirements prescribed in subdivision two of this section except as set
forth in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this subdivision. Pharmacists who do
not satisfy the mandatory continuing education requirements shall not
practice until they have met such requirements, and they have been
issued a registration certificate, except that a pharmacist may practice
without having met such requirements if he or she is issued a
conditional registration certificate pursuant to subdivision three of
this section.
 (b) In accord with the intent of this section, adjustment to the
mandatory continuing education requirement may be granted by the
department for reasons of health certified by an appropriate health care
professional, for extended active duty with the armed forces of the
United States, or for other good cause acceptable to the department
which may prevent compliance.
 (c) A licensed pharmacist not engaged in practice as determined by the
department, shall be exempt from the mandatory continuing education
requirement upon the filing of a statement with the department declaring
such status. Any licensee who returns to the practice of pharmacy during
the triennial registration period shall notify the department prior to
reentering the profession and shall meet such mandatory education
requirements as shall be prescribed by regulations of the commissioner.
 * 2. During each triennial registration period an applicant for
registration shall complete a minimum of forty-five hours of acceptable
formal continuing education, as specified in subdivision four of this
section, provided that no more than twenty-two hours of such continuing
education shall consist of self-study courses. Any pharmacist
participating in collaborative drug therapy management pursuant to
section six thousand eight hundred one-a of this article shall complete
at least five hours of acceptable formal continuing education in the
area or areas of practice generally related to any collaborative drug
therapy management protocols to which the pharmacist may be subject. Any
pharmacist whose first registration date following the effective date of
this section occurs less than three years from such effective date, but
on or after January first, nineteen hundred ninety-eight, shall complete
continuing education hours on a prorated basis at the rate of one and
one-quarter hours per month for the period beginning January first,
nineteen hundred ninety-seven up to the first registration date
thereafter. A licensee who has not satisfied the mandatory continuing
education requirements shall not be issued a triennial registration
certificate by the department and shall not practice unless and until a
conditional registration certificate is issued as provided for in
subdivision three of this section. Continuing education hours taken
during one triennium may not be transferred to a subsequent triennium.
 * NB Effective until July 1, 2026
 * 2. During each triennial registration period an applicant for
registration shall complete a minimum of forty-five hours of acceptable
formal continuing education, as specified in subdivision four of this
section, provided that no more than twenty-two hours of such continuing
education shall consist of self-study courses. Any pharmacist whose
first registration date following the effective date of this section
occurs less than three years from such effective date, but on or after
January first, nineteen hundred ninety-eight, shall complete continuing
education hours on a prorated basis at the rate of one and one-quarter
hours per month for the period beginning January first, nineteen hundred
ninety-seven up to the first registration date thereafter. A licensee
who has not satisfied the mandatory continuing education requirements
shall not be issued a triennial registration certificate by the
department and shall not practice unless and until a conditional
registration certificate is issued as provided for in subdivision three
of this section. Continuing education hours taken during one triennium
may not be transferred to a subsequent triennium.
 * NB Effective July 1, 2026
 3. The department, in its discretion, may issue a conditional
registration to a licensee who fails to meet the continuing education
requirements established in subdivision two of this section but who
agrees to make up any deficiencies and complete any additional education
which the department may require. The fee for such a conditional
registration shall be the same as, and in addition to, the fee for the
triennial registration. The duration of such conditional registration
shall be determined by the department but shall not exceed one year. Any
licensee who is notified of the denial of registration for failure to
submit evidence, satisfactory to the department, of required continuing
education and who practices pharmacy without such registration, may be
subject to disciplinary proceedings pursuant to section sixty-five
hundred ten of this chapter.
 4. As used in subdivision two of this section, "acceptable formal
continuing education" shall mean formal courses of learning which
contribute to professional practice in pharmacy and which meet the
standards prescribed by regulations of the commissioner. The department
may, in its discretion and as needed to contribute to the health and
welfare of the public, require the completion of continuing education
courses in specific subjects. To fulfill this mandatory continuing
education requirement, courses must be taken from a sponsor approved by
the department, pursuant to the regulations of the commissioner.
 5. Pharmacists shall maintain adequate documentation of completion of
acceptable formal continuing education and shall provide such
documentation at the request of the department. Failure to provide such
documentation upon the request of the department shall be an act of
misconduct subject to disciplinary proceedings pursuant to section
sixty-five hundred ten of this chapter.
 6. The mandatory continuing education fee shall be forty-five dollars,
shall be payable on or before the first day of each triennial
registration period, and shall be paid in addition to the triennial
registration fee required by section sixty-eight hundred five of this
article.
 § 6828. Certificates of administration. 1. No pharmacist shall
administer immunizing agents without a certificate of administration
issued by the department pursuant to regulations of the commissioner.
 2. The fee for a certificate of administration shall be one hundred
dollars and shall be paid on a triennial basis. A certificate may be
suspended or revoked in the same manner as a license to practice
pharmacy.
 § 6829. Interpretation and translation requirements for prescription
drugs and standardized medication labeling. 1. For the purposes of this
section, the following terms shall have the following meanings: (a)
"Covered pharmacy" means any pharmacy that is part of a group of eight
or more pharmacies, located within New York state and owned by the same
corporate entity. For purposes of this section, "corporate entity" shall
include related subsidiaries, affiliates, successors, or assignees doing
business as or operating under a common name or trading symbol.
 (b) "Limited English proficient individual" or "LEP individual" means
an individual who identifies as being, or is evidently, unable to speak,
read or write English at a level that permits such individual to
understand health-related and pharmaceutical information communicated in
English.
 (c) "Translation" shall mean the conversion of a written text from one
language into an equivalent written text in another language by an
individual competent to do so and utilizing all necessary pharmaceutical
and health-related terminology. Such translation may occur, where
appropriate, in a separate document provided to an LEP individual that
accompanies his or her medication.
 (d) "Competent oral interpretation" means oral communication in which
a person acting as an interpreter comprehends a message and re-expresses
that message accurately in another language, utilizing all necessary
pharmaceutical and health-related terminology, so as to enable an LEP
individual to receive all necessary information in the LEP individual's
preferred pharmacy primary language.
 (e) "Pharmacy primary languages" shall mean those languages spoken by
one percent or more of the population, as determined by the U.S. Census,
for each region, as established by regulations promulgated pursuant to
this section, provided, however, that the regulations shall not require
translation or competent oral interpretation of more than seven
languages in any region.
 (f) "Mail order pharmacy" shall mean a pharmacy that dispenses most of
its prescriptions through the United States postal service or other
delivery system.
 2. (a) Every covered pharmacy shall provide free, competent oral
interpretation services and translation services to each LEP individual
requesting such services or filling a prescription that indicates that
the individual is limited English proficient at such covered pharmacy in
the LEP individual's preferred pharmacy primary language for the
purposes of counseling such individual about his or her prescription
medications or when soliciting information necessary to maintain a
patient medication profile, unless the LEP individual is offered and
refuses such services.
 (b) Every covered pharmacy shall provide free, competent oral
interpretation services and translation services of prescription
medication labels, warning labels and other written material to each LEP
individual filling a prescription at such covered pharmacy, unless the
LEP individual is offered and refuses such services or the medication
label, warning labels and other written materials have already been
translated into the language spoken by the LEP individual.
 (c) The services required by this section may be provided by a staff
member of the pharmacy or a third-party contractor. Such services must
be provided on an immediate basis but need not be provided in-person or
face-to-face in order to meet the requirements of this section.
 3. Every covered pharmacy shall conspicuously post, at or adjacent to
each counter over which prescription drugs are sold, a notification of
the right to free, competent oral interpretation services and
translation services for limited English proficient individuals as
provided for in subdivision two of this section. Such notifications
shall be provided in the pharmacy primary languages. The size, style and
placement of such notice shall be determined in accordance with rules
promulgated pursuant to this section.
 4. The commissioner, in consultation with the commissioner of health,
shall promulgate regulations requiring that mail order pharmacies
conducting business in the state provide free, competent oral
interpretation services and translation services to persons filling a
prescription through such mail order pharmacies whom are identified as
LEP individuals. Such regulations shall take effect one year after the
effective date of this section; provided, however, that they shall be
promulgated pursuant to the requirements of the state administrative
procedure act, address the concerns of affected stakeholders, and
reflect the findings of a thorough analysis of issues including:
 (a) how persons shall be identified as an LEP individual, in light of
the manner by which prescriptions are currently received by such mail
order pharmacies;
 (b) which languages shall be considered;
 (c) the manner and circumstances in which competent oral
interpretation services and translation services shall be provided;
 (d) the information for which competent oral interpretation services
and translation services shall be provided;
 (e) anticipated utilization, available resources, and cost
considerations; and
 (f) standards for monitoring compliance with regulations and ensuring
the delivery of quality competent oral interpretation services and
translation services.
 The commissioner, in consultation with the commissioner of health,
shall provide a report on implementation, utilization, unanticipated
problems, and corrective actions undertaken and planned to the temporary
president of the senate and the speaker of the assembly no later than
two years after the effective date of this section.
 5. Covered pharmacies shall not be liable for injuries resulting from
the actions of third-party contractors taken pursuant to and within the
scope of the contract with the covered pharmacy as long as the covered
pharmacy entered into such contract reasonably and in good faith to
comply with this section, and was not negligent with regard to the
alleged misconduct of the third-party contractor.
 6. The regulations promulgated pursuant to this section shall
establish a process by which covered pharmacies may apply and receive a
waiver from compliance with subdivisions two and three of this section
upon a showing that implementation would be unnecessarily burdensome
when compared to the need for such services.
 7. The commissioner shall promulgate regulations in consultation with
the commissioner of health to effectuate the requirements of this
section.
 § 6830. Standardized patient-centered data elements. 1. The
commissioner shall develop rules and regulations requiring standardized
patient-centered data elements consistent with existing technology and
equipment to be used on all prescription medicine dispensed to patients
in this state.
 2. When developing the requirements for patient-centered data elements
on prescription drug labels, the commissioner shall consider:
 (a) medical literacy research that identifies factors that improve
understandability of labels and promotes increased compliance with a
drug's intended use;
 (b) factors that improve the clarity of directions for use;
 (c) font types and sizes;
 (d) inclusion of only patient-centered information; and
 (e) the needs of special populations.
To ensure public input, the commissioner shall solicit input from the
state board of pharmacy and the state board of medicine, consumer
groups, advocates for special populations, pharmacists, physicians,
other health care professionals authorized to prescribe, and other
interested parties.
 § 6831. Special provisions relating to outsourcing facilities. 1.
Registration. Any outsourcing facility that is engaged in the
compounding of sterile drugs in this state shall be registered as an
outsourcing facility under the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act and
be registered as an outsourcing facility pursuant to this article.
 2. New drugs. Sections 502(f)(1), 505 and 582 of the Federal Food,
Drug and Cosmetic Act shall not apply to a drug compounded in an
outsourcing facility registered under the Federal Food, Drug and
Cosmetic Act.
 3. Prescriptions. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the
contrary, no outsourcing facility may distribute or dispense any drug to
any person pursuant to a prescription unless it is also registered as a
pharmacy in this state and meets all other applicable requirements of
federal and state law.
 4. Restrictions. Any drugs compounded in an outsourcing facility
registered pursuant to this article shall be compounded in accordance
with all applicable federal and state laws.
 5. Labeling. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the
contrary, the label of any drug compounded by an outsourcing facility
shall include, but not be limited to the following:
 (a) a statement that the drug is a compounded drug or a reasonable
comparable alternative statement that prominently identifies the drug as
a compounded drug;
 (b) the name, address, and phone number of the applicable outsourcing
facility; and
 (c) with respect to the drug:
 (i) the lot or batch number;
 (ii) the established name of the drug;
 (iii) the dosage form and strength;
 (iv) the statement of quantity or volume, as appropriate;
 (v) the date that the drug was compounded;
 (vi) the expiration date;
 (vii) storage and handling instructions;
 (viii) the National Drug Code number, if available;
 (ix) the statement that the drug is not for resale, and the statement
"Office Use Only"; and
 (x) a list of the active and inactive ingredients, identified by
established name, and the quantity or proportion of each ingredient.
 6. Container. The container from which the individual units of the
drug are removed for dispensing or for administration (such as a plastic
bag containing individual product syringes) shall include:
 (a) a list of active and inactive ingredients, identified by
established name, and the quantity or proportion of each ingredient; and
 (b) any other information required by regulations promulgated by the
commissioner to facilitate adverse event reporting in accordance with
the requirements established in section 310.305 of title 21 of the code
of federal regulations.
 7. Bulk drugs. A drug may only be compounded in an outsourcing
facility that does not compound using bulk drug substances as defined in
section 207.3(a)(4) of title 21 of the code of federal regulations or
any successor regulation unless:
 (a) the bulk drug substance appears on a list established by the
secretary of health and human services identifying bulk drug substances
for which there is a clinical need;
 (b) the drug is compounded from a bulk drug substance that appears on
the federal drug shortage list in effect at the time of compounding,
distributing, and dispensing;
 (c) if an applicable monograph exists under the United States
Pharmacopeia, the national formulary, or another compendium or
pharmacopeia recognized by the secretary of health and human services
and the bulk drug substances each comply with the monograph;
 (d) the bulk drug substances are each manufactured by an establishment
that is registered with the federal government.
 8. Ingredients. If an outsourcing facility uses ingredients, other
than bulk drug substances, such ingredients must comply with the
standards of the applicable United States pharmacopeia or national
formulary monograph, if such monograph exists, or of another compendium
or pharmacopeia recognized by the secretary of health and human services
for purposes of this subdivision, if any.
 9. Unsafe or ineffective drugs. No outsourcing facility may compound a
drug that appears on a list published by the secretary of health and
human services that has been withdrawn or removed from the market
because such drugs or components of such drugs have been found to be
unsafe or not effective.
 10. Prohibition on wholesaling. No compounded drug will be sold or
transferred by any entity other than the outsourcing facility that
compounded such drug. This does not prohibit the administration of a
drug in a health care setting or dispensing a drug pursuant to a
properly executed prescription.
 11. Prohibition against copying an approved drug. No outsourcing
facility may compound a drug that is essentially a copy of one or more
approved drugs.
 12. Prohibition against compounding drugs presenting demonstrable
difficulties. No outsourcing facility may compound a drug:
 i. that is identified, directly or as part of a category of drugs, on
a list published by the secretary of health and human services that
present demonstrable difficulties for compounding that are reasonably
likely to lead to an adverse effect on the safety or effectiveness of
the drug or category of drugs, taking into account the risks and
benefits to patients; or
 ii. that is compounded in accordance with all applicable conditions
identified on the drug list as conditions that are necessary to prevent
the drug or category of drugs from presenting demonstrable difficulties.
 13. Adverse event reports. Outsourcing facilities shall submit a copy
of all adverse event reports submitted to the secretary of health and
human services in accordance with the content and format requirements
established in section 310.305 of title 21 of the code of federal
regulations, or any successor regulation, to the executive secretary for
the state board of pharmacy.
 14. Reports. The commissioner, in consultation with the commissioner
of health, shall prepare and submit a report to the governor and the
legislature, due eighteen months from the effective date of this
section, evaluating the effectiveness of the registration and oversight
of outsourcing facilities related to compounding.
 § 6832. Limitations on assistance of an unlicensed person. 1. Subject
to the limitations set forth in subdivision two of this section, an
unlicensed person may assist a licensed pharmacist in the dispensing of
drugs by:
 (a) receiving written or electronically transmitted prescriptions,
except that in the case of electronically transmitted prescriptions the
licensed pharmacist or pharmacy intern shall review the prescription to
determine whether in his or her professional judgment it shall be
accepted by the pharmacy, and if accepted, the licensed pharmacist or
pharmacy intern shall enter his or her initials into the records of the
pharmacy;
 (b) typing prescription labels;
 (c) keying prescription data for entry into a computer-generated file
or retrieving prescription data from the file, provided that such
computer-generated file shall provide for verification of all
information needed to fill the prescription by a licensed pharmacist
prior to the dispensing of the prescription, meaning that the licensed
pharmacist shall review and approve such information and enter his or
her initials or other personal identifier into the recordkeeping system
prior to the dispensing of the prescription or of the prescription
refill;
 (d) getting drugs from stock and returning them to stock;
 (e) getting prescription files and other manual records from storage
and locating prescriptions;
 (f) counting dosage units of drugs;
 (g) placing dosage units of drugs in appropriate containers;
 (h) affixing the prescription label to the containers;
 (i) preparing manual records of dispensing for the signature or
initials of the licensed pharmacist;
 (j) handing or delivering completed prescriptions to the patient or
the person authorized to act on behalf of the patient and, in accordance
with the relevant commissioner's regulations, advising the patient or
person authorized to act on behalf of the patient of the availability of
counseling to be conducted by the licensed pharmacist or pharmacy
intern; and
 (k) performing other functions as defined by the commissioner's
regulations.
 2. Except for a licensed pharmacist employed by a facility licensed in
accordance with article twenty-eight of the public health law or a
pharmacy owned and operated by such a facility, as defined in article
one hundred thirty-seven-A of this title, no licensed pharmacist shall
obtain the assistance of more than four unlicensed persons, in the
performance of the activities that do not require licensure, the total
of such persons shall not exceed four individuals at any one time.
Pharmacy interns shall be exempt from such ratios, but shall be
supervised in accordance with the commissioner's regulations.
Individuals who are responsible for the act of placing drugs which are
in unit-dose packaging into medication carts as part of an approved
unit-dose drug distribution system for patients in institutional
settings shall be exempt from such ratio, provided that such individuals
are not also engaged in performing the activities set forth in paragraph
(b), (c), (d), (e), (f), (g), (h) or (i) of subdivision one of this
section. The licensed pharmacist shall provide the degree of supervision
of such persons as may be appropriate to ensure compliance with the
relevant provisions of regulations of the commissioner.
 ARTICLE 137-A
 REGISTERED PHARMACY TECHNICIANS
Section 6840. Introduction.
 6841. Definition of the practice of registered pharmacy
 technician.
 6842. Definitions.
 6843. Practice of registered pharmacy technician and use of the
 title "registered pharmacy technician".
 6844. Requirements for licensure as a registered pharmacy
 technician.
 § 6840. Introduction. This article applies to the profession of
registered pharmacy technician. The general provisions for all
professions contained in article one hundred thirty of this title shall
apply to this article.
 § 6841. Definition of the practice of registered pharmacy technician.
1. A registered pharmacy technician may, under the direct personal
supervision of a licensed pharmacist, assist such licensed pharmacist,
as directed, in compounding, preparing, labeling, or dispensing of drugs
used to fill valid prescriptions or medication orders or in compounding,
preparing, and labeling in anticipation of a valid prescription or
medication order for a patient to be served by the pharmacy, in
accordance with article one hundred thirty-seven of this title where
such tasks require no professional judgment. Such professional judgment
shall only be exercised by a licensed pharmacist. A registered pharmacy
technician may only practice under the direct personal supervision of a
licensed pharmacist employed in such a pharmacy. Such pharmacy shall be
responsible for ensuring that the registered pharmacy technician has
received appropriate training to ensure competence before beginning to
assist a licensed pharmacist in compounding, preparing, labeling, or
dispensing of drugs, in accordance with this article and article one
hundred thirty-seven of this title. For the purposes of this article,
direct personal supervision means supervision of procedures based on
instructions given directly by a supervising licensed pharmacist who
remains in the immediate area where the procedures are being performed,
authorizes the procedures and evaluates the procedures performed by the
registered pharmacy technicians and a supervising licensed pharmacist
shall approve all work performed by the registered pharmacy technician
prior to the actual dispensing of any drug.
 2. In addition to the registered pharmacy technician services included
in subdivision one of this section, registered pharmacy technicians may
also assist a licensed pharmacist in the dispensing of drugs by
performing the following functions that do not require a license under
this article:
 a. receiving written or electronically transmitted prescriptions,
except that in the case of electronically transmitted prescriptions the
licensed pharmacist or pharmacy intern shall review the prescription to
determine whether in his or her professional judgment it shall be
accepted by the pharmacy, and if accepted, the licensed pharmacist or
pharmacy intern shall enter his or her initials into the records of the
pharmacy;
 b. typing prescription labels;
 c. keying prescription data for entry into a computer-generated file
or retrieving prescription data from the file, provided that such
computer-generated file shall provide for verification of all
information needed to fill the prescription by a licensed pharmacist
prior to the dispensing of the prescription, meaning that the licensed
pharmacist shall review and approve such information and enter his or
her initials or other personal identifier into the recordkeeping system
prior to the dispensing of the prescription or of the prescription
refill;
 d. getting drugs from stock and returning them to stock;
 e. getting prescription files and other manual records from storage
and locating prescriptions;
 f. counting dosage units of drugs;
 g. placing dosage units of drugs in appropriate containers;
 h. affixing the prescription label to the containers;
 i. preparing manual records of dispensing for the signature or
initials of the licensed pharmacist;
 j. handing or delivering completed prescriptions to the patient or the
person authorized to act on behalf of the patient and, in accordance
with the relevant commissioner's regulations, advising the patient or
person authorized to act on behalf of the patient of the availability of
counseling to be conducted by the licensed pharmacist or pharmacy
intern; or
 k. performing other functions as defined by the commissioner's
regulations.
 3. Under the direct personal supervision of a licensed pharmacist,
unlicensed persons who are not registered pharmacy technicians may
assist licensed pharmacists in performing tasks that do not require
licensure in accordance with regulations promulgated by the commissioner
and are also described in subdivision two of this section. Unlicensed
persons who are not registered pharmacy technicians shall not engage in
or assist in compounding.
 4. No licensed pharmacist shall obtain the assistance of more than two
registered pharmacy technicians in the performance of licensed tasks
within their scope of practice or four unlicensed persons, in the
performance of the activities that do not require licensure, the total
of such persons shall not exceed four individuals at any one time.
Pharmacy interns shall be exempt from such ratios, but shall be
supervised in accordance with commissioner's regulations. Individuals
who are responsible for the act of placing drugs which are in unit-dose
packaging into medication carts as part of an approved unit-dose drug
distribution system for patients in institutional settings shall be
exempt from such ratio, provided that such individuals are not also
engaged in performing the activities set forth in subdivision one or
paragraph b, c, d, e, f, g, h, or i of subdivision two of this section.
The licensed pharmacist shall provide the degree of supervision of such
persons as may be appropriate to ensure compliance with the relevant
provisions of regulations of the commissioner.
 § 6842. Definitions. As used in this article:
 1. "Licensed pharmacist" means a person licensed to practice pharmacy
pursuant to article one hundred thirty-seven of this title.
 2. "Pharmacy intern" means a person practicing under a limited permit
pursuant to section sixty-eight hundred six of this title.
 3. "Professional judgment" means professional decision-making by a
licensed pharmacist, including, but not limited to, such activities as:
 a. interpreting a prescription or medication order for therapeutic
acceptability and appropriateness or engaging in the calculations behind
any such formulations;
 b. interpreting and evaluating a prescription or medication order for
conformance with legal requirements, authenticity, accuracy and
interaction of the prescribed drug with other known prescribed and
over-the-counter drugs;
 c. receiving oral prescriptions from prescribers; or
 d. counseling patients.
 4. "Compounding" means the combining, admixing, mixing, diluting,
pooling, reconstituting, or otherwise altering of a drug or bulk drug
substance to create a drug.
 5. "Drugs", "pharmacopeia", "labeling" and "sterile drug" shall have
the same definitions as set forth in section sixty-eight hundred two of
this title.
 § 6843. Practice of registered pharmacy technician and use of the
title "registered pharmacy technician". Only a person licensed to
practice as a registered pharmacy technician under this article or
otherwise authorized shall practice as a registered pharmacy technician
or use the title "registered pharmacy technician."
 § 6844. Requirements for licensure as a registered pharmacy
technician. To qualify for licensure as a "registered pharmacy
technician", an applicant shall fulfill the following requirements:
 1. Application: file an application with the department;
 2. Education: have received an education, including high school
graduation or its equivalent, as determined by the department;
 3. Certification from a nationally accredited pharmacy technician
certification program acceptable to the department;
 4. Age: at the time of application be at least eighteen years of age;
 5. Character: be of good moral character as determined by the
department; and
 6. Fee: pay a fee determined by the department for initial license and
for each triennial registration period.
 ARTICLE 139
 NURSING
Section 6900. Introduction.
 6901. Definitions.
 6902. Definition of practice of nursing.
 6903. Practice of nursing and use of title "registered
 professional nurse" or "licensed practical nurse".
 6904. State board for nursing.
 6905. Requirements for a license as a registered professional
 nurse.
 6906. Requirements for a license as a licensed practical
 nurse.
 6907. Limited permits.
 6908. Exempt persons.
 6909. Special provision.
 6910. Certificates for nurse practitioner practice.
 6911. Certification as a clinical nurse specialist (CNS).
 6912. Clinical education in New York state nursing education
 programs.
 § 6900. Introduction. This article applies to the profession of
nursing. The general provisions for all professions contained in
article one hundred thirty of this title apply to this article.
 § 6901. Definitions. As used in section sixty-nine hundred two:
 1. "Diagnosing" in the context of nursing practice means that
identification of and discrimination between physical and psychosocial
signs and symptoms essential to effective execution and management of
the nursing regimen. Such diagnostic privilege is distinct from a
medical diagnosis.
 2. "Treating" means selection and performance of those therapeutic
measures essential to the effective execution and management of the
nursing regimen, and execution of any prescribed medical regimen.
 3. "Human Responses" means those signs, symptoms and processes which
denote the individual's interaction with an actual or potential health
problem.
 § 6902. Definition of practice of nursing. 1. The practice of the
profession of nursing as a registered professional nurse is defined as
diagnosing and treating human responses to actual or potential health
problems through such services as casefinding, health teaching, health
counseling, and provision of care supportive to or restorative of life
and well-being, and executing medical regimens prescribed by a licensed
physician, dentist or other licensed health care provider legally
authorized under this title and in accordance with the commissioner's
regulations. A nursing regimen shall be consistent with and shall not
vary any existing medical regimen.
 2. The practice of nursing as a licensed practical nurse is defined as
performing tasks and responsibilities within the framework of
casefinding, health teaching, health counseling, the application of
topical fluoride varnish, and provision of supportive and restorative
care under the direction of a registered professional nurse or licensed
physician, dentist or other licensed health care provider legally
authorized under this title and in accordance with the commissioner's
regulations.
 3. (a) (i) The practice of registered professional nursing by a nurse
practitioner, certified under section six thousand nine hundred ten of
this article, may include the diagnosis of illness and physical
conditions and the performance of therapeutic and corrective measures
within a specialty area of practice, in collaboration with a licensed
physician qualified to collaborate in the specialty involved, provided
such services are performed in accordance with a written practice
agreement and written practice protocols except as permitted by
paragraph (b) of this subdivision. The written practice agreement shall
include explicit provisions for the resolution of any disagreement
between the collaborating physician and the nurse practitioner regarding
a matter of diagnosis or treatment that is within the scope of practice
of both. To the extent the practice agreement does not so provide, then
the collaborating physician's diagnosis or treatment shall prevail.
 (ii) Prescriptions for drugs, devices and immunizing agents may be
issued by a nurse practitioner, under this paragraph and section six
thousand nine hundred ten of this article, in accordance with the
practice agreement and practice protocols except as permitted by
paragraph (b) of this subdivision. The nurse practitioner shall obtain a
certificate from the department upon successfully completing a program
including an appropriate pharmacology component, or its equivalent, as
established by the commissioner's regulations, prior to prescribing
under this paragraph. The certificate issued under section six thousand
nine hundred ten of this article shall state whether the nurse
practitioner has successfully completed such a program or equivalent and
is authorized to prescribe under this paragraph.
 (iii) Each practice agreement shall provide for patient records review
by the collaborating physician in a timely fashion but in no event less
often than every three months. The names of the nurse practitioner and
the collaborating physician shall be clearly posted in the practice
setting of the nurse practitioner.
 * (iv) The practice protocol shall reflect current accepted medical
and nursing practice and may be updated periodically. The commissioner
shall make regulations establishing the procedure for the review of
protocols and the disposition of any issues arising from such review.
 * NB Effective until July 1, 2026
 * (iv) The practice protocol shall reflect current accepted medical
and nursing practice. The protocols shall be filed with the department
within ninety days of the commencement of the practice and may be
updated periodically. The commissioner shall make regulations
establishing the procedure for the review of protocols and the
disposition of any issues arising from such review.
 * NB Effective July 1, 2026
 (v) No physician shall enter into practice agreements with more than
four nurse practitioners who are not located on the same physical
premises as the collaborating physician.
 * (b) Notwithstanding subparagraph (i) of paragraph (a) of this
subdivision, a nurse practitioner, certified under section sixty-nine
hundred ten of this article and practicing for more than three thousand
six hundred hours shall not be required to comply with the requirements
of paragraph (a) of this subdivision relating to collaboration with a
physician, a written practice agreement and written practice protocols.
 * NB Effective until July 1, 2026
 * (b) Notwithstanding subparagraph (i) of paragraph (a) of this
subdivision, a nurse practitioner, certified under section sixty-nine
hundred ten of this article and practicing for more than three thousand
six hundred hours may comply with this paragraph in lieu of complying
with the requirements of paragraph (a) of this subdivision relating to
collaboration with a physician, a written practice agreement and written
practice protocols. A nurse practitioner complying with this paragraph
shall have collaborative relationships with one or more licensed
physicians qualified to collaborate in the specialty involved or a
hospital, licensed under article twenty-eight of the public health law,
that provides services through licensed physicians qualified to
collaborate in the specialty involved and having privileges at such
institution. As evidence that the nurse practitioner maintains
collaborative relationships, the nurse practitioner shall complete and
maintain a form, created by the department, to which the nurse
practitioner shall attest, that describes such collaborative
relationships. For purposes of this paragraph, "collaborative
relationships" shall mean that the nurse practitioner shall communicate,
whether in person, by telephone or through written (including
electronic) means, with a licensed physician qualified to collaborate in
the specialty involved or, in the case of a hospital, communicate with a
licensed physician qualified to collaborate in the specialty involved
and having privileges at such hospital, for the purposes of exchanging
information, as needed, in order to provide comprehensive patient care
and to make referrals as necessary. Such form shall also reflect the
nurse practitioner's acknowledgement that if reasonable efforts to
resolve any dispute that may arise with the collaborating physician or,
in the case of a collaboration with a hospital, with a licensed
physician qualified to collaborate in the specialty involved and having
privileges at such hospital, about a patient's care are not successful,
the recommendation of the physician shall prevail. Such form shall be
updated as needed and may be subject to review by the department. The
nurse practitioner shall maintain documentation that supports such
collaborative relationships. Failure to comply with the requirements
found in this paragraph by a nurse practitioner who is not complying
with such provisions of paragraph (a) of this subdivision, shall be
subject to professional misconduct provisions as set forth in article
one hundred thirty of this title.
 * NB Effective July 1, 2026
 (c) Nothing in this subdivision shall be deemed to limit or diminish
the practice of the profession of nursing as a registered professional
nurse under this article or any other law, rule, regulation or
certification, nor to deny any registered professional nurse the right
to do any act or engage in any practice authorized by this article or
any other law, rule, regulation or certification.
 (d) The provisions of this subdivision shall not apply to any activity
authorized, pursuant to statute, rule or regulation, to be performed by
a registered professional nurse in a hospital as defined in article
twenty-eight of the public health law.
 § 6903. Practice of nursing and use of title "registered professional
nurse" or "licensed practical nurse". Only a person licensed or
otherwise authorized under this article shall practice nursing and only
a person licensed under section sixty-nine hundred five of this article
shall use the title "registered professional nurse" and only a person
licensed under section sixty-nine hundred six of this article shall use
the title "licensed practical nurse". No person shall use the title
"nurse" or any other title or abbreviation that would represent to the
public that the person is authorized to practice nursing unless the
person is licensed or otherwise authorized under this article.
 § 6904. State board for nursing. A state board for nursing shall be
appointed by the board of regents on recommendation of the commissioner
for the purpose of assisting the board of regents and the department on
matters of professional licensing and professional conduct in accordance
with section sixty-five hundred eight of this title. The board shall be
composed of not less than fifteen members, eleven of whom shall be
registered professional nurses and four of whom shall be licensed
practical nurses all licensed and practicing in this state for at least
five years. An executive secretary to the board shall be appointed by
the board of regents on recommendation of the commissioner and shall be
a registered professional nurse registered in this state.
 § 6905. Requirements for a license as a registered professional nurse.
To qualify for a license as a registered professional nurse, an
applicant shall fulfill the following requirements:
 (1) Application: file an application with the department;
 (2) Education: have received an education, and a diploma or degree in
professional nursing, in accordance with the commissioner's regulations,
and in order to continue to maintain registration as a registered
professional nurse in New York state, have attained a baccalaureate
degree or higher in nursing within ten years of initial licensure in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations. The department, in its
discretion, may issue a conditional registration to a licensee who fails
to complete the baccalaureate degree but who agrees to meet the
additional requirement within one year. The fee for such a conditional
registration shall be the same as, and in addition to, the fee for the
triennial registration. The duration of such conditional registration
shall be for one year and may be extended, with the payment of a fee,
for no more than one additional year, unless the applicant can show good
cause for non-compliance acceptable to the department. The department,
in its discretion, may issue a temporary educational exemption to a
licensee who is unable to complete the baccalaureate degree due to a
lack of access to educational programs. Licensees seeking a temporary
educational exemption shall provide evidence of applying on at least two
occasions to a baccalaureate degree program or programs and subsequently
being denied access to such program or programs on at least two
occasions due to there being a limited number of seats. Such denials
shall also be corroborated by the higher education institution or
institutions that the licensee applied to. Temporary educational
exemptions issued pursuant to this subdivision shall be for a single two
year period. Licensees shall only be eligible for either a conditional
registration or a temporary educational exemption. The fee for such a
temporary educational exemption shall be the same as, and in addition
to, the fee for the triennial registration. Any licensee who is notified
of the denial of a registration for failure to complete the additional
educational requirements and who practices as a registered professional
nurse without such registration may be subject to disciplinary
proceedings pursuant to section sixty-five hundred ten of this title;
 (3) Experience: meet no requirement as to experience;
 (4) Examination: pass an examination satisfactory to the board and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 (5) Age: be at least eighteen years of age;
 (6) Citizenship: meet no requirement as to United States citizenship;
 (7) Character: be of good moral character as determined by the
department; and
 (8) Fees: pay a fee of one hundred fifteen dollars to the department
for admission to a department conducted examination and for an initial
license, a fee of forty-five dollars for each reexamination, a fee of
seventy dollars for an initial license for persons not requiring
admission to a department conducted examination, and a fee of fifty
dollars for each triennial registration period.
 § 6906. Requirements for a license as a licensed practical nurse. To
qualify for a license as a licensed practical nurse, an applicant shall
fulfill these requirements:
 (1) Application: file an application with the department;
 (2) Education: have received an education including completion of high
school or its equivalent, and have completed a program in practical
nursing, in accordance with the commissioner's regulations, or
completion of equivalent study satisfactory to the department in a
program conducted by the armed forces of the United States or in an
approved program in professional nursing;
 (3) Experience: meet no requirement as to experience;
 (4) Examination: pass an examination satisfactory to the board and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations, provided, however, that
the educational requirements set forth in subdivision two of this
section are met prior to admission for the licensing examination;
 (5) Age: be at least seventeen years of age;
 (6) Citizenship: meet no requirements as to United States citizenship;
 (7) Character: be of good moral character as determined by the
department; and
 (8) Fees: pay a fee of one hundred fifteen dollars to the department
for admission to a department conducted examination and for an initial
license, a fee of forty-five dollars for each reexamination, a fee of
seventy dollars for an initial license for persons not requiring
admission to a department conducted examination, and a fee of fifty
dollars for each triennial registration period.
 * (9) In conjunction with and as a condition of each triennial
registration, the department shall ask and a licensed practical nurse
shall indicate whether the licensed practical nurse is or has previously
been authorized as an advanced home health aide pursuant to subdivision
two of section sixty-nine hundred eight of this article. The department
shall provide responses to the department of health and the department
of health shall include such information in reports related to advanced
home health aides.
 * NB Repealed March 31, 2029
 § 6907. Limited permits. 1. A permit to practice as a registered
professional nurse or a permit to practice as a licensed practical nurse
may be issued by the department upon the filing of an application for a
license as a registered professional nurse or as a licensed practical
nurse and submission of such other information as the department may
require to (i) graduates of schools of nursing registered by the
department, (ii) graduates of schools of nursing approved in another
state, province, or country or (iii) applicants for a license in
practical nursing whose preparation is determined by the department to
be the equivalent of that required in this state.
 2. Such limited permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance
or upon notice to the applicant by the department that the application
for license has been denied, or ten days after notification to the
applicant of failure on the professional licensing examination,
whichever shall first occur. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions
of this subdivision, if the applicant is waiting the result of a
licensing examination at the time such limited permit expires, such
permit shall continue to be valid until ten days after notification to
the applicant of the results of such examination.
 3. A limited permit shall entitle the holder to practice nursing only
under the supervision of a nurse currently registered in this state and
with the endorsement of the employing agency.
 4. Fees. The fee for each limited permit shall be thirty-five dollars.
 5. Graduates of schools of nursing registered by the department may be
employed to practice nursing under supervision of a professional nurse
currently registered in this state and with the endorsement of the
employing agency for ninety days immediately following graduation from a
program in nursing and pending receipt of a limited permit for which an
application has been filed as provided in this section.
 § 6908. Exempt persons. 1. This article shall not be construed:
 a. As prohibiting (i) the domestic care of the sick, disabled or
injured by any family member, household member or friend, or person
employed primarily in a domestic capacity who does not hold himself or
herself out, or accept employment as a person licensed to practice
nursing under the provision of this article; provided that if such
person is remunerated, the person does not hold himself or herself out
as one who accepts employment for performing such care; or the
administration of medications or treatment by child day care providers
or employees or caregivers of child day care programs where such
providers, employees or caregivers are acting under the direction and
authority of a parent of a child, legal guardian, legal custodian, or an
adult in whose care a child has been entrusted and who has been
authorized by the parent to consent to any health care for the child and
in compliance with the regulations of the office of children and family
services pertaining to the administration of medications and treatment;
or
 (ii) any person from the domestic administration of family remedies;
or
 (iii) the providing of care by a person acting in the place of a
person exempt under clause (i) of this paragraph, but who does hold
himself or herself out as one who accepts employment for performing such
care, where nursing services are under the instruction of a licensed
nurse, or under the instruction of a patient or family or household
member determined by a registered professional nurse to be
self-directing and capable of providing such instruction, and services
are provided under section three hundred sixty-five-f of the social
services law; or
 (iv) the furnishing of nursing assistance in case of an emergency; or
 (v) tasks provided by a direct support staff in programs certified or
approved by the office for people with developmental disabilities, when
performed under the supervision of a registered professional nurse and
pursuant to a memorandum of understanding between the office for people
with developmental disabilities and the department, in accordance with
and pursuant to an authorized practitioner's ordered care, provided
that: (1) a registered professional nurse determines, in his or her
professional judgment, which tasks are to be performed based upon the
complexity of the tasks, the skill and experience of the direct support
staff, and the health status of the individual being cared for; (2) only
a direct support staff who has completed training as required by the
commissioner of the office for people with developmental disabilities
may perform tasks pursuant to this subparagraph; (3) appropriate
protocols shall be established to ensure safe administration of
medications; (4) a direct support staff shall not assess the medication
needs of an individual; (5) adequate nursing supervision is provided,
including training and periodic inspection of performance of the tasks.
The amount and type of nursing supervision shall be determined by the
registered professional nurse responsible for supervising such task
based upon the complexity of the tasks, the skill and experience of the
direct support staff, and the health status of the individual being
cared for; (6) a direct support staff shall not be authorized to perform
any tasks or activities pursuant to this subparagraph that are outside
the scope of practice of a licensed practical nurse; (7) a direct
support staff shall not represent himself or herself, or accept
employment, as a person licensed to practice nursing under the
provisions of this article; (8) direct support staff providing
medication administration, tube feeding, or diabetic care shall be
separately certified, and shall be recertified on an annual basis; (9)
the registered professional nurse shall ensure that there is a consumer
specific medication sheet for each medication that is administered; and
(10) appropriate staffing ratios shall be determined by the office for
people with developmental disabilities and the department to ensure
adequate nursing supervision. No direct support staff shall perform
tasks under this subparagraph until the office for people with
developmental disabilities and the department have entered into a
memorandum of understanding to effectuate the provisions of this
subparagraph. The office for people with developmental disabilities
shall complete a criminal background check pursuant to section 16.33 of
the mental hygiene law and an agency background check pursuant to
section 16.34 of the mental hygiene law on the direct support staff
prior to the commencement of any provision of service provided under
this subparagraph if such direct support staff is a new hire.
Individuals providing supervision or direct support tasks pursuant to
this subparagraph shall have protection pursuant to sections seven
hundred forty and seven hundred forty-one of the labor law, where
applicable;
 b. As including services given by attendants in institutions under the
jurisdiction of or subject to the visitation of the state department of
mental hygiene if adequate medical and nursing supervision is provided;
 c. As prohibiting such performance of nursing service by students
enrolled in registered schools or programs as may be incidental to their
course of study;
 d. As prohibiting or preventing the practice of nursing in this state
by any legally qualified nurse or practical nurse of another state,
province, or country whose engagement requires him or her to accompany
and care for a patient temporarily residing in this state during the
period of such engagement provided such person does not represent or
hold himself or herself out as a nurse or practical nurse registered to
practice in this state;
 e. As prohibiting or preventing the practice of nursing in this state
during an emergency or disaster by any legally qualified nurse or
practical nurse of another state, province, or country who may be
recruited by the American National Red Cross or pursuant to authority
vested in the state civil defense commission for such emergency or
disaster service, provided such person does not represent or hold
himself or herself out as a nurse or practical nurse registered to
practice in this state;
 f. As prohibiting or preventing the practice of nursing in this state,
in obedience to the requirements of the laws of the United States, by
any commissioned nurse officer in the armed forces of the United States
or by any nurse employed in the United States veterans administration or
United States public health service while engaged in the performance of
the actual duties prescribed for him or her under the United States
statutes, provided such person does not represent or hold himself or
herself out as a nurse registered to practice in this state; or
 g. As prohibiting the care of the sick when done in connection with
the practice of the religious tenets of any church.
 h. As prohibiting the provision of psychotherapy as defined in
subdivision two of section eighty-four hundred one of this title to the
extent permissible within the scope of practice of nursing as defined in
this title, by any not-for-profit corporation or education corporation
providing services within the state and operating under a waiver
pursuant to section sixty-five hundred three-a of this title, provided
that such entities offering such psychotherapy services shall only
provide such services through an individual appropriately licensed or
otherwise authorized to provide such services or a professional entity
authorized by law to provide such services.
 * 2. This article shall not be construed as prohibiting advanced tasks
provided by an advanced home health aide in accordance with regulations
developed by the commissioner, in consultation with the commissioner of
health. At a minimum, such regulations shall:
 a. specify the advanced tasks that may be performed by advanced home
health aides pursuant to this subdivision. Such tasks shall include the
administration of medications which are routine and prefilled or
otherwise packaged in a manner that promotes relative ease of
administration, provided that administration of medications by
injection, sterile procedures, and central line maintenance shall be
prohibited. Provided, however, such prohibition shall not apply to
injections of insulin or other injections for diabetes care, to
injections of low molecular weight heparin, and to pre-filled
auto-injections of naloxone and epinephrine for emergency purposes, and
provided, further, that entities employing advanced home health aides
pursuant to this subdivision shall establish a systematic approach to
address drug diversion;
 b. provide that advanced tasks performed by advanced home health aides
may be performed only under the direct supervision of a registered
professional nurse licensed in New York state, as set forth in this
subdivision and subdivision eight of section sixty-nine hundred nine of
this article, where such nurse is employed by a home care services
agency licensed or certified pursuant to article thirty-six of the
public health law, a hospice program certified pursuant to article forty
of the public health law, or an enhanced assisted living residence
licensed pursuant to article seven of the social services law and
certified pursuant to article forty-six-B of the public health law. Such
nursing supervision shall:
 (i) include training and periodic assessment of the performance of
advanced tasks;
 (ii) be determined by the registered professional nurse responsible
for supervising such advanced tasks based upon the complexity of such
advanced tasks, the skill and experience of the advanced home health
aide, and the health status of the individual for whom such advanced
tasks are being performed;
 (iii) include a comprehensive initial and thereafter regular and
ongoing assessment of the individual's needs;
 (iv) include as a requirement that the supervising registered
professional nurse shall visit individuals receiving services for the
purpose of supervising the services provided by advanced home health
aides no less than once every two weeks and include as a requirement
that a registered professional nurse shall be available by telephone to
the advanced home health aide twenty-four hours a day, seven days a
week, provided that a registered professional nurse shall be available
to visit an individual receiving services as necessary to protect the
health and safety of such individual; and
 (v) as shall be specified by the commissioner, be provided in a manner
that takes into account individual care needs, case mix complexity and
geographic considerations and provide that the number of individuals
served by a supervising registered professional nurse is reasonable and
prudent.
 c. establish a process by which a registered professional nurse may
assign advanced tasks to an advanced home health aide. Such process
shall include, but not be limited to:
 (i) allowing assignment of advanced tasks to an advanced home health
aide only where such advanced home health aide has demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the supervising registered professional nurse competency
in every advanced task that such advanced home health aide is authorized
to perform, a willingness to perform such advanced tasks, and the
ability to effectively and efficiently communicate with the individual
receiving services and understand such individual's needs;
 (ii) prohibiting assignment of advanced tasks to an advanced home
health aide if the individual receiving services declines to be served
by an advanced home health aide;
 (iii) authorizing the supervising registered professional nurse to
revoke any assigned advanced task from an advanced home health aide for
any reason; and
 (iv) authorizing multiple registered professional nurses to jointly
agree to assign advanced tasks to an advanced home health aide, provided
further that only one registered professional nurse shall be required to
determine if the advanced home health aide has demonstrated competency
in the advanced task to be performed;
 d. provide that advanced tasks may be performed only in accordance
with and pursuant to an authorized health practitioner's ordered care;
 e. provide that only a certified home health aide may perform advanced
tasks as an advanced home health aide when such aide has:
 (i) at least one year of experience providing either home health or
personal care services, or a combination of the same;
 (ii) completed the requisite training and demonstrated competencies of
an advanced home health aide as determined by the commissioner in
consultation with the commissioner of health;
 (iii) successfully completed competency examinations satisfactory to
the commissioner in consultation with the commissioner of health; and
 (iv) meets other appropriate qualifications as determined by the
commissioner in consultation with the commissioner of health;
 f. provide that only an individual who is listed in the home care
services registry maintained by the department of health pursuant to
section thirty-six hundred thirteen of the public health law as having
satisfied all applicable training requirements and having passed the
applicable competency examinations and who meets other requirements as
set forth in regulations issued by the commissioner of health pursuant
to subdivision seventeen of section thirty-six hundred two of the public
health law may perform advanced tasks pursuant to this subdivision and
may hold himself or herself out as an advanced home health aide;
 g. establish minimum standards of training for the performance of
advanced tasks by advanced home health aides, including didactic
training, clinical training, and a supervised clinical practicum with
standards set forth by the commissioner of health;
 h. provide that advanced home health aides shall receive case-specific
training on the advanced tasks to be assigned by the supervising nurse,
provided that additional training shall take place whenever additional
advanced tasks are assigned;
 i. prohibit an advanced home health aide from holding himself or
herself out, or accepting employment as, a person licensed to practice
nursing under the provisions of this article;
 j. provide that an advanced home health aide is not required nor
permitted to assess the medication or medical needs of an individual;
 k. provide that an advanced home health aide shall not be authorized
to perform any advanced tasks or activities pursuant to this subdivision
that are outside the scope of practice of a licensed practical nurse or
any advanced tasks that have not been appropriately assigned by the
supervising registered professional nurse;
 l. provide that an advanced home health aide shall document all
advanced tasks provided to an individual, including medication
administration to each individual through the use of a medication
administration record; and
 m. provide that the supervising registered professional nurse shall
retain the discretion to decide whether to assign advanced tasks to
advanced home health aides under this program and shall not be subject
to coercion, retaliation, or the threat of retaliation; in developing
such regulations, the commissioner shall take into account the
recommendations of a workgroup of stakeholders convened by the
commissioner of health in consultation with the commissioner for the
purpose of providing guidance on the foregoing.
 * NB Repealed March 31, 2029
 § 6909. Special provision. 1. Notwithstanding any inconsistent
provision of any general, special, or local law, any licensed registered
professional nurse or licensed practical nurse who voluntarily and
without the expectation of monetary compensation renders first aid or
emergency treatment at the scene of an accident or other emergency,
outside a hospital, doctor's office or any other place having proper and
necessary medical equipment, to a person who is unconscious, ill or
injured shall not be liable for damages for injuries alleged to have
been sustained by such person or for damages for the death of such
person alleged to have occurred by reason of an act or omission in the
rendering of such first aid or emergency treatment unless it is
established that such injuries were or such death was caused by gross
negligence on the part of such registered professional nurse or licensed
practical nurse. Nothing in this subdivision shall be deemed or
construed to relieve a licensed registered professional nurse or
licensed practical nurse from liability for damages for injuries or
death caused by an act or omission on the part of such nurse while
rendering professional services in the normal and ordinary course of her
practice.
 2. Nothing in this article shall be construed to confer the authority
to practice medicine or dentistry.
 3. An applicant for a license as a registered professional nurse or
licensed practical nurse by endorsement of a license of another state,
province or country whose application was filed with the department
under the laws in effect prior to August thirty-first, nineteen hundred
seventy-one shall be licensed only upon successful completion of the
appropriate licensing examination unless satisfactory evidence of the
completion of all educational requirements is submitted to the
department prior to September one, nineteen hundred seventy-seven.
 4. A certified nurse practitioner may prescribe and order a
non-patient specific regimen to a registered professional nurse,
pursuant to regulations promulgated by the commissioner, consistent with
subdivision three of section six thousand nine hundred two of this
article, and consistent with the public health law, for:
 (a) administering immunizations.
 (b) the emergency treatment of anaphylaxis.
 (c) administering purified protein derivative (PPD) tests or other
tests to detect or screen for tuberculosis infections.
 (d) administering tests to determine the presence of the human
immunodeficiency virus.
 (e) administering tests to determine the presence of the hepatitis C
virus.
 (f) the urgent or emergency treatment of opioid related overdose or
suspected opioid related overdose.
 (g) screening of persons at increased risk for syphilis, gonorrhea and
chlamydia.
 * (h) administering tests to determine the presence of COVID-19 or its
antibodies or influenza virus.
 * NB Repealed July 1, 2026
 (i) administering electrocardiogram tests to detect signs and symptoms
of acute coronary syndrome.
 (j) administering point-of-care blood glucose tests to evaluate acute
mental status changes in persons with suspected hypoglycemia.
 (k) administering tests and intravenous lines to persons that meet
severe sepsis and septic shock criteria.
 (l) administering tests to determine pregnancy.
 5. A registered professional nurse may execute a non-patient specific
regimen prescribed or ordered by a licensed physician or certified nurse
practitioner, pursuant to regulations promulgated by the commissioner.
 6. A registered professional nurse defined under subdivision one of
section sixty-nine hundred two of this article may use accepted
classifications of signs, symptoms, dysfunctions and disorders,
including, but not limited to, classifications used in the practice
setting for the purpose of providing mental health services.
 7. A certified nurse practitioner may prescribe and order a patient
specific order or non-patient specific regimen to a licensed pharmacist,
pursuant to regulations promulgated by the commissioner, and consistent
with the public health law, for: (a) administering immunizations to
prevent influenza to patients two years of age or older; and (b)
administering immunizations to prevent pneumococcal, acute herpes
zoster, hepatitis A, hepatitis B, human papillomavirus, measles, mumps,
rubella, varicella, COVID-19, meningococcal, tetanus, diphtheria or
pertussis disease and medications required for emergency treatment of
anaphylaxis to patients eighteen years of age or older; and (c)
administering other immunizations recommended by the advisory committee
on immunization practices of the centers for disease control and
prevention for patients eighteen years of age or older if the
commissioner of health in consultation with the commissioner determines
that an immunization: (i) (A) may be safely administered by a licensed
pharmacist within their lawful scope of practice; and (B) is needed to
prevent the transmission of a reportable communicable disease that is
prevalent in New York state; or (ii) is a recommended immunization for
such patients who: (A) meet age requirements, (B) lack documentation of
such immunization, (C) lack evidence of past infection, or (D) have an
additional risk factor or another indication as recommended by the
advisory committee on immunization practices of the centers for disease
control and prevention. Nothing in this subdivision shall authorize
unlicensed persons to administer immunizations, vaccines or other drugs.
 * 8. A registered professional nurse, while working for a home care
services agency licensed or certified pursuant to article thirty-six of
the public health law, a hospice program certified pursuant to article
forty of the public health law, or an enhanced assisted living residence
licensed pursuant to article seven of the social services law and
certified pursuant to article forty-six-B of the public health law may,
in accordance with this subdivision, assign advanced home health aides
to perform advanced tasks for individuals pursuant to the provisions of
subdivision two of section sixty-nine hundred eight of this article and
supervise advanced home health aides who perform assigned advanced
tasks.
 (a) Prior to assigning or modifying an assignment to perform an
advanced task, the registered professional nurse shall:
 (i) complete a nursing assessment to ascertain the client's current
health status and care needs; and
 (ii) provide to the advanced home health aide written,
individual-specific instructions for performing the advanced task and
criteria for identifying, reporting and responding to problems or
complications.
 (b) The registered professional nurse shall not assign an advanced
task unless:
 (i) the advanced task to be assigned is consistent with an authorized
health practitioner's ordered care;
 (ii) the registered professional nurse provides case specific training
to the advanced home health aide and personally verifies that the
advanced home health aide can safely and competently perform the
advanced task;
 (iii) the registered professional nurse determines that the advanced
home health aide is willing to perform such advanced task; and
 (iv) the registered professional nurse determines that the advanced
home health aide is able to effectively and efficiently communicate with
the individual receiving services and understand such individual's
needs.
 (c) The supervising registered professional nurse shall:
 (i) visit individuals receiving services for the purpose of
supervising the services provided by advanced home health aides no less
than once every two weeks; and
 (ii) conduct regular and ongoing assessment of the individual's needs.
 * NB Repealed March 31, 2029
 * NB There are 2 sb 8's
 * 8. A certified nurse practitioner may prescribe and order a patient
specific order or non-patient specific order to a licensed pharmacist,
pursuant to regulations promulgated by the commissioner in consultation
with the commissioner of health, and consistent with the public health
law, for dispensing up to a seven day starter pack of HIV post-exposure
prophylaxis for the purpose of preventing human immunodeficiency virus
infection following a potential human immunodeficiency virus exposure.
 * NB There are 2 sb 8's
 9. A registered professional nurse may execute a standing order for
newborn care in a hospital established under section twenty-eight
hundred three-v of the public health law, as provided in that section.
The commissioner may make regulations relating to implementation of this
subdivision.
 10. A certified nurse practitioner may prescribe and order a
non-patient-specific regimen to a licensed pharmacist, for insulin and
related supplies pursuant to section sixty-eight hundred one of this
title.
 11. A certified nurse practitioner may prescribe and order a
non-patient specific order to a pharmacist licensed and located in the
state, pursuant to regulations promulgated by the commissioner, and
consistent with section sixty-eight hundred one of this title, for
dispensing self-administered hormonal contraceptives as defined in
section sixty-eight hundred two of this title.
 § 6910. Certificates for nurse practitioner practice. 1. For issuance
of a certificate to practice as a nurse practitioner under subdivision
three of section six thousand nine hundred two of this article, the
applicant shall fulfill the following requirements:
 (a) Application: file an application with the department;
 (b) License: be licensed as a registered professional nurse in the
state;
 (c) Education: (i) have satisfactorily completed educational
preparation for provision of these services in a program registered by
the department or in a program determined by the department to be the
equivalent; or
 (ii) submit evidence of current certification by a national certifying
body, recognized by the department; or
 (iii) meet such alternative criteria as established by the
commissioner's regulations;
 (d) Fees: pay a fee to the department of fifty dollars for each
initial certificate authorizing nurse practitioner practice in a
specialty area and a triennial registration fee of thirty dollars.
Registration under this section shall be coterminous with the nurse
practitioner's registration as a professional nurse.
 2. Only a person certified under this section shall use the title
"nurse practitioner".
 3. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any act or
practice authorized by any other law, rule, regulation or certification.
 4. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any activity
authorized, pursuant to statute, rule or regulation, to be performed by
a registered professional nurse in a hospital as defined in article
twenty-eight of the public health law.
 5. The commissioner is authorized to promulgate regulations to
implement the provisions of this section.
 § 6911. Certification as a clinical nurse specialist (CNS). 1. For
issuance of a certificate to practice as a clinical nurse specialist
under section six thousand nine hundred two of this article, the
applicant shall fulfill the following requirements:
 (a) file an application with the department;
 (b) be licensed as a registered professional nurse in this state;
 (c) (i) have satisfactorily completed an educational program
registered by the department including a master's or doctoral degree, or
a post-master's certificate from a program acceptable to the department
which prepares graduates to practice as CNSs and which is accredited by
a national nursing accredited body acceptable to the department, and
(ii) meets all other requirements established by the department to
practice as a clinical nurse specialist, or (iii) have received
educational preparation determined by the department to be the
substantial equivalent of subparagraphs (i) and (ii) of this paragraph;
and
 (d) pay a fee to the department of fifty dollars for each initial
certificate authorizing clinical nurse specialist practice and a
triennial registration fee of thirty dollars. Registration under this
section shall be coterminous with the clinical nurse specialist's
registration as a professional nurse.
 2. Only a person certified under this section shall use the title
"clinical nurse specialist" or the designation "CNS".
 § 6912. Clinical education in New York state nursing education
programs. 1. For purposes of this section, "simulation experience" shall
mean planned learning experiences that represent actual or potential
situations in clinical nursing practice and adhere to the standards of
this section. Such learning experiences allow participants to develop or
enhance clinical nursing competencies and provide an opportunity to
analyze and respond to realistic situations in a simulated environment.
 2. New York state certificate and degree programs registered by the
department for the purposes of meeting the education requirements set
forth in this article shall include clinical education, or the
equivalent as defined and determined by the commissioner pursuant to
regulation.
 3. Registered programs may deliver one-third of such clinical training
or clinical education through simulation experience as defined in this
section and in accordance with the commissioner's regulations, provided,
however, nothing in this section shall reduce the minimum in-person or
direct care requirements established by programmatic accreditors and
certifying bodies. To meet a particular educational need the
commissioner may approve that more than one-third of such clinical
training or clinical education may be met through simulation experience
as defined in this section and in accordance with the commissioner's
regulations.
 4. The commissioner shall prescribe in regulation an expedited process
for programs seeking a curricular change to implement simulation
experiences. For programs that are not in substantial compliance with
department program requirements, the department may request additional
information and materials, in accordance with the commissioner's
regulations. The department shall act upon a program's submission to
implement simulation experiences within twenty business days of receipt
of a complete and properly submitted form.
 5. Simulation experience acceptable to the department for the purposes
of clinical training or clinical education shall:
 (a) be designed, guided and supervised by program faculty and program
staff with appropriate and relevant training, certification or
accreditation, who may be assisted or supported by experts in
simulation, in a nursing skills or clinical simulation laboratory
setting;
 (b) include continued professional development opportunities for
program faculty and program staff in simulation methods and best
practices;
 (c) utilize theory-based, evidence-based, and standards-driven
pedagogy;
 (d) require active student engagement in guided skills practice with
instructional feedback;
 (e) include formative and summative assessments of well-articulated
competencies appropriate to the role and responsibilities of the
learner;
 (f) use various types of fidelity through equipment and practice to
replicate substantial aspects of clinical nursing practice and utilize
relevant equipment and technologies as appropriate to the desired
learning outcomes;
 (g) maintain continued compliance with the standards of program
registration; and
 (h) respond to innovations or emerging educational needs, pursuant to
regulation.
 ARTICLE 140
 PROFESSIONAL MIDWIFERY PRACTICE ACT
Section 6950. Introduction.
 6951. Definition of practice of midwifery.
 6952. Practice of midwifery.
 6953. Use of title "midwife".
 6954. State board of midwifery.
 6955. Requirements for a professional license.
 6956. Prior nurse-midwifery certification.
 6957. Exempt persons.
 6958. Limited permit.
 § 6950. Introduction. This article applies to the profession of
midwifery. The general provisions for all professions contained in
article one hundred thirty of this title apply to this article.
 § 6951. Definition of practice of midwifery. 1. The practice of the
profession of midwifery is defined as the management of normal
pregnancies, child birth and postpartum care as well as primary
preventive reproductive health care of essentially healthy women, and
shall include newborn evaluation, resuscitation and referral for
infants. A midwife shall have collaborative relationships with (i) a
licensed physician who is board certified as an
obstetrician-gynecologist by a national certifying body or (ii) a
licensed physician who practices obstetrics and has obstetric privileges
at a general hospital licensed under article twenty-eight of the public
health law or (iii) a hospital, licensed under article twenty-eight of
the public health law, that provides obstetrics through a licensed
physician having obstetrical privileges at such institution, that
provide for consultation, collaborative management and referral to
address the health status and risks of his or her patients and that
include plans for emergency medical gynecological and/or obstetrical
coverage. A midwife shall maintain documentation of such collaborative
relationships and shall make information about such collaborative
relationships available to his or her patients. Failure to comply with
the requirements found in this subdivision shall be subject to
professional misconduct provisions as set forth in article one hundred
thirty of this title.
 2. A licensed midwife shall have the authority, as necessary, and
limited to the practice of midwifery, to prescribe and administer drugs,
immunizing agents, diagnostic tests and devices, and to order laboratory
tests, as established by the board in accordance with the commissioner's
regulations. A midwife shall obtain a certificate from the department
upon successfully completing a program including a pharmacology
component, or its equivalent, as established by the commissioner's
regulations prior to prescribing under this section.
 3. Any reference to midwifery, midwife, certified nurse-midwifery or
certified nurse-midwife, nurse-midwifery or nurse-midwife under the
provisions of this article, this chapter or any other law, shall refer
to and include the profession of midwifery and a licensed midwife,
unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
 § 6952. Practice of midwifery. Only a person licensed or exempt under
this article or authorized by any other section of law shall practice
midwifery.
 § 6953. Use of title "midwife". Only a person licensed or exempt under
this article shall use the title "midwife". Only a person licensed
under both this article and article one hundred thirty-nine of this
chapter may use the title "nurse-midwife".
 § 6954. State board of midwifery. 1. The state board of midwifery
shall be appointed by the board of regents on recommendation of the
commissioner for the purpose of assisting the board of regents on
matters of professional licensing and professional conduct in accordance
with section sixty-five hundred eight of this title. The board shall be
composed of thirteen individuals. Initial appointments to the board
shall be such that the terms shall be staggered. However, no members
shall serve more than two terms.
 2. (a) (1) Seven members of the board shall be persons licensed or
exempt under this section.
 (2) One member of the board shall be an educator of midwifery.
 (b) Two members of the board shall be individuals who are licensed
physicians who are also certified as obstetrician/gynecologists by a
national certifying body.
 (c) One member of the board shall be an individual licensed as a
physician who practices family medicine including obstetrics.
 (d) One member of the board shall be an individual licensed as a
physician who practices pediatrics.
 (e) One member of the board shall be an individual not possessing
either licensure or training in medicine, midwifery, pharmacology or
nursing and shall represent the public at large.
 3. For purposes of this article, "board" means the state board of
midwifery created under this section unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise.
 § 6955. Requirements for a professional license. To qualify for a
license as a midwife, an applicant shall fulfill the following
requirements:
 1. Application: file an application with the department.
 2. Education: satisfactorily;
 (a) complete educational preparation (degree or diploma granting) for
the practice of nursing, followed by or concurrently with educational
preparation for the practice of midwifery in accordance with the
commissioner's regulations, or
 (b) submit evidence of license or certification, the educational
preparation for which is determined by the department to be equivalent
to the foregoing, from any state or country, satisfactory to the
department and in accordance with the commissioner's regulations, or
 (c) complete a program determined by the department to be equivalent
to the foregoing and in accordance with the commissioner's regulations.
 3. Examination: pass an examination satisfactory to the department and
in accordance with the commissioner's regulations.
 4. Age: be at least twenty-one years of age.
 5. Character: be of good moral character as determined by the
department.
 6. Citizenship or immigration status: be a United States citizen or a
noncitizen lawfully admitted for permanent residence in the United
States.
 7. Fee: pay a fee of one hundred ninety dollars to the department for
admission to a department conducted examination for an initial license,
a fee of one hundred dollars for each re-examination, a fee of one
hundred fifteen dollars for an initial license for persons not requiring
admission to a department conducted examination, a fee of one hundred
eighty dollars for each triennial registration period and a fee of
seventy dollars for a limited permit.
 § 6956. Prior nurse-midwifery certification. Any individual who is
certified as a nurse-midwife pursuant to section twenty-five hundred
sixty of the public health law before June first, nineteen hundred
ninety-six, shall be deemed to be licensed as a midwife under this
article; provided that each such certified nurse-midwife shall, prior to
that date, submit evidence of such certification to the department
together with the appropriate fee required by subdivision seven of
section sixty-nine hundred fifty-five of this article. Any individual
certified as a nurse-midwife pursuant to section twenty-five hundred
sixty of the public health law (i) may practice under that section until
it is repealed, but (ii) shall not practice pursuant to this article
until after receiving approval from the commissioner and submitting the
fee required by subdivision seven of section sixty-nine hundred
fifty-five of this article.
 § 6957. Exempt persons. Nothing in this article shall be construed to
affect, prevent or in any manner expand or limit any duty or
responsibility of a licensed physician from practicing midwifery or
affect or prevent a medical student or midwifery student in clinical
practice under the supervision of a licensed physician or board
certified obstetrician/gynecologist or licensed midwife practicing
pursuant to the provisions of section twenty-five hundred sixty of the
public health law in pursuance of an educational program registered by
the department from engaging in such practice.
 § 6958. Limited permit. 1. A limited permit to practice midwifery may
be granted for a period not to exceed twelve months to an individual who
has to the satisfaction of the department met all the requirements of
section sixty-nine hundred fifty-five of this article, but has not yet
passed the examination required by subdivision three of such section.
 2. A limited permit shall entitle the holder to practice midwifery
only under the direct supervision of a licensed physician who is
authorized under section sixty-nine hundred fifty-one of this article or
a licensed midwife.
 ARTICLE 141
 PODIATRY
Section 7000. Introduction.
 7001. Definition of practice of podiatry.
 7002. Practice of podiatry and use of title "podiatrist".
 7003. State board for podiatry.
 7004. Requirements for a professional license.
 7005. Exempt persons.
 7006. Special provision.
 7007. Limited permits.
 7008. Limited residency permits and limited fellowship permits.
 7009. Podiatric ankle surgery privileges.
 7010. Ankle surgery limited permits.
 § 7000. Introduction. This article applies to the profession of
podiatry. The general provisions for all professions contained in
article one hundred thirty of this title apply to this article.
 § 7001. Definition of practice of podiatry. * 1. The practice of the
profession of podiatry is defined as diagnosing, treating, operating and
prescribing for any disease, injury, deformity or other condition of the
foot, and may include performing physical evaluations in conjunction
with the provision of podiatric treatment. For the purposes of wound
care however, the practice of podiatry shall include the treatment of
such wounds if they are contiguous with wounds relating, originating or
in the course of treatment of a wound on the foot within the podiatric
scope of practice. Wound care shall not, however, extend beyond the
level ending at the distal tibial tuberosity. The practice of podiatry
may also include diagnosing, treating, operating and prescribing for any
disease, injury, deformity or other condition of the ankle and soft
tissue of the leg below the tibial tuberosity if the podiatrist has
obtained an issuance of a privilege to perform podiatric standard ankle
surgery or advanced ankle surgery in accordance with section seven
thousand nine of this article. Podiatrists may treat traumatic open
wound fractures only in hospitals, as defined in article twenty-eight of
the public health law. For the purposes of this article, the term
"ankle" shall be defined as the distal metaphysis and epiphysis of the
tibia and fibula, the articular cartilage of the distal tibia and distal
fibula, the ligaments that connect the distal metaphysis and epiphysis
of the tibia and fibula and talus, and the portions of skin,
subcutaneous tissue, facia, muscles, tendons, ligaments and nerves at or
below the level of the myotendinous junction of the triceps surae.
 * NB Effective until June 12, 2027
 * 1. The practice of the profession of podiatry is defined as
diagnosing, treating, operating and prescribing for any disease, injury,
deformity, other condition of, or local manifestations of systemic
diseases as they appear on the foot and the diagnosing, treating, and
prescribing for any disease, injury, deformity, other condition of, or
local manifestations of systemic diseases as they appear on the ankle,
unless otherwise provided by this section, and may include performing
physical evaluations in conjunction with the provision of podiatric
treatment. For the purposes of wound care however, the practice of
podiatry shall include the treatment of such wounds if they are
contiguous with wounds relating, originating or in the course of
treatment of a wound on the foot or ankle within the podiatric scope of
practice. Wound care shall not extend beyond the level ending at the
distal tibial tuberosity. The practice of podiatry may also include
operating for any disease, injury, deformity or other condition of the
ankle and soft tissue of the leg below the tibial tuberosity if the
podiatrist has obtained an issuance of a privilege to perform podiatric
standard ankle surgery or advanced ankle surgery in accordance with
section seven thousand nine of this article. Podiatrists may treat
traumatic open wound fractures only in hospitals, as defined in article
twenty-eight of the public health law. For the purposes of this article,
the term "ankle" shall be defined as the distal metaphysis and epiphysis
of the tibia and fibula, the articular cartilage of the distal tibia and
distal fibula, the ligaments that connect the distal metaphysis and
epiphysis of the tibia and fibula and talus, and the portions of skin,
subcutaneous tissue, facia, muscles, tendons, ligaments and nerves at or
below the level of the myotendinous junction of the triceps surae.
 * NB Effective June 12, 2027
 * 2. The practice of podiatry shall not include treating any part of
the human body other than the foot, nor treating fractures of the
malleoli or cutting operations upon the malleoli unless the podiatrist
obtains an issuance of a privilege to perform podiatric standard ankle
surgery or podiatric advanced ankle surgery. Podiatrists who have
obtained an issuance of a privilege to perform podiatric standard ankle
surgery may perform surgery on the ankle which may include soft tissue
and osseous procedures except those procedures specifically authorized
for podiatrists who have obtained an issuance of a privilege for
advanced ankle surgery. Podiatrists who have obtained an issuance of a
privilege to perform podiatric advanced ankle surgery may perform
surgery on the ankle which may include ankle fracture fixation, ankle
fusion, ankle arthroscopy, insertion or removal of external fixation
pins into or from the tibial diaphysis at or below the level of the
myotendinous junction of the triceps surae, and insertion and removal of
retrograde tibiotalocalcanneal intramedullary rods and locking screws up
to the level of the myotendinous junction of the triceps surae, but does
not include the surgical treatment of complications within the tibial
diaphysis related to the use of such external fixation pins. Podiatrists
licensed to practice, but not authorized to prescribe or administer
narcotics prior to the effective date of this subdivision, may do so
only after certification by the department in accordance with the
qualifications established by the commissioner. The practice of podiatry
shall include administering only local anesthetics for therapeutic
purposes as well as for anesthesia and treatment under general
anesthesia administered by authorized persons. The practice of podiatry
by any licensee shall not include partial or total ankle replacements
nor the treatment of pilon fractures.
 * NB Effective until June 12, 2027
 * 2. The practice of podiatry shall not include treating any part of
the human body other than the foot or ankle, provided, however, that
unless the podiatrist obtains an issuance of a privilege to perform
podiatric standard ankle surgery or podiatric advanced ankle surgery,
such practice shall not include the surgical treatment of fractures of
the malleoli which includes cutting operations upon the malleoli.
Podiatrists who have obtained an issuance of a privilege to perform
podiatric standard ankle surgery may perform surgery on the ankle which
may include soft tissue and osseous procedures except those procedures
specifically authorized for podiatrists who have obtained an issuance of
a privilege for advanced ankle surgery. Podiatrists who have obtained an
issuance of a privilege to perform podiatric advanced ankle surgery may
perform surgery on the ankle which may include ankle fracture fixation,
ankle fusion, ankle arthroscopy, insertion or removal of external
fixation pins into or from the tibial diaphysis at or below the level of
the myotendinous junction of the triceps surae, and insertion and
removal of retrograde tibiotalocalcanneal intramedullary rods and
locking screws up to the level of the myotendinous junction of the
triceps surae, but does not include the surgical treatment of
complications within the tibial diaphysis related to the use of such
external fixation pins. Podiatrists licensed to practice, but not
authorized to prescribe or administer narcotics prior to the effective
date of this subdivision, may do so only after certification by the
department in accordance with the qualifications established by the
commissioner. The practice of podiatry shall include administering only
local anesthetics for therapeutic purposes as well as for anesthesia and
treatment under general anesthesia administered by authorized persons.
The practice of podiatry by any licensee shall not include the treatment
of pilon fractures.
 * NB Effective June 12, 2027
 3. (a) The department shall conduct a study to determine whether to
make available to the public profiles on podiatrists who have obtained
an issuance of a privilege to perform podiatric standard or advanced
ankle surgery pursuant to subdivisions one and two of section seven
thousand nine of this article. Such study shall include consideration of
whether it would be appropriate and feasible for the department to make
publicly available profiles for such podiatrists in a manner similar to
physician profiles made available on the department of health's website
in accordance with section twenty-nine hundred ninety-five-a of the
public health law. The department shall consult with the department of
health as necessary on matters related to the operation of the
department of health's physician profiles established pursuant to
section twenty-nine hundred ninety-five-a of the public health law in
conducting its study.
 (b) If the department determines that making podiatrist profiles
available is appropriate and feasible, the department, after
consultation with the department of health, shall outline in such study
an appropriate and cost effective method of presenting relevant and
appropriate podiatric profiling information to the general public. The
department shall submit such study to the governor, the temporary
president of the senate, the speaker of the assembly, the minority
leader of the senate and the minority leader of the assembly on or
before November first, two thousand sixteen.
 (c) If the department makes podiatrist profiles available as set forth
in paragraph (b) of this subdivision, the department of health shall
include on its website containing the physician profiles established
pursuant to section twenty-nine hundred ninety-five-a of the public
health law a link to the website on which such podiatrist profiles may
be accessed and a statement describing the purpose of such link.
 § 7002. Practice of podiatry and use of title "podiatrist". Only a
person licensed or exempt under this article shall practice podiatry or
use the title "podiatrist" or "chiropodist".
 § 7003. State board for podiatry. A state board for podiatry shall be
appointed by the board of regents on recommendation of the commissioner
for the purpose of assisting the board of regents and the department on
matters of professional licensing and professional conduct in accordance
with section sixty-five hundred eight of this title. The board shall be
composed of not less than seven podiatrists licensed in this state. An
executive secretary to the board shall be appointed by the board of
regents on recommendation of the commissioner.
 § 7004. Requirements for a professional license. To qualify for a
license as a podiatrist, an applicant shall fulfill the following
requirements:
 (1) Application: file an application with the department;
 (2) Education: have received an education, including a doctoral degree
in podiatry, in accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 (3) Experience: have experience satisfactory to the board and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 (4) Examination: pass an examination satisfactory to the board and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 (5) Age: be at least twenty-one years of age;
 (6) Citizenship: meet no requirements as to United States citizenship;
 (7) Character: be of good moral character as determined by the
department; and
 (8) Fees: pay a fee of two hundred twenty dollars to the department
for admission to a department conducted examination and for an initial
license, a fee of one hundred fifteen dollars for each reexamination, a
fee of one hundred thirty-five dollars for an initial license for
persons not requiring admission to a department conducted examination,
and a fee of two hundred ten dollars for each triennial registration
period.
 (9) Continuing education: In accordance with the requirements of
section sixty-five hundred two of the education law, at the time of
re-registration with the department, each applicant shall present
satisfactory evidence to the state board for podiatry that in the years
prior to the filing for re-registration he attended the education
programs conducted by the podiatry society of the state of New York or
the equivalent of such educational programs as approved by the state
board for podiatry in accordance with the commissioner's regulations.
 § 7005. Exempt persons. Nothing in this article shall be construed to
affect or prevent a student from engaging in clinical practice under
supervision of a licensed podiatrist as part of the program of an
approved school of podiatry.
 § 7006. Special provision. 1. No corporation, except a hospital
corporation authorized under article forty-three of the insurance law or
a corporation organized and existing under the laws of the state of New
York which, on or before the first day of March, nineteen hundred
forty-two, was legally incorporated to practice podiatry, shall practice
podiatry, and then only through licensed podiatrists and shall conform
to board of regents rules. No corporation organized to practice podiatry
shall change its name or sell its franchise or transfer its corporate
rights directly or indirectly, by transfer of capital stock control or
otherwise, to any person or to another corporation without permission
from the department and any corporation so changing its name or so
transferring its franchise or corporate rights without such permission
or found guilty of violating a board of regents rule shall be deemed to
have forfeited its right to exist and shall be dissolved by a proceeding
brought by the attorney general.
 2. Any manufacturer or merchant may sell, advertise, fit, or adjust
proprietary foot remedies, arch supports, corrective foot appliances or
shoes.
 3. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of any general, special
or local law, any licensed podiatrist who voluntarily and without the
expectation of monetary compensation renders first aid or emergency
treatment at the scene of an accident or other emergency, outside of a
hospital or any other place having proper and necessary medical
equipment, to a person who is unconscious, ill or injured shall not be
liable for damages for injuries alleged to have been sustained by such
person or for damages for the death of such person alleged to have
occurred by reason of an act or omission in the rendering of such first
aid or emergency treatment unless it is established that such injuries
were or such death was caused by gross negligence on the part of such
podiatrist. Nothing in this subdivision shall be deemed or construed to
relieve a licensed podiatrist from liability for damages for injuries or
death caused by an act or omission on the part of a podiatrist while
rendering professional services in the normal and ordinary course of
practice.
 4. An unlicensed person may provide supportive services to a
podiatrist incidental to and concurrent with such podiatrist personally
performing a service or procedure. Nothing in this subdivision shall be
construed to allow an unlicensed person to provide any service which
constitutes the practice of podiatry as defined in this article. An
unlicensed person providing supportive services to a podiatrist may
operate radiographic equipment under direct supervision for the sole
purpose of foot radiography provided that such person completes a course
of study acceptable to the department in consultation with the
department of health.
 § 7007. Limited permits. 1. Limited permits to practice podiatry may
be issued by the department to graduates of a program of professional
education in podiatry registered by the department or accredited by an
accrediting agency acceptable to the department. Such permits shall
authorize the practice of podiatry only under the supervision of a
licensed podiatrist and only in:
 a. a hospital or health facility licensed pursuant to article
twenty-eight of the public health law;
 b. a clerkship for a period of two years or less conducted by a
licensed podiatrist designated as a member of the faculty of an approved
school of podiatry for purposes of a preceptorship program; or
 2. Limited permits shall be issued for a period of one year, and may
be renewed at the discretion of the department for one additional year.
 3. The fee for a limited permit shall be one hundred five dollars and
the fee for a renewal shall be fifty dollars.
 § 7008. Limited residency permits and limited fellowship permits. 1.
Limited residency permits and limited fellowship permits may be issued
by the department to graduates of a program of professional education in
podiatry registered by the department or accredited by an accrediting
agency acceptable to the department.
 2. Such permits shall allow a resident or fellow in podiatric medicine
participating in an approved post-graduate residency or fellowship
program to perform such duties, tasks and functions that are required
for successful completion of such program under the administrative
supervision of a licensed podiatrist serving as the residency or
fellowship director, as applicable, in a hospital or health care
facility licensed pursuant to article twenty-eight of the public health
law. At any time during the residency or fellowship, a licensed
physician or a licensed podiatrist may provide direct personal
supervision of activities which he or she is authorized and competent to
provide in the approved facility; provided, however, when the resident's
or fellow's training involves practice beyond that authorized in section
seven thousand one of this article, a licensed physician shall provide
direct personal supervision. For the purposes of this section, direct
personal supervision means supervision of procedures based on
instructions given directly by a licensed physician or licensed
podiatrist, as applicable, who remains in the immediate area where the
procedures are being performed, authorizes the procedures and evaluates
the procedures performed by the podiatric resident or fellow.
 3. Such permit shall be issued for three years and may be renewed at
the discretion of the department for additional one-year periods when
necessary to permit the completion of an approved post-graduate
residency or fellowship in podiatric medicine.
 4. The fee for a limited residency permit or a limited fellowship
permit shall be one hundred five dollars and the fee for a renewal shall
be fifty dollars.
 § 7009. Podiatric ankle surgery privileges. 1. For issuance of a
privilege to perform podiatric standard ankle surgery, as that term is
used in subdivision two of section seven thousand one of this article,
the applicant shall fulfill the following requirements:
 a. Application: file an application with the department;
 b. License: be licensed as a podiatrist in the state;
 c. Training and certification: either:
 (i) have graduated on or after June first, two thousand six from a
three-year residency program in podiatric medicine and surgery that was
accredited by an accrediting agency acceptable to the department, and be
certified in reconstructive rearfoot and ankle surgery by a national
certifying board having certification standards acceptable to the
department; or
 (ii) have graduated on or after June first, two thousand six from a
three-year residency program in podiatric medicine and surgery that was
accredited by an accrediting agency acceptable to the department, be
board qualified but not yet certified in reconstructive rearfoot and
ankle surgery by a national certifying board having certification
standards acceptable to the department, and provide documentation that
he or she has acceptable training and experience in standard or advance
midfoot, rearfoot and ankle procedures that has been approved by the
department; or
 (iii) have graduated before June first, two thousand six from a
two-year residency program in podiatric medicine and surgery that was
accredited by an accrediting agency acceptable to the department, be
certified in reconstructive rearfoot and ankle surgery by a national
certifying board having certification standards acceptable to the
department, and provide documentation that he or she has acceptable
training and experience in standard or advanced midfoot, rearfoot and
ankle procedures that has been approved by the department;
 d. Fees: pay a fee to the department of two hundred twenty dollars for
the issuance of a privilege to perform podiatric standard ankle surgery.
 2. For issuance of a privilege to perform podiatric advanced ankle
surgery, as that term is used in subdivision two of section seven
thousand one of this article, the applicant shall fulfill the following
requirements:
 a. Application: file an application with the department;
 b. License: be licensed as a podiatrist in the state;
 c. Experience and certification: either:
 (i) have graduated on or after June first, two thousand six from a
three-year residency program in podiatric medicine and surgery that was
accredited by an accrediting agency acceptable to the department, be
certified in reconstructive rearfoot and ankle surgery by a national
certifying board having certification standards acceptable to the
department, and provide documentation that he or she has acceptable
training and experience in advanced midfoot, rearfoot and ankle
procedures that has been approved by the department; or
 (ii) have graduated before June first, two thousand six from a
two-year residency program in podiatric medicine and surgery that was
accredited by an accrediting agency acceptable to the department, be
certified in reconstructive rearfoot and ankle surgery, by a national
certifying board having certification standards acceptable to the
department, and provide documentation that he or she has acceptable
training and experience in advanced midfoot, rearfoot and ankle
procedures that has been approved by the department.
 d. Fees: pay a fee to the department of two hundred twenty dollars for
the issuance of a privilege to perform podiatric advanced ankle surgery.
 3. Duration and registration of privileges. A privilege issued under
this section shall be valid for the life of the holder, unless revoked,
annulled, or suspended by the board of regents. Such a privilege shall
be subject to the same oversight and disciplinary provisions as licenses
issued under this title. The holder of a privilege issued under this
section shall register with the department as a privilege holder in the
same manner and subject to the same provisions as required of a licensee
pursuant to section six thousand five hundred two of this title,
provided that, at the time of each registration, the privilege holder
shall certify that he or she continues to meet the requirements for the
privilege set forth in this section. The fee for such registration shall
be two hundred ten dollars. The registration period for a privilege
holder shall be coterminous with his or her registration as a
podiatrist.
 § 7010. Ankle surgery limited permits. * A limited permit to perform
podiatric standard ankle surgery, as described in subdivision two of
section seven thousand one of this article, may be issued by the
department to a podiatrist who is licensed pursuant to this article and
who has met the residency and board qualification/certification
requirements set forth in subdivision one of section seven thousand nine
of this article in order to authorize such podiatrist to obtain the
training and experience required for the issuance of a podiatric
standard ankle surgery privilege pursuant to subdivision one of section
seven thousand nine of this article. Such permits shall authorize the
performance of podiatric standard ankle surgery only under the direct
personal supervision of a licensed podiatrist holding a podiatric
standard ankle surgery privilege or a podiatric advanced ankle surgery
privilege issued pursuant to section seven thousand nine of this article
or of a physician licensed pursuant to article one hundred thirty-one of
this title and certified in orthopedic surgery by a national certifying
board having certification standards acceptable to the department.
 * NB Effective until June 12, 2027
 * 1. A limited permit to perform podiatric standard ankle surgery, as
described in subdivision two of section seven thousand one of this
article, may be issued by the department to a podiatrist who is licensed
pursuant to this article and who has met the residency and board
qualification/certification requirements set forth in subdivision one of
section seven thousand nine of this article in order to authorize such
podiatrist to obtain the training and experience required for the
issuance of a podiatric standard ankle surgery privilege pursuant to
subdivision one of section seven thousand nine of this article. Such
permits shall authorize the performance of podiatric standard ankle
surgery only under the direct personal supervision of a licensed
podiatrist holding a podiatric standard ankle surgery privilege or a
podiatric advanced ankle surgery privilege issued pursuant to section
seven thousand nine of this article or of a physician licensed pursuant
to article one hundred thirty-one of this title and certified in
orthopedic surgery by a national certifying board having certification
standards acceptable to the department.
 * NB Effective June 12, 2027
 * 2. A limited permit to perform podiatric advanced ankle surgery, as
described in subdivision two of section seven thousand one of this
article, may be issued by the department to a podiatrist who is licensed
pursuant to this article and who has met the residency and board
certification requirements set forth in subdivision two of section seven
thousand nine of this article in order to authorize such podiatrist to
obtain the training and experience required for the issuance of a
podiatric advanced ankle surgery privilege pursuant to subdivision two
of section seven thousand nine of this article. Such permits shall
authorize the performance of podiatric advanced ankle surgery only under
the direct personal supervision of a licensed podiatrist holding a
podiatric advanced ankle surgery privilege issued pursuant to
subdivision two of section seven thousand nine of this article or of a
physician licensed pursuant to article one hundred thirty-one of this
title and certified in orthopedic surgery by a national certifying board
having certification standards acceptable to the department.
 * NB Effective until June 12, 2027
 * 2. (a) A limited permit to perform podiatric advanced ankle surgery,
as described in subdivision two of section seven thousand one of this
article, may be issued by the department, for the purposes of
authorizing a podiatrist to obtain the training and experience required
for the issuance of a podiatric advanced ankle surgery privilege
pursuant to subdivision two of section seven thousand nine of this
article, to a podiatrist who:
 (i) is licensed pursuant to this article and who has met the residency
and board certification requirements set forth in subdivision two of
section seven thousand nine of this article; or
 (ii) is licensed pursuant to this article and who has met the
residency requirements set forth in subdivision two of section seven
thousand nine of this article and who is board qualified but not yet
certified in reconstructive rearfoot and ankle surgery by a national
certifying board having certification standards acceptable to the
department.
 (b) Such permits shall authorize the performance of podiatric advanced
ankle surgery only under the direct personal supervision of a licensed
podiatrist holding a podiatric advanced ankle surgery privilege issued
pursuant to subdivision two of section seven thousand nine of this
article or of a physician licensed pursuant to article one hundred
thirty-one of this title and certified in orthopedic surgery by a
national certifying board having certification standards acceptable to
the department.
 * NB Effective June 12, 2027
 3. For the purposes of this section, direct personal supervision means
supervision of procedures based on instructions given directly by the
supervising podiatrist or physician who remains in the immediate area
where the procedures are being performed, authorizes the procedures and
evaluates the procedures performed by the holder of the limited permit.
 4. The holder of a limited permit issued pursuant to this section
shall perform podiatric ankle surgery only in a hospital or health
facility licensed pursuant to article twenty-eight of the public health
law and appropriately authorized to provide such surgery.
 5. Limited permits shall be issued for a period of one year, and may
be renewed for additional one year periods when necessary to permit the
completion of the training and experience required to obtain a podiatric
standard ankle surgery privilege or podiatric advanced ankle surgery
privilege, as applicable, provided that no permit may be renewed more
than four times for each such privilege.
 6. The fee for a limited permit shall be one hundred five dollars and
the fee for a renewal shall be fifty dollars.
 ARTICLE 143
 OPTOMETRY
Section 7100. Introduction.
 7101. Definition of the practice of optometry.
 7101-a. Certification to use therapeutic drugs.
 7102. Practice of optometry and use of title "optometrist".
 7103. State board for optometry.
 7104. Requirements for a professional license.
 7105. Exempt persons.
 7106. Special provisions.
 7107. Advertising of non-prescription ready-to-wear magnifying
 spectacles or glasses.
 § 7100. Introduction. This article applies to the profession of
optometry. The general provisions for all professions contained in
article one hundred thirty of this title apply to this article.
 § 7101. Definition of the practice of optometry. The practice of the
profession of optometry is defined as diagnosing and treating optical
deficiency, optical deformity, visual anomaly, muscular anomaly or
disease of the human eye and adjacent tissue by prescribing, providing,
adapting or fitting lenses or by prescribing, providing, adapting or
fitting non-corrective contact lenses, or by prescribing or providing
orthoptics or vision training, or by prescribing and using drugs. The
practice of optometry shall not include any injection or invasive
modality. For purposes of this section invasive modality means any
procedure in which human tissue is cut, altered, or otherwise
infiltrated by mechanical or other means. Invasive modality includes
surgery, lasers, ionizing radiation, therapeutic ultrasound and the
removal of foreign bodies from within the tissue of the eye. Nothing in
this section or section seventy-one hundred one-a of this article shall
be construed to limit the scope of optometric practice as authorized
prior to January first, nineteen hundred ninety-five. The use of drugs
by optometrists is authorized only in accordance with the provisions of
this article and regulations promulgated by the commissioner.
 § 7101-a. Certification to use therapeutic drugs. 1. Definitions. As
used in this section, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
 (a) Clinical training. Clinical training shall mean the diagnosis,
treatment and management of patients with ocular disease and shall be
comparable to that acquired by a current graduate of the State
University College of Optometry.
 (b) Consultation. Consultation shall mean a confirmation of the
diagnosis, a plan of co-management of the patient, and a periodic review
of the patient's progress.
 (c) Education review committee. Education review committee shall mean
the committee established pursuant to subdivision nine of this section.
 (d) Diagnostic pharmaceuticals. Diagnostic pharmaceuticals shall mean
those drugs which shall be limited to topical applications to the
surface of the eye for the purpose of diagnostic examination of the eye
and shall be limited to:
 (i) Anesthetic agents;
 (ii) Mydriatics;
 (iii) Cycloplegics;
 (iv) Miotics;
 (v) Disclosing agents and other substances used in conjunction with
these drugs as part of a diagnostic procedure.
 (e) Topical therapeutic pharmaceutical agents. Topical therapeutic
pharmaceutical agents shall mean those drugs which shall be limited to
topical application to the surface of the eye for therapeutic purposes
and shall be limited to:
 (i) antibiotic/antimicrobials;
 (ii) decongestants/anti-allergenics;
 (iii) non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents;
 (iv) steroidal anti-inflammatory agents;
 (v) antiviral agents;
 (vi) hyperosmotic/hypertonic agents;
 (vii) cycloplegics;
 (viii) artificial tears and lubricants; and
 (ix) immunosuppressive agents.
 (e-1) Nasal sprays as topical therapeutic pharmaceutical agents.
Topical therapeutic pharmaceutical agents shall also include those drugs
listed in subparagraph (iii) of paragraph (f) of this subdivision that
are administered through a nasal spray for the treatment of dry eye
disease.
 (f) Therapeutic pharmaceutical agents for treatment of glaucoma and
ocular hypertension. Therapeutic pharmaceutical agents for treatment of
glaucoma and ocular hypertension shall mean those drugs which shall be
limited to topical application to the surface of the eye and shall be
limited to:
 (i) beta blockers;
 (ii) alpha agonists;
 (iii) direct acting cholinergic agents;
 (iv) prostaglandin analogs; and
 (v) carbonic anhydrase inhibitors.
 (g) Oral therapeutic pharmaceutical agents. Oral therapeutic
pharmaceutical agents shall mean those orally administered drugs used
for therapeutic purposes solely for the treatment of diseases of the eye
and adnexa and shall be limited to:
 (i) the following antibiotics:
 (1) amoxicillin/clavulanate potassium;
 (2) cephalexin;
 (3) azithromycin;
 (4) sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim;
 (5) doxycycline; and
 (6) tetracycline;
 (ii) the following antiglaucoma agents used for the management of
acute increases in intraocular pressure; provided, however, an
optometrist may use or prescribe a maximum of one twenty-four hour
prescription and shall immediately refer the patient to a licensed
physician specializing in diseases of the eye:
 (1) acetazolamide; and
 (2) methazolamide; and
 (iii) the following antiviral agents used for herpes zoster
ophthalmicus; provided an optometrist shall use or prescribe in maximum,
one seven-day prescription; provided, however, if a patient is diagnosed
with herpes zoster ophthalmicus and has not already been examined by a
primary care physician or other appropriate physician for such viral
condition, an optometrist shall refer the patient to a licensed primary
care physician, licensed physician specializing in diseases of the eye,
or other appropriate physician within three days of such diagnosis:
 (1) valacyclovir; and
 (2) acyclovir.
 2. Standard of care. An optometrist authorized to use pharmaceutical
agents for use in the diagnosis, treatment or prevention of ocular
disease shall be held to the same standard of care in diagnosis, use of
such agents, and treatment as that degree of skill and proficiency
commonly exercised by a physician in the same community.
 3. Certificate. The commissioner shall issue appropriate certificates
to use therapeutic pharmaceutical agents in accordance with the
provisions of this section to those optometrists who have satisfactorily
completed a curriculum in general and ocular pharmacology at a college
of optometry with didactic and supervised clinical programs approved by
the department are eligible to apply for the certificate issued pursuant
to this section.
 4. Topical therapeutic pharmaceutical agents. (a) Before using or
prescribing topical therapeutic pharmaceutical agents, each optometrist
shall have completed at least three hundred hours of clinical training
in the diagnosis, treatment and management of patients with ocular
disease other than glaucoma and ocular hypertension, not fewer than
twenty-five hours of such training shall have been completed subsequent
to June thirtieth, nineteen hundred ninety-three and additionally shall
either have taken and successfully passed the treatment and management
of ocular diseases portion of the National Board of Examiners in
Optometry test or have taken and successfully passed an examination
acceptable to the board.
 (b) Before using or prescribing therapeutic pharmaceutical agents for
treatment of glaucoma and ocular hypertension, an optometrist must be
certified for diagnostic and topical therapeutic agents and have
completed an additional one hundred hours of clinical training in the
diagnosis, treatment and management of patients with glaucoma and ocular
hypertension, not fewer than twenty-five hours of such training shall
have been completed subsequent to July first, nineteen hundred
ninety-four, and shall have taken and successfully passed an oral or
written examination acceptable by the board.
 (c) Before using or prescribing oral therapeutic pharmaceutical
agents, an optometrist must be certified to prescribe diagnostic
pharmaceutical agents and topical therapeutic and therapeutic
pharmaceutical agents for treatment of glaucoma and ocular hypertension,
have completed an oral therapeutic pharmaceutical agent certification
course and have passed an examination within five years of the
department's approval of the initial certification course or the initial
examination, whichever is later provided, however, an optometrist who
has commenced the oral therapeutic pharmaceutical agent certification
course within the five year time period but has not yet passed an
examination shall be allowed to take such examination and become
certified after the five year time period provided for in this paragraph
has ended.
 (i) The curriculum for the oral therapeutic pharmaceutical agent
certification course shall include, but not be limited to, instruction
in pharmacology and drug interaction in treating ocular disease and be
taught through clinical case scenarios and emphasize clinical decision
making and shall be no less than forty hours, of which no less than
twenty-four hours shall be live instruction.
 (ii) Such course shall qualify towards meeting the continuing
education per triennial registration requirement pursuant to subdivision
seven of this section.
 (iii) The examination shall assess the knowledge of materials in the
curriculum and reflect the oral therapeutic pharmaceutical agents
described in paragraph (g) of subdivision one of this section, and shall
be acceptable to the department.
 (iv) The initial, and any subsequent, curriculum and examination shall
be subject to review and approval by the department.
 (v) The requirement for the oral therapeutic pharmaceutical agent
certification course and examination shall not apply to those
optometrists who graduated from an accredited college of optometry
subsequent to January first, two thousand twenty-two and have taken and
successfully passed the National Board of Examiners in Optometry
examination or an examination acceptable to the department.
 (d) The clinical training required by this section may have been
acquired prior to the enactment of this section not inconsistent with
paragraphs (a) and (b) of this subdivision. Approval of the pre-acquired
clinical training shall be in accordance with subdivision nine-a of this
section.
 (e) The provisions of paragraphs (a) and (b) of this subdivision shall
not apply to (i) graduates of an appropriate program approved by the
department who have successfully passed the examination on the use of
diagnostic and therapeutic drugs and who graduated subsequent to January
first, nineteen hundred ninety-three; or (ii) optometrists who have been
certified for at least five years to use phase one and phase two drugs
in another jurisdiction, have demonstrated such use in independently
managed patients, and have been licensed in accordance with section
seventy-one hundred four of this chapter. Provided, however, no
optometrist exempt under this paragraph shall be permitted to use phase
one therapeutic pharmaceutical agents or phase two therapeutic
pharmaceutical agents prior to the general authorization provided to
optometrists licensed in this state.
 5. Suspension of certification. The department shall suspend the
certification for the use and prescribing of topical therapeutic agents
of any optometrist who fails to receive certification for therapeutic
pharmaceutical agents for treatment of glaucoma and ocular hypertension
within three years of having been certified for topical therapeutic
pharmaceutical agents.
 6. Consultation with use of certain topical therapeutic pharmaceutical
agents for treatment of glaucoma and ocular hypertension. (a) After the
initial diagnosis of glaucoma or ocular hypertension and before
initiating treatment of any patient, an optometrist shall engage in a
written consultation with a licensed physician specializing in diseases
of the eye.
 (b) A consultation shall be required for a period of three years or
until the optometrist has examined and diagnosed seventy-five patients
having glaucoma or ocular hypertension which examinations require a
written consultation in accordance with paragraph (a) of this
subdivision, whichever occurs later.
 (c) The consultation provisions shall not apply to a graduate of an
appropriate program approved by the department who successfully passed
an examination in the use of diagnostic and therapeutic pharmaceutical
agents approved by the department and graduated such school subsequent
to January first, nineteen hundred ninety-nine and who has had at least
seventy-five documented examinations and diagnosis of patients with
glaucoma or ocular hypertension which examinations were part of their
training and were under physician supervision.
 7. Continuing education. (a) Each optometrist certified to use topical
therapeutic pharmaceutical agents and therapeutic pharmaceutical agents
for treatment of glaucoma and ocular hypertension, shall complete a
minimum of thirty-six hours of continuing education in the area of
ocular disease and pharmacology per triennial registration period. Each
optometrist certified to use oral therapeutic pharmaceutical agents
shall, in addition to the minimum thirty-six hours of continuing
education provided for in this subdivision, complete an additional
minimum of eighteen hours of continuing education related to systemic
disease and therapeutic treatment per triennial registration period.
Such educational programs may include both didactic and clinical
components and shall be approved in advance by the department. Beginning
on January first, two thousand twenty-three, all sponsors of continuing
education courses seeking advanced approval from the department shall
file an application and pay a fee determined by the department in
accordance with the regulations of the commissioner. An optometrist
subject to the provisions of this subdivision whose first registration
date following the effective date of this section occurs less than three
years from such effective date, but on or after January first, two
thousand twenty-three, shall complete continuing education hours on a
prorated basis at the rate of one hour per month for the period
beginning January first, two thousand twenty-three up to the first
registration date thereafter. An optometrist who has not satisfied the
mandatory continuing education requirement pursuant to this subdivision
shall not be issued a triennial registration certificate by the
department and shall not practice unless and until a conditional
registration is issued as provided for in paragraph (b) of this
subdivision. Continuing education hours taken during one triennium may
not be transferred to the subsequent triennium.
 (b) The department, in its discretion, may issue a conditional
registration to an optometrist who fails to meet the continuing
education requirements established in paragraph (a) of this subdivision,
but who agrees to make up any deficiencies and complete any additional
education which the department may require. The fee for such a
conditional registration shall be the same as, and in addition to, the
fee for the triennial registration. The duration of such conditional
registration shall be determined by the department, but shall not exceed
one year. Any optometrist who is notified of the denial of registration
for failure to submit evidence, satisfactory to the department, of
required continuing education and who practices without such
registration may be subject to disciplinary proceedings pursuant to
section sixty-five hundred ten of this title.
 (c) In accordance with the intent of this section, adjustment to the
mandatory continuing education requirement may be granted by the
department for reasons of health that are certified by an appropriate
health care professional, for extended active duty with the armed forces
of the United States, or for other good cause acceptable to the
department which may prevent compliance.
 (d) An optometrist not engaged in practice, as determined by the
department, shall be exempt from the mandatory continuing education
requirement upon the filing of a statement with the department declaring
such status. Any licensee who returns to the practice of optometry
during the triennial registration period shall notify the department
prior to reentering the profession and shall meet such continuing
education requirements as shall be prescribed by regulations of the
commissioner.
 (e) Optometrists subject to the provisions of this subdivision shall
maintain adequate documentation of completion of acceptable continuing
education credits and shall provide such documentation at the request of
the department. Failure to provide such documentation upon the request
of the department shall be an act of misconduct subject to disciplinary
proceedings pursuant to section sixty-five hundred ten of this title.
 (f) The mandatory continuing education fee shall be determined by the
department. Such fee shall be payable on or before the first day of each
triennial registration period, and shall be paid in addition to the
triennial registration fee required by subdivision eight of section
seventy-one hundred four of this article.
 8. Notice to patient with the use or prescription of topical
therapeutic pharmaceutical agents and therapeutic pharmaceutical agents
for treatment of glaucoma and ocular hypertension. (a) (i) An
optometrist prescribing topical steroids or antiviral medication shall
inform each patient that in the event the condition does not improve
within five days, a physician of the patient's choice will be notified.
 (ii) An optometrist engaged in a written consultation with an
ophthalmologist shall inform a patient diagnosed with glaucoma that the
optometrist will have the diagnosis confirmed and co-managed with an
ophthalmologist of the patient's choice, or one selected by the
optometrist.
 (b) In addition, each optometrist certified to prescribe and use
therapeutic drugs shall have posted conspicuously in the office
reception area the following notice:
 "Dr. (Name), O.D. is certified by New York State to use drugs to
diagnose and treat diseases of the eye. In the event your condition
requires the use of steroids or antiviral medication and your condition
does not improve within five days, a physician of your choice will be
notified.
 In the event you are diagnosed with glaucoma, the optometrist will
have your diagnosis confirmed and treatment co-managed with an
ophthalmologist (MD) of your choice, or if you wish, one selected by Dr.
(Name)."
 The second paragraph of such notice shall only be required to be
included during the period when the optometrist is engaged in a written
consultation pursuant to subdivision six of this section.
 9. Education review committee. An education review committee is hereby
created to advise and assist the commissioner in evaluating pre-acquired
clinical training. The members of the committee shall be appointed by
the commissioner in consultation with the chancellor of the state
university of New York. The committee shall consist of five members, two
of whom shall be optometrists on the faculty of the SUNY college of
optometry, two of whom shall be ophthalmologists who, in addition to
being members of the faculty of any approved medical school in this
state and not also faculty members of SUNY college of optometry, have
surgical privileges at a New York state hospital. The fifth member who
shall be designated as chair shall be an expert in the field of public
health and shall be neither an ophthalmologist nor an optometrist.
 The commissioner shall submit each application to the committee for
its review and recommendation. In making such recommendation, the
committee shall advise as to the number of hours of pre-acquired
clinical training, if any, to be approved, based upon the information
submitted with the application. In evaluating such training, the
committee shall be authorized to require the submission of such
reasonable documentation needed to facilitate the committee's review of
the adequacy and relevance of such training.
 9-a. Pre-acquired clinical training. (a) Each optometrist requesting
approval of pre-acquired clinical training shall submit a written
application to the department. The commissioner, in consultation with
the education review committee may provide credit for the following:
 (i) clinical training acquired at an institution accredited by a
regional or professional accreditation organization which is recognized
or approved by the United States Department of Education, the department
and the Board of Regents of the University of the state of New York;
 (ii) clinical training acquired at a facility licensed by the state of
New York in accordance with article twenty-eight of the public health
law or at a comparable facility located in another state or country
provided the licensing requirements or accreditation requirements of
such institution are comparable to those of New York state;
 (iii) hospital affiliations, including rounds and patient management
for applicants having staff privileges at such facility;
 (iv) consultation and co-management with ophthalmologists of patients
with ocular disease and post-surgery recovery;
 (v) postdoctoral accredited residency or fellowship programs;
 (vi) experience at an accredited educational institution as a faculty
instructor in clinical practice, ocular disease management and
pharmacology;
 (vii) experience in other states in which the applicant has been
certified to use therapeutic pharmaceutical agents.
 (b) Any optometrist disagreeing with the recommendation of the
education review committee shall have a right to appeal in writing to
the commissioner. The decision of the commissioner shall be final and
binding on all parties.
 10. Pharmaceutical agents. Optometrists who have been approved and
certified by the department shall be permitted to use the following
drugs:
 (a) Diagnostic pharmaceuticals.
 (b) Those optometrists having been certified for topical therapeutic
pharmaceutical agents shall be authorized to use and prescribe all
topical therapeutic pharmaceutical agents specified in paragraph (e) of
subdivision one of this section, which are FDA approved and commercially
available for topical use.
 In the event an optometrist treats a patient with topical antiviral or
steroidal drugs and the patient's condition either fails to improve or
worsens within five days, the optometrist shall notify a physician
designated by the patient or, if none, by the treating optometrist.
 (c) Those optometrists having been certified for therapeutic
pharmaceutical agents for treatment of glaucoma and ocular hypertension
shall be authorized to use and prescribe therapeutic pharmaceutical
agents for treatment of glaucoma and ocular hypertension specified in
paragraph (f) of subdivision one of this section, which are FDA approved
and commercially available.
 (d) Those optometrists having been certified for oral therapeutic
pharmaceutical agents shall be authorized to use and prescribe oral
therapeutic pharmaceutical agents specified in paragraph (g) of
subdivision one of this section, which are FDA approved and commercially
available and shall comply with all safety information and side-effect
and warning advisories contained in the most current physicians' desk
reference.
 (e) Those optometrists having been certified for topical therapeutic
pharmaceutical agents, therapeutic pharmaceutical agents for treatment
of glaucoma and ocular hypertension or oral therapeutic pharmaceutical
agents shall be authorized to use and recommend all nonprescription
medications, whether intended for topical or oral use, appropriate for
the treatment of the eye and adnexa.
 11. Responsibilities of the commissioner. The commissioner shall adopt
regulations (a) providing for the certification of graduates of an
appropriate program approved by the department who have successfully
passed the examination on the use of diagnostic and therapeutic
pharmaceutical agents and who have graduated subsequent to January
first, nineteen hundred ninety-three; and (b) providing for the
certification of optometrists who have graduated from other accredited
colleges of optometry or who are licensed to practice in other
jurisdictions, have demonstrated such use in independently managed
patients and are seeking licensure and certification in New York.
 12. Responsibilities of the commissioner of health. The commissioner
of health may recommend to the commissioner additions or deletions to
the department's regulations relating to optometric use of drugs except
that such recommendations shall be limited only to additions which have
been determined to be equivalent to those drugs already authorized or
deletions based upon a finding that the drugs are no longer appropriate
for their current use or for other similar reasons.
 § 7102. Practice of optometry and use of title "optometrist". Only a
person licensed or exempt under this article shall practice optometry or
use the title "optometrist".
 § 7103. State board for optometry. A state board for optometry shall
be appointed by the board of regents on recommendation of the
commissioner for the purpose of assisting the board of regents and the
department on matters of professional licensing and professional conduct
in accordance with section sixty-five hundred eight of this title. The
board shall be composed of not less than seven optometrists who shall
have been residents of this state engaged in the practice of optometry
for at least five years in this state. An executive secretary to the
board shall be appointed by the board of regents on recommendation of
the commissioner.
 § 7104. Requirements for a professional license. To qualify for a
license as an optometrist, an applicant shall fulfill the following
requirements:
 (1) Application: file an application with the department;
 (2) Education: have received an education, including a degree of
doctor of optometry or equivalent degree, in accordance with the
commissioner's regulations;
 (3) Experience: have experience satisfactory to the board and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 (4) Examination: pass an examination satisfactory to the board and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 (5) Age: be at least twenty-one years of age;
 (6) Citizenship: meet no requirement as to United States citizenship;
 (7) Character: be of good moral character as determined by the
department; and
 (8) Fees: pay a fee of two hundred twenty dollars to the department
for admission to a department conducted examination and for an initial
license, a fee of one hundred fifteen dollars for each reexamination, a
fee of one hundred thirty-five dollars for an initial license for
persons not requiring admission to a department conducted examination, a
fee of two hundred ten dollars for each triennial registration period,
for additional authorization for the purpose of utilizing diagnostic
pharmaceutical agents, a fee of sixty dollars, and for certification to
use or prescribe oral therapeutic pharmaceutical agents, a fee of two
hundred fifty dollars.
 § 7105. Exempt persons. Nothing in this article shall be construed to
affect or prevent:
 a. A student actively enrolled in a school of optometry with
accreditation acceptable to the department from engaging in clinical
practice under the supervision of a licensed and currently registered
optometrist or physician; or
 b. A person licensed to practice optometry from using a degree
conferred in course after resident study by an educational institution
lawfully authorized by the state in which it is located to confer such a
degree.
 c. An optometrist licensed in another state or country who is employed
on a full-time basis by a registered school of optometry as a faculty
member with the rank of assistant professor or higher from conducting
research and clinical demonstrations as part of such employment, under
the supervision of a licensed optometrist and on the premises of the
school. No fee may be charged for the practice of optometry authorized
by this subdivision.
 d. 1. A person in training or appropriately trained and deemed
qualified by the supervising licensed optometrist, to assist a licensed
optometrist in the care of a patient for the purpose of instilling
mydriatic or cycloplegic eye drops and anesthetic eye drops in
conjunction with such dilating drops to the surface of the eye of a
patient, provided that the person instilling such eye drops is:
 (i) under the on-site supervision of a supervising licensed
optometrist;
 (ii) at least eighteen years of age; and
 (iii) complies with standards issued by the department.
 2. The supervising licensed optometrist shall submit a form prescribed
by the department, detailing the identity of each person instilling
mydriatic or cycloplegic eye drops and anesthetic eye drops in
conjunction with such dilating drops to the surface of the eye of a
patient, under his or her supervision, attesting to compliance with the
above requirements.
 3. The supervising licensed optometrist's use of any such person
pursuant to the terms of this subdivision shall be undertaken with
professional judgment in order to ensure the safety and well-being of
the patient. Such use shall subject the licensed optometrist to the full
disciplinary and regulatory authority of the board of regents and the
department pursuant to this title. The licensed optometrist must notify
the patient or the patient's designated health care surrogate that the
licensed optometrist may utilize the services of an individual to
administer certain eye drops and must provide the patient or the
patient's designated health care surrogate the opportunity to refuse the
licensed optometrist's plan to utilize such person.
 § 7106. Special provisions. 1. The testimony and reports of a licensed
optometrist shall be received by any official, board, commission or
other agency of the state or of any of its subdivisions or
municipalities as qualified evidence with respect to any matter defined
in section seventy-one hundred one of this article; and no official,
board, commission, or other agency of the state or any of its
subdivisions or municipalities shall discriminate among the
practitioners of optometry and any other ocular practitioners.
 2. Eyeglasses or lenses for the correction of vision or non-corrective
contact lenses may be sold by any person, firm or corporation at retail,
only on prescription of a licensed physician or licensed optometrist and
only if a licensed physician, optometrist or ophthalmic dispenser is in
charge of and in personal attendance at the place of sale. This article
shall not apply to binoculars, telescopes, or other lenses used for
simple magnification; except, that a seller of non-prescription
ready-to-wear magnifying spectacles or glasses shall have the following
language attached to each pair of glasses or spectacles displayed or
offered for sale and in at least ten point bold type permanently affixed
in plain view to the top of any point of sale display or, if there is no
display, in the area of sale: "ATTENTION; READY-TO-WEAR NON-PRESCRIPTION
GLASSES ARE NOT INTENDED TO REPLACE PRESCRIBED CORRECTIVE LENSES OR
EXAMINATIONS BY AN EYE CARE PROFESSIONAL. CONTINUOUS EYE CHECK-UPS ARE
NECESSARY TO DETERMINE YOUR EYE HEALTH STATUS AND VISION NEEDS." As used
in this subdivision "non-prescription, ready to wear magnifying
spectacles or glasses" means spherical convex lenses, uniform in each
meridian, which are encased in eyeglass frames and intended to
ameliorate the symptoms of presbyopia. The lenses in such glasses shall
be of uniform focus power in each eye and shall not exceed 2.75
diopters.
 3. It shall be a class A misdemeanor to practice any fraud, deceit or
misrepresentation in any advertising related to optometric services.
 § 7107. Advertising of non-prescription ready-to-wear magnifying
spectacles or glasses. 1. Any printed advertising for non-prescription
ready-to-wear magnifying spectacles or glasses to be sold through the
mail also shall include the statement, "ATTENTION; READY-TO-WEAR
NON-PRESCRIPTION GLASSES ARE NOT INTENDED TO REPLACE PRESCRIBED
CORRECTIVE LENSES OR EXAMINATIONS BY AN EYE CARE PROFESSIONAL.
CONTINUOUS EYE CHECK-UPS ARE NECESSARY TO DETERMINE YOUR EYE HEALTH
STATUS AND VISION NEEDS." As used in this section, "non-prescription,
ready to wear magnifying spectacles or glasses" means spherical convex
lenses, uniform in each meridian, which are encased in eyeglass frames
and intended to ameliorate the symptoms of presbyopia. The lenses in
such glasses shall be of uniform focus power in each eye and shall not
exceed 2.75 diopters.
 2. Any person, his or her agent or employee who shall violate any
provision of this section shall be subject to a civil penalty of not
less than twenty-five dollars nor more than two hundred fifty dollars
for each violation. For purposes of this section, the sale or offer for
sale of each pair of non-prescription ready-to-wear magnifying
spectacles or glasses which fail to meet the standards of this section
shall constitute a violation.
 ARTICLE 144
 OPHTHALMIC DISPENSING
Section 7120. Introduction.
 7121. Definition of practice of ophthalmic dispensing.
 7122. Practice of ophthalmic dispensing and use of title
 "ophthalmic dispenser" or "optician".
 7123. State board for ophthalmic dispensing.
 7124. Requirements for a professional license.
 7125. Exemptions.
 7126. Special provisions.
 7127. Advertising of non-prescription ready-to-wear magnifying
 spectacles or glasses.
 7128. Mandatory continuing education.
 § 7120. Introduction. This article applies to the profession of
ophthalmic dispensing. The general provisions for all professions
contained in article one hundred thirty of this title apply to this
article.
 § 7121. Definition of practice of ophthalmic dispensing. The practice
of the profession of ophthalmic dispensing is defined as adapting and
fitting lenses, for the correction of deficiencies, deformities or
anomalies of the human eyes, or adapting and fitting non-corrective
contact lenses, on written prescriptions from a licensed physician or
optometrist. Replacements or duplicates of such lenses may be adapted
and dispensed without prescription. Contact lenses may be fitted by an
ophthalmic dispenser only under the personal supervision of a licensed
physician or optometrist.
 § 7122. Practice of ophthalmic dispensing and use of title "ophthalmic
dispenser" or "optician". Only a person licensed or exempt under this
article or a corporation, partnership or persons doing business under an
assumed name and either composed of licensed ophthalmic dispensers or
employing licensed ophthalmic dispensers shall practice ophthalmic
dispensing or use the title "ophthalmic dispenser", "optician", "optical
technician", "dispensing optician", or "optical dispenser".
 § 7123. State board for ophthalmic dispensing. A state board for
ophthalmic dispensing shall be appointed by the board of regents on
recommendation of the commissioner for the purpose of assisting the
board of regents and the department on matters of professional licensing
and professional conduct in accordance with section sixty-five hundred
eight of this title. The board shall be composed of not less than seven
licensed ophthalmic dispensers who shall have been residents of this
state engaged in the practice of ophthalmic dispensing for at least five
years in this state. An executive secretary to the board shall be
appointed by the board of regents on recommendation of the commissioner.
 § 7124. Requirements for a professional license. a. To qualify for a
license as an ophthalmic dispenser, an applicant shall fulfill the
following requirements;
 (1) Application: file an application with the department;
 (2) Education: have received an education, including high school
graduation and completion, in accordance with the commissioner's
regulations, of either (i) a two-year program in ophthalmic dispensing,
or, (ii) two years of training and experience in ophthalmic dispensing
under the supervision of a licensed ophthalmic dispenser, optometrist or
physician;
 (3) Experience: have experience satisfactory to the board and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 (4) Examination: pass an examination satisfactory to the board and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 (5) Age: be at least eighteen years of age;
 (6) Citizenship: meet no requirement as to United States citizenship;
 (7) Character: be of good moral character as determined by the
department; and
 (8) Fees: pay a fee of one hundred fifteen dollars to the department
for admission to a department conducted examination and for an initial
license, a fee of forty-five dollars for each reexamination, a fee of
fifty dollars for an initial license for persons not requiring admission
to a department conducted examination, and a fee of fifty dollars for
each triennial registration period.
 b. A person licensed after July first, nineteen hundred seventy-three
shall be permitted to fit contact lenses only if the licensee, in
addition to the requirements of subdivision a of this section, shall (1)
pass a separate examination satisfactory to the board and in accordance
with the commissioner's regulations; and (2) have the requisite
experience in the fitting of contact lenses satisfactory to the board
and in accordance with the commissioner's regulations.
 § 7125. Exemptions. Nothing in this article shall be construed to
affect or prevent:
 a. An unlicensed person from performing merely mechanical work upon
inert matter in an optical office, laboratory or shop; or
 b. A student from engaging in clinical practice, under the supervision
of a licensed ophthalmic dispenser or licensed optometrist or licensed
physician, in an ophthalmic dispensing school or college registered by
the department; or
 c. The department from issuing a limited permit to an applicant who
meets all requirements for admission to the licensing examination;
provided, however, that:
 (1) Practice under a limited permit shall be under the supervision of
a licensed physician, optometrist or ophthalmic dispenser.
 (2) A limited permit shall expire after two years, or upon notice to
the applicant that the application for licensure has been denied, or ten
days after notification to the applicant of failure on the professional
licensing examination, whichever shall first occur. Notwithstanding the
foregoing provisions of this subdivision, if the applicant is waiting
the result of a licensing examination at the time such limited permit
expires, such permit shall continue to be valid until ten days after
notification to the applicant of the results of such examination. A
limited permit which has not expired as a result of notice of denial of
licensure or of failure on the licensing examination may be renewed for
a period of not more than one additional year, upon a showing
satisfactory to the department that the applicant could not obtain a
license within two years.
 (3) Supervision of a permittee by a licensed physician, optometrist or
ophthalmic dispenser shall be on-site supervision but not necessarily
direct personal supervision.
 (4) The fee for each limited permit and for each renewal shall be
thirty-five dollars. The fee for issuance of a training permit shall be
thirty dollars.
 § 7126. Special provisions. 1. Eyeglasses or lenses for the correction
of vision or non-corrective contact lenses may be sold by any person,
firm or corporation at retail, only on prescription of a licensed
physician or licensed optometrist and only if a licensed physician,
optometrist or ophthalmic dispenser is in charge of and in personal
attendance at the place of sale. This article shall not apply to
binoculars, telescopes, or other lenses used for simple magnification;
except, that a seller of non-prescription ready-to-wear magnifying
spectacles or glasses shall have the following language attached to each
pair of glasses or spectacles displayed or offered for sale and in at
least ten point bold type permanently affixed in plain view to the top
of any point of sale display or, if there is no display, in the area of
sale: "ATTENTION; READY-TO-WEAR NON-PRESCRIPTION GLASSES ARE NOT
INTENDED TO REPLACE PRESCRIBED CORRECTIVE LENSES OR EXAMINATIONS BY AN
EYE CARE PROFESSIONAL. CONTINUOUS EYE CHECK-UPS ARE NECESSARY TO
DETERMINE YOUR EYE HEALTH STATUS AND VISION NEEDS." As used in this
subdivision, "non-prescription, ready to wear magnifying spectacles or
glasses" means spherical convex lenses, uniform in each meridian, which
are encased in eyeglass frames and intended to ameliorate the symptoms
of presbyopia. The lenses in such glasses shall be of uniform focus
power in each eye and shall not exceed 2.75 diopters.
 2. It shall be a class A misdemeanor to practice any fraud, deceit or
misrepresentation in any advertising related to ophthalmic dispensing.
 § 7127. Advertising of non-prescription ready-to-wear magnifying
spectacles or glasses. 1. Any printed advertising for non-prescription
ready-to-wear magnifying spectacles or glasses to be sold through the
mail also shall include the statement, "ATTENTION; READY-TO-WEAR
NON-PRESCRIPTION GLASSES ARE NOT INTENDED TO REPLACE PRESCRIBED
CORRECTIVE LENSES OR EXAMINATIONS BY AN EYE CARE PROFESSIONAL.
CONTINUOUS EYE CHECK-UPS ARE NECESSARY TO DETERMINE YOUR EYE HEALTH
STATUS AND VISION NEEDS." As used in this section, "non-prescription,
ready to wear magnifying spectacles or glasses" means spherical convex
lenses, uniform in each meridian, which are encased in eyeglass frames
and intended to ameliorate the symptoms of presbyopia. The lenses in
such glasses shall be of uniform focus power in each eye and shall not
exceed 2.75 diopters.
 2. Any person, his or her agent or employee who shall violate any
provision of this section shall be subject to a civil penalty of not
less than twenty-five dollars nor more than two hundred fifty dollars
for each violation. For purposes of this section, the sale or offer for
sale of each pair of non-prescription ready-to-wear magnifying
spectacles or glasses which fail to meet the standards of this section
shall constitute a violation.
 § 7128. Mandatory continuing education. 1. (a) Each licensed
ophthalmic dispenser required under this article to register triennially
with the department to practice in the state shall comply with the
provisions of the mandatory continuing education requirements prescribed
in subdivision two of this section except as set forth in paragraphs (b)
and (c) of this subdivision. Ophthalmic dispensers who do not satisfy
the mandatory continuing education requirements shall not practice until
they have met such requirements, and they have been issued a
registration certificate, except that an ophthalmic dispenser may
practice without having met such requirements if he or she is issued a
conditional registration certificate pursuant to subdivision three of
this section.
 (b) Ophthalmic dispensers shall be exempt from the mandatory
continuing education requirement for the triennial registration period
during which they are first licensed. In accord with the intent of this
section, adjustment to the mandatory continuing education requirement
may be granted by the department for reasons of health certified by an
appropriate health care professional, for extended active duty with the
armed forces of the United States, or for other good cause acceptable to
the department which may prevent compliance.
 (c) A licensed ophthalmic dispenser not engaged in practice, as
determined by the department, shall be exempt from the mandatory
continuing education requirement upon the filing of a statement with the
department declaring such status. Any licensee who returns to the
practice of ophthalmic dispensing during the triennial registration
period shall notify the department prior to reentering the profession
and shall meet such mandatory education requirements as shall be
prescribed by regulations of the commissioner.
 2. During each triennial registration period an applicant for
registration as an ophthalmic dispenser shall complete a minimum of
eighteen hours of acceptable formal continuing education, as specified
in subdivision four of this section; provided that three hours may be in
recognized areas of study pertinent to the dispensing and fitting of
contact lenses. During each triennial registration period an applicant
for registration as an ophthalmic dispenser and certified to fit contact
lenses shall complete twenty hours of acceptable formal continuing
education, as specified in subdivision four of this section; provided
that ten hours shall be in recognized areas of study pertinent to the
dispensing and fitting of contact lenses. Any ophthalmic dispenser whose
first registration date following the effective date of this section
occurs less than three years from such effective date, but on or after
January first, nineteen hundred ninety-nine, shall complete continuing
education hours on a prorated basis at the rate of one-half hour per
month for the period beginning January first, nineteen hundred
ninety-eight up to the first registration date thereafter. A licensee
who has not satisfied the mandatory continuing education requirements
shall not be issued a triennial registration certificate by the
department and shall not practice unless and until a conditional
registration certificate is issued as provided for in subdivision three
of this section. Continuing education hours taken during one triennium
may not be transferred to a subsequent triennium.
 3. The department, in its discretion, may issue a conditional
registration to a licensee who fails to meet the continuing education
requirements established in subdivision two of this section but who
agrees to make up any deficiencies and complete any additional education
which the department may require the fee for such a conditional
registration shall be the same as, and in addition to, the fee for the
triennial registration. The duration of such conditional registration
shall be determined by the department but shall not exceed one year. Any
licensee who is notified of the denial of registration for failure to
submit evidence, satisfactory to the department, of required continuing
education and who practices without such registration, may be subject to
disciplinary proceedings pursuant to section sixty-five hundred ten of
this chapter.
 4. As used in subdivision two of this section, "Acceptable Formal
Education" shall mean formal courses of learning which contribute to
professional practice in ophthalmic dispensing and which meet the
standards prescribed by regulations of the commissioner. Such formal
courses of learning shall include, but not be limited to, collegiate
level credit and non-credit courses. Professional development programs
and technical sessions offered by national, state and local professional
associations and other organizations acceptable to the department, and
any other organized educational and technical programs acceptable to the
department. The department may, in its discretion and as needed to
contribute to the health and welfare of the public, require the
completion of continuing education courses in specific subjects to
fulfill this mandatory continuing education requirement. Courses must be
taken from a sponsor approved by the department, pursuant to the
regulations of the commissioner.
 5. Ophthalmic dispensers shall maintain adequate documentation of
completion of acceptable formal continuing education and shall provide
such documentation at the request of the department. Failure to provide
such documentation upon the request of the department shall be an act of
misconduct subject to disciplinary proceedings pursuant to section
sixty-five hundred ten of this chapter.
 6. The mandatory continuing education fee shall be forty-five dollars,
shall be payable on or before the first day of each triennial
registration period, and shall be paid in addition to the triennial
registration fee required by section seventy-one hundred twenty-four of
this article.
 ARTICLE 145
 ENGINEERING, LAND SURVEYING AND GEOLOGY
Section 7200. Introduction.
 7201. Definition of practice of engineering.
 7202. Practice of engineering and use of title "professional
 engineer".
 7203. Definition of practice of land surveying.
 7204. Practice of land surveying and use of title "land
 surveyor".
 7204-a. Definition of the profession of geology.
 7204-b. Practice of geology and the use of title "professional
 geologist".
 7205. State board for engineering, land surveying and geology.
 7206. Requirements for a license as a professional engineer.
 7206-a. Requirements for a license as a professional land
 surveyor.
 7206-b. Requirements for a license as a professional geologist.
 7207. Limited permits.
 7208. Exempt persons for the professions of engineering and
 land surveying.
 7208-a. Exempt persons in or related to the profession of
 geology.
 7209. Special provisions.
 7210. Certificates of authorization.
 7211. Mandatory continuing education for professional
 engineers, land surveyors and professional geologists.
 § 7200. Introduction. This article applies to the professions of
engineering, land surveying and geology. The general provisions for all
professions contained in article one hundred thirty of this title apply
to this article.
 § 7201. Definition of practice of engineering. The practice of the
profession of engineering is defined as performing professional service
such as consultation, investigation, evaluation, planning, design or
supervision of construction or operation in connection with any
utilities, structures, buildings, machines, equipment, processes, works,
or projects wherein the safeguarding of life, health and property is
concerned, when such service or work requires the application of
engineering principles and data.
 § 7202. Practice of engineering and use of title "professional
engineer". Only a person licensed or otherwise authorized under this
article shall practice engineering or use the title "professional
engineer".
 § 7203. Definition of practice of land surveying. The practice of the
profession of land surveying is defined as practicing that branch of the
engineering profession and applied mathematics which includes the
measuring and plotting of the dimensions and areas of any portion of the
earth, including all naturally placed and man- or machine-made
structures and objects thereon, the lengths and directions of boundary
lines, the contour of the surface and the application of rules and
regulations in accordance with local requirements incidental to
subdivisions for the correct determination, description, conveying and
recording thereof or for the establishment or reestablishment thereof.
 § 7204. Practice of land surveying and use of title "land surveyor".
Only a person licensed or otherwise authorized under this article shall
practice land surveying or use the title "land surveyor".
 § 7204-a. Definition of the profession of geology. The practice of the
profession of geology is defined as performing professional service such
as researching, investigating, consulting and geological mapping,
describing the natural processes that act upon the earth's materials,
predicting the probable occurrence of natural resources, predicting and
locating natural or human-induced phenomena which may be useful or
hazardous to humankind and recognizing, determining and evaluating
geological factors, and the inspection and performance of geological
work and the responsible supervision thereof in furtherance of the
health, safety and welfare of the public; provided, however, that
geological mapping shall not include the practice of land surveying as
defined in section seventy-two hundred three of this article.
 § 7204-b. Practice of geology and the use of title "professional
geologist". Only a person licensed or otherwise authorized under this
article shall practice geology or use the title "professional
geologist".
 § 7205. State board for engineering, land surveying and geology. A
state board for engineering, land surveying and geology shall be
appointed by the board of regents on recommendation of the commissioner
for the purpose of assisting the board of regents and the department on
matters of professional licensing and professional conduct in accordance
with section sixty-five hundred eight of this title. The board shall be
composed of not less than seven professional engineers, not less than
two land surveyors and not less than two professional geologists
licensed in this state. An executive secretary to the board shall be
appointed by the board of regents on recommendation of the commissioner
and shall be a professional engineer, land surveyor or professional
geologist licensed in this state.
 § 7206. Requirements for a license as a professional engineer. 1. To
qualify for a license as a professional engineer an applicant shall
fulfill the following requirements:
 (1) Application: file an application with the department;
 (2) Education: have received an education, including a bachelor's or
higher degree based on a program in engineering or the substantial
equivalent, in accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 (3) Experience: have at least four years in work satisfactory to the
board, provided that the board may accept study beyond the bachelor's
degree in partial fulfillment of this requirement;
 (4) Examination: pass an examination satisfactory to the board and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 (5) Age: be at least twenty-one years of age;
 (6) Citizenship or immigration status: be a United States citizen or a
noncitizen lawfully admitted for permanent residence in the United
States;
 (7) Character: be of good moral character as determined by the
department; and
 (8) Fees: pay a fee of one hundred thirty-five dollars for an initial
license and a fee of two hundred ten dollars for each triennial
registration period.
 2. For an identification card as an "engineer in training", an
applicant shall fulfill the requirements of paragraphs one, two, four
and seven of subdivision one of this section. The fee for examination
and identification card as an "engineer in training" shall be seventy
dollars.
 3. On recommendation of the board, the department may waive specific
requirements, except as to age, character and citizenship, in the case
of applicants who are possessed of established and recognized standing
in the engineering profession and who have practiced lawfully for more
than fifteen years.
 4. Applicants who file with the department within two years of the
effective date of this subdivision an application and fee requirements
pursuant to paragraphs one and eight of subdivision one of this section
and who, at such time or anytime thereafter, demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the department that they have twelve years of practical
experience in work satisfactory to the board may substitute such
experience for the degree and experience requirements specified in
paragraphs two and three of subdivision one of this section, provided
that each full year of study in engineering satisfactory to the
department may at the discretion of the board be accepted in lieu of up
to two years of the required twelve years of experience.
 § 7206-a. Requirements for a license as a professional land surveyor.
1. To qualify for a license as a professional land surveyor, an
applicant shall fulfill the following requirements:
 (1) Application: file an application with the department;
 (2) Education: have received an education, including a bachelor's or
higher degree based on a program in land surveying, in accordance with
the commissioner's regulations;
 (3) Experience: Have practical experience satisfactory to the
department and in accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 (4) Examination: pass an examination satisfactory to the board and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 (5) Age: be at least twenty-one years of age;
 (6) Citizenship or immigration status: be a United States citizen or a
noncitizen lawfully admitted for permanent residence in the United
States;
 (7) Character: be of good moral character as determined by the
department; and
 (8) Fees: pay a fee of one hundred thirty-five dollars to the
department for an initial license, and a fee of two hundred ten dollars
for each triennial registration period.
 2. In lieu of the degree requirements specified in paragraph (2) of
subdivision one of this section, an associate's degree in land
surveying, or an associate's degree or higher in engineering, math, or
related science with credits in land surveying acceptable to the
department.
 2-a. For admittance to the fundamentals of surveying examination, the
applicant shall fulfill the education, experience, and examination
requirements in accordance with the commissioner's regulations. Upon the
successful completion of the examination, an identification card as an
"intern land surveyor" shall be issued by the department. The fee for
examination qualification and identification card as an "intern land
surveyor" shall be seventy dollars.
 * 2-b. In lieu of the degree and experience requirements specified in
paragraphs two and three of subdivision one of this section, eight years
of practical experience in work satisfactory to the department may be
accepted, provided that each full year of college study in engineering
or land surveying satisfactory to the department may at the discretion
of the department be accepted in lieu of one year of the required eight
years of experience.
 * NB Repealed April 3, 2029
 § 7206-b. Requirements for a license as a professional geologist. 1.
To qualify for a license as a professional geologist, an applicant shall
fulfill the following requirements:
 (a) Application: file an application with the department;
 (b) Education: have received an education, including a bachelor's or
higher degree in geological sciences, in accordance with the
commissioner's regulations;
 (c) Experience: have at least five years practical experience
satisfactory to the board in appropriate geological work; up to one year
of experience may be credited for an advanced degree (masters, doctorate
or an equivalent thereof) in accordance with the commissioner's
regulations;
 (d) Examination: pass an examination satisfactory to the board and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 (e) Age: be at least twenty-one years of age;
 (f) Character: be of good moral character as determined by the
department; and
 (g) Fees: pay a fee of two hundred twenty dollars to the department
for an initial license, and a fee of two hundred ten dollars for each
triennial registration period.
 2. In lieu of the degree and experience requirements specified in
paragraphs (b) and (c) of subdivision one of this section, twelve years
of practical experience in geological work of a grade and character
satisfactory to the board may be accepted by the department.
 3. For an identification card as an "intern geologist", an applicant
shall fulfill the requirements of subdivision one of this section,
except those in paragraphs (c) and (e) of such subdivision, provided
that admission to the examination may be given when the applicant is
within twenty credits of the completion of the requirements of the
bachelor's degree or higher as prescribed in paragraph (b) of
subdivision one of this section, or has completed the practical
experience requirement of subdivision two of this section. The fee for
the examination and identification card as an "intern geologist" shall
be seventy dollars and the fee for each reexamination shall be seventy
dollars.
 4. An applicant who applies for licensure within one year after the
effective date of this section shall be qualified for a license as a
professional geologist without a written examination if the applicant
has satisfied the requirements of education and experience described in
paragraphs (b) and (c) of subdivision one or subdivision two of this
section no later than one year after the effective date of this section.
 § 7207. Limited permits. 1. On recommendation of the board, the
department may issue a limited permit to practice engineering to an
engineer not a resident of this state and having no established place of
practice in this state who is legally qualified to practice as such in
his own country or state and who submits satisfactory evidence of
established and recognized professional standing in his own country or
state and who submits satisfactory certifications as to character and
qualifications from at least two licensed professional engineers, one of
whom shall be a resident of this state. Such limited permit shall be
issued solely in connection with the specific project for which such
limited permit is granted.
 2. A limited permit to practice as a professional engineer, land
surveyor or professional geologist in this state may be issued by the
department to a person not a resident in this state and having no
established place of practice in this state, when such practice does not
aggregate more than thirty days in any calendar year, provided that such
person is legally qualified to practice in his own state or country. The
limited permit authorizing such right to practice in this state shall
specify the dates within the calendar year when such right may be
exercised.
 3. On recommendation of the board, the department may issue a limited
permit to practice geology to a geologist not a resident of this state
and having no established place of practice in this state who is legally
qualified to practice as such in his or her own country or state with
standards equivalent to those enumerated in this article and who submits
evidence satisfactory to the board established and recognized
professional standing in his or her own country or state and who submits
satisfactory certification as to character and qualifications from at
least two professional geologists, one of whom shall be a resident of
this state. Such limited permit shall be issued solely in connection
with the specific project for which such limited permit is granted.
 4. Fees. The fee for each limited permit shall be one hundred five
dollars.
 § 7208. Exempt persons for the professions of engineering and land
surveying. This article shall not be construed to affect or prevent the
following, provided that no title, sign, card or device shall be used in
such manner as to tend to convey the impression that the person
rendering such service is a professional engineer or a land surveyor
licensed in this state or is practicing engineering or land surveying:
 a. Offering to practice in this state as a professional engineer or
land surveyor by any person not a resident of, and having no established
place of practice in this state, provided that such person is legally
qualified for such practice in his own state or country;
 b. Practice as a professional engineer or land surveyor in this state
by any person not a resident, or having no established place of practice
in this state, or any person resident in this state but who has arrived
in this state within six months, provided, however, such a person shall
have filed an application for license as a professional engineer or land
surveyor, and is legally qualified for such practice in the state or
country in which he resides or has his place of practice or in which he
had his previous residence or place of practice, such exemption
continuing for only such reasonable time as the board requires to grant
or deny the application for license, and a person intending to practice
under this subdivision shall so state on the application;
 c. Practice of engineering or land surveying, by an employee of a
county or town, in the construction, improvement or maintenance of a
county road or town highway, or by an employee of a county, city, town
or village, in the construction, improvement or maintenance of any
public work wherein the contemplated expenditure for the completed
project does not exceed five thousand dollars;
 d. Operation or maintenance of steam, power, or refrigeration plants
by legally authorized persons not licensed under this article or persons
engaged or employed as an engine man, operator or driver of any engine
or of any mechanical, electrical, chemical or other device or machine;
 e. Making of surveys by professional engineers, except that the
determination of real property boundaries may be done only by a licensed
land surveyor;
 f. Employment or supervision of interns or other persons qualified by
education or experience by professional engineers or land surveyors as
assistants in the performance of engineering or land surveying, or as
consultants or employees in special fields related to but not uniquely
engineering or land surveying, provided that the engineers or land
surveyors employing or supervising such persons shall not be relieved of
any responsibility whatsoever by delegation to such persons, and
provided further that such persons who have attained the bachelor's
level of studies in accordance with the requirements of section
seventy-two hundred six of this title may be employed as junior or
assistant engineers or junior or assistant land surveyors, or similar
titles, to act under the general direction of a professional engineer or
land surveyor, or in work not covered by this article;
 g. Employment of any person as a junior or assistant engineer or
junior or assistant land surveyor in the civil service of the state or
its political subdivisions in a position the title of which was approved
and in use as of July first, nineteen hundred seventy-one, provided such
person acts under the general direction of a licensed professional
engineer or land surveyor;
 h. Execution by a contractor or by others of work designed by a
professional engineer, or land surveyor, or the superintendence of such
work as a superintendent, foreman, or inspector;
 i. The practice of architecture by an architect licensed in this
state, or the practice of landscape architecture by a landscape
architect licensed in this state, provided that no such architect or
landscape architect shall use the designation "engineer" or
"engineering" unless licensed as a professional engineer in this state;
 j. The practice of engineering or land surveying or having the title
"engineer" or "surveyor" solely as an officer or an employee of a
corporation engaged in interstate commerce;
 k. The practice of engineering by a manufacturing corporation or by
employees of such corporation, or use of the title "engineer" by such
employees, in connection with or incidental to goods produced by, or
sold by, or nonengineering services rendered by, such corporation or its
manufacturing affiliates;
 l. The practice of engineering or land surveying, or using the title
"engineer" or "surveyor" (i) exclusively as an officer or employee of a
public service corporation by rendering to such corporation such
services in connection with its lines and property which are subject to
supervision with respect to the safety and security thereof by the
public service commission of this state, the interstate commerce
commission or other federal regulatory body and so long as such person
is thus actually and exclusively employed and no longer, or (ii)
exclusively as an officer or employee of the Long Island power authority
or its service provider, as defined under section three-b of the public
service law, by rendering to such authority or provider such services in
connection with its lines and property which are located in such
authority's service area and so long as such person is thus actually and
exclusively employed and no longer;
 m. The making of land surveys by a professional engineer where such
land surveys are essential to engineering projects, provided he was
licensed as a professional engineer in this state on or before the first
day of January in the year in which this act shall become a law and
files evidence satisfactory to the board on or before the first day of
July in the year next succeeding the year in which this act shall have
become law, that he is competent and experienced in such land surveys;
 n. The design by a land surveyor of roads, drainage, water supply or
sanitary sewerage facilities of a minor nature in connection with
subdivisions and the extension and inspection thereof, but not including
sewage disposal or treatment plants, lift stations, pumping stations,
commercial buildings or bridges, provided the surveyor was licensed as a
land surveyor in this state on or before the first day of January in the
year in which this act shall have become a law and files evidence
satisfactory to the board on or before the first day of July in the year
next succeeding the year in which this act shall have become a law,
attesting that he is competent and experienced in the engineering
required for design of such facilities appurtenant to subdivisions; or
 o. Using the title "marine operating engineer", "stationary engineer",
"port of customs surveyor", or "ship surveyor".
 p. Contractors or builders from engaging in construction management
and administration of construction contracts.
 § 7208-a. Exempt persons in or related to the profession of geology.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to affect or prevent:
 1. The employment and supervision of interns and other persons
qualified by education or experience by professional geologists as
assistants in the performance of geological services, or as consultants
or employees in special fields related to but not uniquely geology,
provided that the professional geologist employing or supervising such
persons shall not be relieved of any responsibility whatsoever by
delegation to such persons.
 2. The practice of professional engineering by a professional engineer
licensed pursuant to this article to practice engineering in this state
or an entity authorized pursuant to section seventy-two hundred ten of
this article to provide engineering in this state, including the
investigation, acquisition, evaluation, and interpretation of the
physical and chemical properties of the soil, rock, groundwater, earth
materials and data related thereto, and the performance of activities as
specified in section seventy-two hundred four-a of this article,
provided that no such person shall use the designation, or hold himself
or herself out as a "professional geologist," unless licensed as such in
this state, and provided further that nothing in this chapter shall
preclude a licensed professional engineer or authorized entity from
offering to provide or providing the work enumerated in this
subdivision, however categorized, on the grounds that such licensed
professional engineer or authorized entity is not licensed to practice
geology.
 3. The practice of land surveying by any person that is licensed or
otherwise authorized to practice land surveying in this state, provided
that no such person shall use the designation or hold himself or herself
out as a "professional geologist" unless licensed as such in this state.
 4. The execution of work by contractors or by others of work prepared
by a professional geologist, or the superintendence of such work as a
superintendent, foreman or inspector.
 5. The practice of the profession of geology by officers and employees
of this state practicing solely as officers and employees; provided,
however, that this exemption shall not apply to officers and employees
of the state of New York who commence employment or the performance of
work related activities after the effective date of this section.
 6. The execution of geological research and/or teaching conducted at
accredited educational institutions and not-for-profit research
institutions, conducted solely through those institutions.
 7. Work customarily performed by physical or natural scientists
provided such work does not include geological investigations, being in
responsible charge of geological work, or the drawing of geological
conclusions and recommendations.
 8. Work customarily performed by water well drillers who have received
a certificate of registration pursuant to section 15-1525 of the
environmental conservation law.
 § 7209. Special provisions. 1. Every professional engineer, land
surveyor and professional geologist shall have a seal, approved by the
board, which shall contain the name of the professional engineer and the
words "Licensed Professional Engineer", the name of the land surveyor
and the words "Licensed Land Surveyor" or the name of the professional
geologist and the words "Licensed Professional Geologist", and such
other words or figures as the board may deem necessary. All plans,
specifications, plats and reports relating to the construction or
alteration of buildings or structures, or geologic drawings and reports
prepared by such professional engineer, all plans, specifications, plats
and reports prepared by such land surveyor and all geologic drawings and
reports prepared by such professional geologist or by a full-time or
part-time subordinate under his or her supervision, shall be stamped
with such seal and shall also be signed, on the original with the
personal signature of such professional engineer, land surveyor or
professional geologist when filed with public officials. No official of
this state, or of any city, county, town or village therein, charged
with the enforcement of laws, ordinances or regulations shall accept or
approve any plans, specifications, or geologic drawings or reports that
are not stamped:
 a. With the seal of an architect or professional engineer or land
surveyor or professional geologist licensed in this state and bearing
the authorized facsimile of the signature of such architect or
professional engineer or land surveyor or professional geologist, or
 b. With the official seal and authorized facsimile of the signature of
a professional engineer or land surveyor or professional geologist not a
resident of this state and having no established business in this state,
but who is legally qualified to practice as such in his or her own state
or country, provided that such person may lawfully practice as such in
this state, and provided further that the plans, specifications, or
geologic drawings or reports are accompanied by and have attached
thereto written authorization issued by the department certifying to
such right to practice at such time.
 2. a. To all plans, specifications, plats and reports to which the
seal of a professional engineer or land surveyor has been applied, there
shall also be applied a stamp with appropriate wording warning that it
is a violation of this article for any person, unless he or she is
acting under the direction of a licensed professional engineer or land
surveyor, to alter an item in any way. If an item bearing the seal of an
engineer or land surveyor is altered, the altering engineer or land
surveyor shall affix to the item his or her seal and the notation
"altered by" followed by his or her signature and the date of such
alteration, and a specific description of the alteration.
 b. To all geologic drawings and reports to which the seal of a
professional geologist or professional engineer has been applied, there
shall also be applied a stamp with appropriate wording warning that it
is a violation of this article for any person, unless he or she is
acting under the direction of a professional geologist or professional
engineer, to alter a drawing or report in any way. If an item bearing
the seal of a licensed professional geologist or professional engineer
is altered, the altering party shall affix to the item his or her seal
and the notation "altered by" followed by his or her signature and the
date of such alteration, and a specific description of the alteration.
Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to authorize a
professional geologist to practice professional engineering unless he or
she is licensed as a professional engineer pursuant to this article.
 3. No county, city, town or village or other political subdivision of
this state shall engage in the construction or maintenance of any public
work involving engineering or land surveying for which plans,
specifications and estimates have not been made by, and the construction
and maintenance supervised by, a professional engineer or land surveyor;
provided that this section shall not apply to the construction,
improvement or maintenance of county roads or town highways, nor to any
other public works wherein the contemplated expenditure for the
completed project does not exceed five thousand dollars. This section
shall not be construed as affecting or preventing any county, city, town
or village or other political subdivision of this state from engaging an
architect licensed in this state for the preparation of plans,
specifications and estimates for and the supervision of construction or
maintenance of public works.
 4. Engineers, land surveyors, geologists, architects, and landscape
architects may join in the formation of a joint enterprise, or a
partnership or a professional service corporation or a design
professional service corporation or may form any desired combination of
such professions and may use in the name of such corporation the title
of any of the professions which will be practiced. After the name of
each member his or her profession shall be indicated.
 5. A firm name may be continued by employees having at least fifteen
years of continuous service if the retired members and legal
representatives of deceased members consent to such continuance.
 6. It shall be lawful for a corporation organized and existing under
the laws of the state of New York which on the fifteenth day of April,
nineteen hundred thirty-five and continuously thereafter, was lawfully
practicing engineering or land surveying in New York state, to continue
such practice provided that the chief executive officer shall be a
professional engineer licensed under this article, if practicing
engineering, or a land surveyor licensed under this article, if
practicing land surveying, and provided further that the person or
persons carrying on the actual practice of engineering or surveying on
behalf of, or designated as "engineer" or "surveyor", with or without
qualifying or characterizing word, by such corporation shall be
authorized to practice engineering or land surveying as provided in this
article. It shall be lawful for a corporation which, on account of or as
a result of requirements, restrictions or provisions of federal law, was
organized subsequent to April fifteenth, nineteen hundred thirty-five
for the purpose of taking over an existing engineering organization
established prior to such time and which has taken over such
organization and continued its engineering activities, provided that the
chief executive officer of such corporation shall be a professional
engineer licensed under this article and provided further, that the
person or persons carrying on the actual practice of engineering on
behalf of, or designated as "engineer", with or without qualifying or
characterizing word, by such corporation, shall be authorized to
practice engineering as provided in this article. No such corporation
shall change its name or sell its franchise or transfer its corporate
rights, directly or indirectly to any person, firm or corporation
without the consent of the department. Each such corporation shall
obtain a triennial registration on payment of a fee of fifty dollars.
 7. Nothing in this article shall be construed to apply:
 a. To the preparation or execution of designs, drawings, plans or
specifications for the construction or installation of machinery, or
apparatus constructed or installed by the corporation preparing such
designs, drawings, plans or specifications if the supervision of the
preparation of any such designs, drawings, plans or specifications,
construction or installation is done under the general direction of a
professional engineer or land surveyor licensed under this article; or
 b. To alterations to any building or structure costing ten thousand
dollars or less which do not involve changes affecting the structural
safety or public safety thereof nor to farm buildings, including barns,
sheds, poultry houses and other buildings used directly and solely for
agricultural purposes; nor to residence buildings of gross floor area of
fifteen hundred square feet or less, not including garages, carports,
porches, cellars, or uninhabitable basements or attics.
 8. Nothing in this article shall prohibit a corporation organized and
existing prior to the fifteenth day of April, nineteen hundred
thirty-five under the laws of any state other than the state of New
York, the name of which includes the word "engineers", from obtaining a
certificate of authority to do business in the state of New York,
provided that the business proposed to be done by such corporation
within this state, as set forth in the statement and designation
provided for by section thirteen hundred four of the business
corporation law, shall not include the practice within this state of
engineering or land surveying.
 9. a. Any person who knowingly damages, destroys, disturbs, removes,
resets, or replaces any boundary marker placed on any tract of land by a
licensed land surveyor, or by any person at the direction of a licensed
land surveyor, for the purpose of designating any point, course or line
in the boundary of such tract of land in which he or she has no legal
interest, shall be punished by a civil fine of not more than five
hundred dollars and shall be liable for the cost of reestablishment of
said boundary marker.
 b. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph a of this subdivision,
a licensed land surveyor licensed under section seventy-two hundred
three of this article or a person acting at the direction of any such
licensed land surveyor, may remove an existing marker if substandard in
nature in order to place an upgraded marker in the same location and
shall note the same on the map of survey.
 § 7210. Certificates of authorization. 1. Domestic or foreign
professional service corporations, design professional service
corporations, professional service limited liability companies, foreign
professional service limited liability companies, registered limited
liability partnerships, New York registered foreign limited liability
partnerships, partnerships and joint enterprises specified in
subdivision four of section seventy-two hundred nine of this article,
provided each of the foregoing entities is authorized to provide
professional engineering, land surveying or professional geology
services and general business corporations authorized to provide
professional engineering or land surveying services pursuant to
subdivision six of section seventy-two hundred nine of this article may
offer to provide or provide professional engineering, land surveying or
professional geology services only after obtaining a certificate of
authorization from the department. Except as otherwise authorized by
statute, rule or regulation, other business entities are not authorized
to offer or provide professional engineering, land surveying or
professional geology services and may not obtain certificates of
authorization provided that nothing contained herein shall prohibit an
individual who is licensed to practice professional engineering, land
surveying or professional geology under this article from obtaining a
certificate of authorization upon application and payment of the
appropriate fees provided for under this section.
 2. Upon application a certificate of authorization shall be issued by
the department to all individuals, corporations, limited liability
companies, limited liability partnerships, partnerships and joint
enterprises specified in subdivision one of this section and which are
authorized to provide professional engineering or land surveying
services and pay the appropriate fee.
 3. A "certificate of authorization" shall authorize such individual,
corporation, limited liability company, limited liability partnership,
partnership or joint enterprise to provide professional engineering or
land surveying services for three years from the date of issuance
subject to, as otherwise prescribed by law, the supervision of the
regents of the university of the state of New York including the power
to discipline and impose penalties in the same manner and to the same
extent as is provided with respect to individuals and their licenses and
registration pursuant to this title.
 4. An application, triennial renewal, delinquent or replacement
certificate fee must accompany the "certificate of authorization"
request in the amount shown below. A business entity that fails to renew
its certificate of authorization before the expiration date shall be
required to pay the additional delinquent fee for late filing of ten
dollars for each full month it has practiced after the expiration of its
certificate of authorization.
 Application fee and first triennial certificate of authorization -
 $125.00;
 Triennial renewal fee - $75.00;
 Delinquent fee - $10.00 per month of practice without a certificate of
 authorization;
 Replacement certificate fee - $10.00.
 All checks shall be made payable to the state department of education,
state of New York and submitted to the department. If a business
enterprise is not eligible to receive a "certificate of authorization",
the fee will be retained to cover the costs of processing. Triennial
renewal fees for all "certificates of authorization" are due and payable
on or before the filing date of each triennial registration period.
 5. The department shall compile a registry of the holders of all
certificates of authorization. Such registry shall include the name and
address of all registrants, state whether a certificate of authorization
has been issued, denied, suspended, or revoked, and disclose whether the
certificate is current or expired. Access to the registry shall be made
available electronically without cost. A record search of the registry
may be obtained in person or by mail provided that a fee of ten dollars
shall be paid for each putative registrant.
 § 7211. Mandatory continuing education for professional engineers,
land surveyors and professional geologists. 1. (a) Each licensed
professional required under this article to register triennially with
the department to practice in this state shall comply with provisions of
the mandatory continuing education requirements prescribed in
subdivision two of this section except as set forth in paragraphs (b)
and (c) of this subdivision. Licensed professionals who do not satisfy
the mandatory continuing education requirements shall not practice until
they have met such requirements, and have been issued a registration
certificate, except that a licensed professional may practice without
having met such requirements if he or she is issued a conditional
registration certificate pursuant to subdivision three of this section.
For purposes of this section the term "licensed professional" shall mean
any individual licensed under this article as a professional engineer,
land surveyor or professional geologist.
 (b) Licensed professionals shall be exempt from the mandatory
continuing education requirement for the triennial registration period
during which they are first licensed. In accordance with the intent of
this section, adjustment to the mandatory continuing education
requirement may be granted by the department for reasons of health
certified by an appropriate health care professional, for extended
active duty with the armed forces of the United States, or for other
good cause acceptable to the department which may prevent compliance.
 (c) A licensed professional not engaged in practice as determined by
the department shall be exempt from the mandatory continuing education
requirement upon the filing of a statement with the department declaring
such status. Any licensee who returns to the practice of his or her
profession during the triennial registration period shall notify the
department prior to reentering the profession and shall meet such
mandatory education requirements as shall be prescribed by regulations
of the commissioner.
 (d) Professional engineers directly employed on a full time basis by
the state of New York, its agencies, public authorities, public benefit
corporations or local governmental units prior to January first, two
thousand four and who are represented by a collective bargaining unit or
who are designated managerial or confidential pursuant to article
fourteen of the civil service law, at all times when so employed shall
be deemed to have satisfied the continuing education requirements of
this section, provided however that any such licensees who thereafter
leave such employment and enter the practice of professional engineering
in other capacities in New York, or otherwise engage in such practice,
shall satisfy the requirements of this section in such manner as shall
be prescribed by regulations of the commissioner.
 (e) Professional geologists directly employed on a full-time basis by
the state of New York, its agencies, public authorities, public benefit
corporations or local governmental units prior to January first, two
thousand twenty-two and who are represented by a collective bargaining
unit or who are designated managerial or confidential pursuant to
article fourteen of the civil service law, at all times when so employed
shall be deemed to have satisfied the continuing education requirements
of this section, provided however that any such licensees who thereafter
leave such employment and enter the practice of professional geology in
other capacities in New York, or otherwise engage in such practice,
shall satisfy the requirements of this section in such manner as shall
be prescribed by regulations of the commissioner.
 2. During each triennial registration period an applicant for
registration as a professional engineer and/or a professional geologist
shall complete a minimum of thirty-six hours of acceptable continuing
education and an applicant for registration as a land surveyor shall
complete a minimum of twenty-four hours of acceptable continuing
education as specified in subdivision four of this section. Any
professional geologist whose first registration date following the
effective date of the chapter of the laws of two thousand twenty which
amended this section occurs less than three years from such effective
date, but on or after January first, two thousand twenty-three, shall
complete continuing education hours on a prorated basis at the rate of
one hour per month for the period beginning January first, two thousand
twenty-two up to the first registration date thereafter. A licensee who
has not satisfied the mandatory continuing education requirements shall
not be issued a triennial registration certificate by the department and
shall not practice unless and until a conditional registration
certificate is issued as provided for in subdivision three of this
section. With the exception of continuing education hours taken during
the registration period immediately preceding the effective date of this
section, no more than six continuing education hours taken during one
triennium may be transferred to a subsequent triennium.
 3. The department, in its discretion, may issue a conditional
registration to a licensee who fails to meet the continuing education
requirements established in subdivision two of this section but who
agrees to make up any deficiencies and complete any additional education
which the department may require. The fee for such a conditional
registration shall be the same as, and in addition to, the fee for the
triennial registration. The duration of such conditional registration
shall be determined by the department but shall not exceed one year. Any
licensee who is notified of the denial of registration for failure to
submit evidence, satisfactory to the department, of required continuing
education and who practices a licensed profession without such
registration, may be subject to disciplinary proceedings pursuant to
section sixty-five hundred ten of this title.
 4. As used in subdivision two of this section, "acceptable continuing
education" shall mean courses of learning and educational activities in
architecture, engineering, interior design, land surveying, landscape
architecture and geology that may contribute to professional practice in
professional engineering, land surveying and/or geology and which meet
the standards prescribed by regulations of the commissioner. Completing
courses of learning and educational activities that fall within the
scope of practice of another licensed profession does not authorize the
licensed professional engineer, licensed land surveyor or licensed
professional geologist to lawfully practice a profession that they are
not authorized to practice as defined in sections seventy-two hundred
one, seventy-two hundred three and seventy-two hundred four of this
title. The department may, in its discretion and as needed to contribute
to the health and welfare of the public, require the completion of
continuing education courses in specific subjects.
 5. Licensed professionals shall maintain adequate documentation of
completion of acceptable continuing education and educational activities
and shall provide such documentation at the request of the department.
 6. The mandatory continuing education fee shall be forty-five dollars,
shall be payable on or before the first day of each triennial
registration period, and shall be paid in addition to the triennial
registration fees required by sections seventy-two hundred six,
seventy-two hundred six-a, and seventy-two hundred six-b of this
article.
 ARTICLE 147
 ARCHITECTURE
Section 7300. Introduction.
 7301. (Enacted without section heading).
 7302. Practice of architecture and use of title "architect".
 7303. State board for architecture.
 7304. Requirements for a professional license.
 7305. Limited permits.
 7306. Exempt persons.
 7307. Special provisions.
 7308. Mandatory continuing education for architects.
 § 7300. Introduction. This article applies to the profession of
architecture. The general provisions for all professions contained in
article one hundred thirty of this title apply to this article.
 § 7301. The practice of the profession of architecture is defined as
rendering or offering to render services which require the application
of the art, science, and aesthetics of design and construction of
buildings, groups of buildings, including their components and
appurtenances and the spaces around them wherein the safeguarding of
life, health, property, and public welfare is concerned. Such services
include, but are not limited to consultation, evaluation, planning, the
provision of preliminary studies, designs, construction documents,
construction management, and the administration of construction
contracts.
 § 7302. Practice of architecture and use of title "architect". Only a
person licensed or otherwise authorized to practice under this article
shall practice architecture or use the title "architect".
 § 7303. State board for architecture. A state board for architecture
shall be appointed by the board of regents on recommendation of the
commissioner for the purpose of assisting the board of regents and the
department on matters of professional licensing and professional conduct
in accordance with section sixty-five hundred eight of this title. The
board shall be composed of not less than seven architects licensed in
this state. An executive secretary to the board shall be appointed by
the board of regents on recommendation of the commissioner and shall be
an architect licensed in this state.
 § 7304. Requirements for a professional license. 1. To qualify for a
license as an architect, an applicant shall fulfill the following
requirements:
 (1) Application: file an application with the department;
 (2) Education: have received an education, including a bachelor's or
higher degree in architecture, in accordance with the commissioner's
regulations;
 (3) Experience: have experience satisfactory to the board in
appropriate architectural work and of sufficient amount so that the
combined college study and experience total eight years;
 (4) Examination: pass an examination satisfactory to the board and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 (5) Age: be at least twenty-one years of age;
 (6) Citizenship: meet no requirement as to United States citizenship;
 (7) Character: be of good moral character as determined by the
department; and
 (8) Fees: pay a fee of three hundred forty-five dollars to the
department for admission to a department conducted examination and for
an initial license, a fee of one hundred seventy dollars for each
reexamination, a fee of one hundred thirty-five dollars for an initial
license for persons not requiring admission to a department conducted
examination, and a fee of two hundred ten dollars for each triennial
registration period. The fee for a department conducted examination may
be prorated for candidates taking parts of the examination.
 2. In lieu of degree and experience requirements specified in
subparagraphs (2) and (3) of subdivision one of this section, twelve
years of practical experience in architectural work of a grade and
character satisfactory to the board may be accepted by the department,
provided that each complete year of college study satisfactory to the
department may at the discretion of the board be accepted in lieu of two
years of experience but not to exceed nine years toward the required
total of twelve years.
 3. In lieu of degree, experience and examination requirements
specified in subparagraphs (2), (3) and (4) of subdivision one of this
section, ten years of lawful practice of architecture outside the state
satisfactory to the board may be accepted by the department upon the
passing of a practical examination satisfactory to the board.
 4. In lieu of degree, experience and examination requirements
specified in subparagraphs (2), (3) and (4) of subdivision one of this
section, a certificate of qualification issued by the national council
of architectural registration boards on the basis of the fulfillment of
requirments satisfactory to the board may be accepted by the department,
provided further that the board shall be authorized to prepare and
conduct examinations leading to certification of applicants by the
national council of architectural registration boards.
 § 7305. Limited permits. 1. On recommendation of the board, the
department may issue a limited permit to practice architecture to an
architect not a resident of this state and having no established
business in this state who is legally qualified to practice as such in
his own country or state and who submits evidence satisfactory to the
board of established and recognized professional standing in his own
country or state and who submits satisfactory certifications as to
character and qualifications. Such limited permit shall entitle the
holder to practice architecture in this state but only in connection
with the specific project for which it is granted.
 2. Fees. The fee for each limited permit shall be one hundred five
dollars.
 § 7306. Exempt persons. 1. This article shall not be construed to
affect or prevent:
 a. The preparation of details and shop drawings by persons, other than
architects, for use in connection with the execution of their work;
 b. Employees of those lawfully practicing as architects under the
provisions of this article from acting under the instruction, control or
supervision of their employers;
 c. Builders, or superintendents employed by such builders, from
supervising the construction or structural alteration of buildings or
structures; or
 d. A holder of a valid certificate of the national council of
architectural registration boards, not licensed in this state, from
coming into the state for interview, but not to perform any
architectural services or enter into any contract until such time as he
is licensed as an architect in this state.
 e. The practice of engineering or land surveying by an engineer or
land surveyor licensed in this state, or the practice of landscape
architecture by a landscape architect licensed in this state, provided
that no such engineer, land surveyor or landscape architect shall use
the designation "architect," or "architectural" or "architecture" unless
licensed as an architect in this state.
 f. Employment of any person as a junior or assistant architect by the
City of New York in a position the title of which was approved and in
use as of July first, nineteen hundred seventy-one, provided such person
acts under the general direction of a licensed architect.
 g. Contractors or builders from engaging in construction management
and administration of construction contracts.
 § 7307. Special provisions. 1. Every architect shall have a seal,
approved by the board, which shall contain the name of the architect and
either the words "Registered Architect" and such other words or figures
as the board may deem necessary. All working drawings and
specifications, prepared by such architect or by a full-time or
part-time subordinate employed under his supervision, shall be stamped
with such seal and shall also be signed on the original with the
personal signature of such architect when filed with public officials.
Except for plans and specifications excluded from the provisions of this
article by section seventy-three hundred six of this article, no
official of this state, or of any county, city, town or village therein,
charged with the enforcement of laws, ordinances or regulations relating
to the construction or alteration of buildings or structures, shall
accept or approve any plans or specifications that are not stamped:
 a. With the seal of an architect or professional engineer registered
in this state and bearing the authorized facsimile of the signature of
such architect or professional engineer; or
 b. With the official seal and authorized facsimile of the signature of
an architect or professional engineer not a resident of this state and
having no established business in this state, but who is legally
qualified to practice as such in his own state or country, provided that
such person holds a limited permit issued by the department, and
provided further that the plans or specifications are accompanied by and
have attached thereto written authorization issued by the department for
the specific project.
 2. Engineers, land surveyors, geologists, architects and landscape
architects may join in the formation of a joint enterprise, or a
partnership or a professional service corporation or a design
professional service corporation or may form any desired combination of
such professions and may use in the name of such corporation the title
of any of the professions which will be practiced. After the name of
each member his or her profession shall be indicated.
 3. A firm name may be continued by employees having at least fifteen
years of continuous service if the retired members and legal
representatives of deceased members consent to such continuance.
 4. It shall be lawful for a corporation organized and existing under
the laws of the state of New York, and which on or before the twelfth
day of April nineteen hundred twenty-nine and continuously thereafter
was lawfully practicing in New York state to continue such practice,
provided that the chief executive officer of such corporation in the
state of New York shall be an architect licensed under this article, and
provided further that the construction of buildings and structures shall
be under the personal supervision of such architect and that drawings,
plans, and specifications shall be prepared under the personal direction
and supervision of such architect and bear the stamp of his official
seal, and the drawings or specifications shall also be signed on the
original, with the personal signature of such architect. No such
corporation shall be permitted to change its name and continue to
practice architecture, except upon the written approval of the
department.
 5. This article shall not apply to: 1. Farm buildings, including
barns, sheds, poultry houses and other buildings used directly and
solely for agricultural purposes; nor to residence buildings of gross
area of fifteen hundred square feet or less, not including garages,
carports, porches, cellars, or uninhabitable basements or attics; or
 2. Alterations, costing ten thousand dollars or less, to any building
or structure within the city of New York and twenty thousand dollars or
less, to any building or structure outside the city of New York which do
not involve changes affecting the structural safety or public safety
thereof.
 § 7308. Mandatory continuing education for architects. 1. (a) Each
licensed architect required under this article to register triennially
with the department to practice in the state shall comply with
provisions of the mandatory continuing education requirements prescribed
in subdivision two of this section except as set forth in paragraphs (b)
and (c) of this subdivision. Architects who do not satisfy the mandatory
continuing education requirements shall not practice until they have met
such requirements, and have been issued a registration certificate,
except that an architect may practice without having met such
requirements if he or she is issued a conditional registration
certificate pursuant to subdivision three of this section.
 (b) In accord with the intent of this section, an adjustment and/or
exemption to the mandatory continuing education requirement may be
granted by the department for reasons of health certified by an
appropriate health care professional, for extended active duty with the
armed forces of the United States, or for other good cause acceptable to
the department which may prevent compliance.
 (c) A licensed architect not engaged in practice as determined by the
department, shall be exempt from the mandatory continuing education
requirement upon the filing of a statement with the department declaring
such status. Any licensee who returns to the practice of architecture
during the triennial registration period shall notify the department
prior to reentering the profession and shall meet such mandatory
education requirements as shall be prescribed by regulations of the
commissioner.
 2. During each triennial registration period an applicant for
registration shall complete a minimum of thirty-six hours of acceptable
continuing education, as specified in subdivision four of this section,
provided that a minimum of twenty-four hours of such continuing
education shall be in the areas of health, safety and welfare. Any
architect whose first registration date following the effective date of
this section occurs less than three years from such effective date, but
on or after January first, two thousand one, shall complete continuing
education hours on a prorated basis at the rate of one hour per month
for the period beginning January first, two thousand up to the first
registration date thereafter. A licensee who has not satisfied the
mandatory continuing education requirements shall not be issued a
triennial registration certificate by the department and shall not
practice unless and until a conditional registration certificate is
issued as provided for in subdivision three of this section. With the
exception of continuing education hours taken during the registration
period immediately preceding the effective date of this section, no more
than six continuing education hours taken during one triennium may be
transferred to a subsequent triennium.
 3. The department, in its discretion, may issue a conditional
registration to a licensee who fails to meet the continuing education
requirements established in subdivision two of this section but who
agrees to make up any deficiencies and complete any additional education
which the department may require. The fee for such a conditional
registration shall be the same as, and in addition to, the fee for the
triennial registration. The duration of such conditional registration
shall be determined by the department but shall not exceed one year. Any
licensee who is notified of the denial of registration for failure to
submit evidence, satisfactory to the department, of required continuing
education and who practices architecture without such registration, may
be subject to disciplinary proceedings pursuant to section sixty-five
hundred ten of this title.
 4. As used in subdivision two of this section, "acceptable continuing
education" shall mean courses of learning and educational activities in
architecture, engineering, interior design, land surveying, landscape
architecture and geology that may contribute to professional practice in
architecture and which meet the standards prescribed by regulations of
the commissioner. Completing courses of learning and educational
activities that fall within the scope of practice of another licensed
profession does not authorize the licensed architect to lawfully
practice a profession that they are not authorized to practice as
defined in section seventy-three hundred one of this article. The
department may, in its discretion and as needed to contribute to the
health and welfare of the public, require the completion of continuing
education courses in specific subjects.
 5. Architects shall maintain adequate documentation of completion of
acceptable continuing education and educational activities and shall
provide such documentation at the request of the department.
 6. The mandatory continuing education fee shall be forty-five dollars,
shall be payable on or before the first day of each triennial
registration period, and shall be paid in addition to the triennial
registration fee required by section seventy-three hundred four of this
article.
 ARTICLE 148
 LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE
Section 7320. Introduction.
 7321. Definition of practice of landscape architecture.
 7322. Practice of landscape architecture and use of title
 "landscape architect".
 7323. State board for landscape architecture.
 7324. Requirements for a professional license.
 7325. Limited permits.
 7326. Exempt persons.
 7327. Special provisions.
 7328. Mandatory continuing education for landscape architects.
 § 7320. Introduction. This article applies to the profession of
landscape architecture. The general provisions for all professions
contained in article one hundred thirty of this title apply to this
article.
 § 7321. Definition of practice of landscape architecture. The
practice of the profession of landscape architecture is defined as
performing services in connection with the development of land areas
where, and to the extent that the dominant purpose of such services is
the preservation, enhancement or determination of proper land uses,
natural land features, ground cover and planting, naturalistic and
aesthetic values, the settings, approaches or environment for structures
or other improvements, natural drainage and the consideration and
determination of inherent problems of the land relating to the erosion,
wear and tear, blight or other hazards. This practice shall include the
location and arrangement of such tangible objects and features as are
incidental and necessary to the purposes outlined herein but shall not
include the design of structures or facilities with separate and
self-contained purposes such as are ordinarily included in the practice
of engineering or architecture; and shall not include the making of land
surveys or final land plats for official approval or recording.
 § 7322. Practice of landscape architecture and use of title "landscape
architect". Only a person licensed or otherwise authorized to practice
under this article shall practice landscape architecture or use the
title "landscape architect".
 § 7323. State board for landscape architecture. A state board for
landscape architecture shall be appointed by the board of regents on
recommendation of the commissioner for the purpose of assisting the
board of regents and the department on matters of professional licensing
and professional conduct in accordance with section sixty-five hundred
eight of this title. The board shall be composed of not less than seven
landscape architects licensed in this state. An executive secretary to
the board shall be appointed by the board of regents on recommendation
of the commissioner.
 § 7324. Requirements for a professional license. 1. To qualify for a
license as a landscape architect, an applicant shall fulfill the
following requirements:
 (1) Application: file an application with the department;
 (2) Education: have received an education, including a bachelor's or
higher degree in landscape architecture, in accordance with the
commissioner's regulations;
 (3) Experience: have experience satisfactory to the board in
appropriate landscape architectural work and of sufficient amount so
that the combined college study and experience total eight years;
 (4) Examination: pass an examination satisfactory to the board and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 (5) Age: be at least twenty-one years of age;
 (6) Citizenship or immigration status: be a United States citizen or a
noncitizen lawfully admitted for permanent residence in the United
States;
 (7) Character: be of good moral character as determined by the
department; and
 (8) Fees: pay a fee of two hundred twenty dollars to the department
for admission to a department conducted examination and for an initial
license, a fee of one hundred fifteen dollars for each reexamination, a
fee of one hundred fifteen dollars for an initial license for persons
not requiring admission to a department conducted examination, and a fee
of one hundred fifty-five dollars for each triennial registration
period.
 2. In lieu of degree and experience requirements specified in
subparagraphs (2) and (3) of subdivision one of this section, twelve
years of practical experience in landscape architecture of a grade and
character satisfactory to the board may be accepted by the department
provided that each complete year of study satisfactory to the department
may at the discretion of the board be accepted in lieu of two years of
experience but not to exceed eight years toward the required total of
twelve years. Eight years of such experience satisfactory to the board
may be accepted by the department for admission to that portion of the
examination related to fundamental landscape architecture theory.
 3. In lieu of degree, experience and examination requirements
specified in subparagraphs (2), (3) and (4) of subdivision one of this
section, ten years of lawful practice of landscape architecture outside
the state satisfactory to the board may be accepted by the department
upon the passing of a practical examination satisfactory to the board.
 4. On recommendation of the board, the department may exempt from
examination an applicant who holds a license or certificate to practice
landscape architecture issued to him upon examination by a legally
constituted board of examiners in any other state or political
subdivision of the United States, provided the applicant's
qualifications met the requirements in this state at the time such
license was issued.
 § 7325. Limited permits. 1. On recommendation of the board, the
department may issue a limited permit to practice landscape architecture
to a landscape architect not a resident of this state and having no
established business in this state who is legally qualified to practice
as such in his own country or state and who submits evidence
satisfactory to the board of established and recognized professional
standing in his own country or state and satisfactory certifications as
to character and qualifications. Such limited permit shall be issued
solely in connection with the specific project for which it is granted.
 2. Fees. The fee for each limited permit shall be seventy dollars.
 § 7326. Exempt persons. This article shall not be construed to affect
or prevent:
 a. The preparation of details and shop drawings by persons, other than
landscape architects, for use in connection with the execution of their
work;
 b. Employees of those lawfully practicing as landscape architects
under the provisions of this article from acting under the instruction,
control or supervision of their employers;
 c. Supervision by builders, or superintendents employed by such
builders, of the installation of landscape projects; or
 d. Business conducted in this state by any agriculturist,
horticulturist, tree expert, arborist, forester, nurseryman or landscape
nurseryman, gardener, landscape gardener, landscape contractor, garden
or lawn caretaker or grader or cultivator of land, as these terms are
generally used, except that no such person shall use the designation
landscape architect, landscape architectural or landscape architecture
unless licensed under this article.
 e. Employment of any person as a junior or assistant landscape
architect by the City of New York in a position the title of which was
approved and in use as of July first, nineteen hundred seventy-one,
provided such person acts under the general supervision of a licensed
landscape architect.
 f. The practice of architecture by an architect licensed in this
state, or the practice of engineering or land surveying by an engineer
or land surveyor licensed in this state, provided that no such
architect, engineer or land surveyor shall use the designation
"landscape architect," "landscape architectural" or "landscape
architecture" unless licensed as a landscape architect in this state.
 § 7327. Special provisions. 1. Every landscape architect shall have a
seal, approved by the board, which shall contain the name of the
landscape architect and either the words "Registered Landscape
Architect" and such other words or figures as the board may deem
necessary. All working drawings and specifications prepared by such
landscape architect relating to the setting, approaches or environment
for structures or other improvements or under the supervision of such
landscape architect, shall be stamped with such seal and signed on the
original, with the personal signature of such landscape architect when
filed with public officials, or with the official seal and personal
signature of a landscape architect granted a limited permit under
section seventy-three hundred twenty-five of this article when such
drawings and specifications are accompanied by a written authorization
from the department for the specific project concerned.
 2. Engineers, land surveyors, geologists, architects and landscape
architects may join in the formation of a joint enterprise, or a
partnership or a professional service corporation or a design
professional service corporation or may form any desired combination of
such professions and may use in the name of such corporation the title
of any of the professions which will be practiced. After the name of
each member his or her profession shall be indicated.
 3. A firm name may be continued by employees having at least fifteen
years of continuous service if the retired members and legal
representatives of deceased members consent to such continuance.
 4. It shall be lawful for a corporation organized and existing under
the laws of the state of New York, and which on or before the first day
of April nineteen hundred sixty-one was legally incorporated to practice
landscape architecture, while conforming to the provisions of this
title, and which has been continuously engaged in such practice since
such time to continue such practice provided that the chief executive
officer of such corporation in the state of New York shall be a
landscape architect licensed under this article, and provided further
that the supervision of such projects shall be under the personal
supervision of such landscape architect and that such plans and designs
shall be prepared under the personal direction and supervision of such
landscape architect and bear the stamp of his official seal, and such
drawings or specifications shall also be signed on the original, with
the personal signature of such landscape architect. No such corporation
shall be permitted to change its name and continue to practice landscape
architecture, except upon the written approval of the department.
 * § 7328. Mandatory continuing education for landscape architects. 1.
(a) Each licensed landscape architect required under this article to
register triennially with the department to practice in the state shall
comply with provisions of the mandatory continuing education
requirements prescribed in subdivision two of this section except as set
forth in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this subdivision. Landscape
architects who do not satisfy the mandatory continuing education
requirements shall not practice until they have met such requirements,
and have been issued a registration certificate, except that a landscape
architect may practice without having met such requirements if he or she
is issued a conditional registration certificate pursuant to subdivision
three of this section.
 (b) Landscape architects shall be exempt from the mandatory continuing
education requirement for the triennial registration period during which
they are first licensed, in accordance with the intent of this section,
adjustment to the mandatory continuing education requirement may be
granted by the department for reasons of health certified by an
appropriate health care professional, for extended active duty with the
armed forces of the United States, or for other good cause acceptable to
the department which may prevent compliance.
 (c) A licensed landscape architect not engaged in practice as
determined by the department, shall be exempt from the mandatory
continuing education requirement upon the filing of a statement with the
department declaring such status. Any licensee who returns to the
practice of landscape architecture during the triennial registration
period shall notify the department prior to reentering the profession
and shall meet such mandatory education requirements as shall be
prescribed by regulations of the commissioner.
 2. During each triennial registration period an applicant for
registration shall complete a minimum of thirty-six hours of acceptable
continuing education, as specified in subdivision four of this section,
provided that a minimum of twenty-four hours of such continuing
education shall be in the areas of health, safety and welfare. Up to
one-half of the total hours of continuing education may consist of
non-course activities. Any landscape architect whose first registration
date following the effective date of this section occurs less than three
years from such effective date, but on or after January first, two
thousand seven, shall complete continuing education hours on a prorated
basis at the rate of one hour per month for the period beginning January
first, two thousand seven up to the first registration date thereafter.
A licensee who has not satisfied the mandatory continuing education
requirements shall not be issued a triennial registration certificate by
the department and shall not practice unless and until a conditional
registration certificate is issued as provided for in subdivision three
of this section. With the exception of continuing education hours taken
during the registration period immediately preceding the effective date
of this section, continuing education hours taken during one triennium
may not be transferred to a subsequent triennium.
 3. The department, in its discretion, may issue a conditional
registration to a licensee who fails to meet the continuing education
requirements established in subdivision two of this section but who
agrees to make up any deficiencies and complete any additional education
which the department may require. The fee for such a conditional
registration shall be the same as, and in addition to, the fee for the
triennial registration. The duration of such conditional registration
shall be determined by the department but shall not exceed one year. Any
licensee who is notified of the denial of registration for failure to
submit evidence, satisfactory to the department, of required continuing
education and who practices landscape architecture without such
registration, may be subject to disciplinary proceedings pursuant to
section sixty-five hundred ten of this title.
 4. As used in subdivision two of this section, "acceptable continuing
education" shall mean courses of learning and educational activities
which contribute to professional practice in landscape architecture and
which meet the standards prescribed by regulations of the commissioner.
The department may, in its discretion and as needed to contribute to the
health and welfare of the public, require the completion of continuing
education courses in specific subjects.
 5. Landscape architects shall maintain adequate documentation of
completion of acceptable continuing education and educational activities
and shall provide such documentation at the request of the department.
 6. The mandatory continuing education fee shall be forty-five dollars,
shall be payable on or before the first day of each triennial
registration period, and shall be paid in addition to the triennial
registration fee required by section seventy-three hundred twenty-four
of this article.
 * NB Effective until May 21, 2027
 * § 7328. Mandatory continuing education for landscape architects. 1.
(a) Each licensed landscape architect required under this article to
register triennially with the department to practice in the state shall
comply with provisions of the mandatory continuing education
requirements prescribed in subdivision two of this section except as set
forth in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this subdivision. Landscape
architects who do not satisfy the mandatory continuing education
requirements shall not practice until they have met such requirements,
and have been issued a registration certificate, except that a landscape
architect may practice without having met such requirements if they are
issued a conditional registration certificate pursuant to subdivision
three of this section.
 (b) Landscape architects shall be exempt from the mandatory continuing
education requirement for the triennial registration period during which
they are first licensed, in accordance with the intent of this section,
an adjustment and/or exemption to the mandatory continuing education
requirement may be granted by the department for reasons of health
certified by an appropriate health care professional, for extended
active duty with the armed forces of the United States, or for other
good cause acceptable to the department which may prevent compliance.
 (c) A licensed landscape architect not engaged in practice as
determined by the department, shall be exempt from the mandatory
continuing education requirement upon the filing of a statement with the
department declaring such status. Any licensee who returns to the
practice of landscape architecture during the triennial registration
period shall notify the department prior to reentering the profession
and shall meet such mandatory education requirements as shall be
prescribed by regulations of the commissioner.
 2. During each triennial registration period an applicant for
registration shall complete a minimum of thirty-six hours of acceptable
continuing education, as specified in subdivision four of this section,
provided that a minimum of twenty-four hours of such continuing
education shall be in the areas of health, safety and welfare. Any
landscape architect whose first registration date following the
effective date of this section occurs less than three years from such
effective date, but on or after January first, two thousand seven, shall
complete continuing education hours on a prorated basis at the rate of
one hour per month for the period beginning January first, two thousand
seven up to the first registration date thereafter. A licensee who has
not satisfied the mandatory continuing education requirements shall not
be issued a triennial registration certificate by the department and
shall not practice unless and until a conditional registration
certificate is issued as provided for in subdivision three of this
section. No more than six continuing education hours taken during one
triennium may be transferred to a subsequent triennium.
 3. The department, in its discretion, may issue a conditional
registration to a licensee who fails to meet the continuing education
requirements established in subdivision two of this section but who
agrees to make up any deficiencies and complete any additional education
which the department may require. The fee for such a conditional
registration shall be the same as, and in addition to, the fee for the
triennial registration. The duration of such conditional registration
shall be determined by the department but shall not exceed one year. Any
licensee who is notified of the denial of registration for failure to
submit evidence, satisfactory to the department, of required continuing
education and who practices landscape architecture without such
registration, may be subject to disciplinary proceedings pursuant to
section sixty-five hundred ten of this title.
 4. As used in subdivision two of this section, "acceptable continuing
education" shall mean courses of learning and educational activities in
landscape architecture, architecture, engineering, interior design, land
surveying, and geology that may contribute to professional practice in
landscape architecture and which meet the standards prescribed by
regulations of the commissioner. Completing courses of learning and
educational activities that fall within the scope of practice of another
licensed profession does not authorize a licensed landscape architect to
lawfully practice a profession that they are not authorized to practice
as defined in section seventy-three hundred twenty-one of this article.
The department may, in its discretion and as needed to contribute to the
health and welfare of the public, require the completion of continuing
education courses in specific subjects.
 5. Landscape architects shall maintain adequate documentation of
completion of acceptable continuing education and educational activities
and shall provide such documentation at the request of the department.
 6. The mandatory continuing education fee shall be forty-five dollars,
shall be payable on or before the first day of each triennial
registration period, and shall be paid in addition to the triennial
registration fee required by section seventy-three hundred twenty-four
of this article.
 * NB Effective May 21, 2027
 ARTICLE 149
 PUBLIC ACCOUNTANCY
Section 7400. Introduction.
 7401. Definition of practice of public accountancy.
 7401-a. Definitions.
 7402. Practice of public accountancy and use of title
 "certified public accountant" or "public accountant".
 7403. State board for public accountancy.
 7404. Requirements for a license as a certified public
 accountant.
 7405. Requirements for a license as a public accountant.
 7406. Limited permits and practice privilege.
 7407. Exempt persons.
 7408. Special provisions.
 7409. Mandatory continuing education.
 7410. Mandatory peer review.
 § 7400. Introduction. This article applies to the profession of
public accountancy. The general provisions for all professions contained
in article one hundred thirty of this title apply to this article.
 § 7401. Definition of practice of public accountancy. The practice of
the profession of public accountancy is defined as:
 1. offering to perform or performing attest and/or compilation
services, as defined in section seventy-four hundred one-a of this
article;
 2. incident to the services described in subdivision one of this
section, offering to perform or performing professional services for
clients, in any or all matters relating to accounting concepts and to
the recording, presentation, or certification of financial information
or data; or
 3. offering to perform or performing, for other persons one or more
types of the following services including but not limited to accounting,
management advisory, financial advisory, and tax exclusive of services
within subdivisions one and two of this section, involving the use of
professional skills or competencies of the licensed accountant as
described in the rules of the board of regents, including professional
services rendered to one's employer not required to register under
section seventy-four hundred eight of this article, in any and all
matters related to accounting concepts and to the recording of financial
data or information or the preparation or presentation of financial
statements.
 § 7401-a. Definitions. As used in this article:
 1. "Attest" means providing the following public accountancy services
which all require the independence of licensees:
 a. any audit to be performed in accordance with generally accepted
auditing standards or other similar standards, developed by a federal
governmental agency, commission or board or a recognized international
or national professional accountancy organization, that are acceptable
to the department in accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 b. any review of a financial statement to be performed in accordance
with standards, developed by a federal governmental agency, commission
or board or a recognized international or national professional
accountancy organization, that are acceptable to the department in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 c. any examination to be performed in accordance with attestation
standards developed by a federal governmental agency, commission or
board or a recognized international or national professional accountancy
organization, that are acceptable to the department in accordance with
the commissioner's regulations; or
 d. any engagement to be performed in accordance with the auditing
standards of the public company accounting oversight board.
 2. "Certified public accountant" or "CPA" means any person who has
received a license from the department or any other state as a certified
public accountant for the practice of public accountancy.
 3. "Compilation" means providing a service that presents, in the form
of financial statements, information that is the representation of the
management or owners of the client without undertaking to express any
assurance of the accuracy of the information in the statements, to be
performed in accordance with standards, developed by a federal
governmental agency, commission or board or a recognized international
or national professional accountancy organization, that are acceptable
to the department in accordance with the commissioner's regulations.
 4. "Firm" means a domestic or foreign entity organized as a sole
proprietorship, a professional service corporation, a partnership, a
professional service limited liability company, a foreign professional
service limited liability company, a registered limited liability
partnership, a foreign registered limited liability partnership, or any
other form of organization that is established for the business purpose
of lawfully engaging in the practice of public accountancy.
 5. "Principal place of business" means the office location designated
by the licensee from which the person directs, controls, and coordinates
his or her professional services.
 6. "Public accountant" or "PA" means any person who has received a
license from the department as a public accountant for the practice of
public accountancy.
 7. "State" means any state of the United States, the District of
Columbia, Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virgin Islands, and Guam.
 § 7402. Practice of public accountancy and use of title "certified
public accountant" or "public accountant". Only a person licensed or
otherwise authorized to practice under this article shall practice
public accountancy or use the title "certified public accountant" or the
designation CPA or "public accountant" or the designation PA or any
other derivative or designation provided in section seventy-four hundred
eight of this article.
 § 7403. State board for public accountancy. A state board for public
accountancy shall be appointed by the board of regents on recommendation
of the commissioner for the purpose of assisting the board of regents
and the department on matters of professional licensing and professional
conduct in accordance with section sixty-five hundred eight of this
title. The board shall be composed of not less than twenty licensed
accountants, not less than fifteen of whom shall be licensed as
certified public accountants in this state, and the board should be kept
in such proportion if it is ever increased. An executive secretary to
the board shall be appointed by the board of regents on recommendation
of the commissioner and shall be a certified public accountant licensed
in this state.
 § 7404. Requirements for a license as a certified public accountant.
1. To qualify for a license as a certified public accountant, an
applicant shall fulfill the following requirements:
 (1) Application: file an application with the department;
 * (2) Education: have received an education, including a bachelor's or
higher degree or a foreign equivalent based on a program in accountancy,
in accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 * NB Effective until November 21, 2026
 * (2) Education: have received an education, including a bachelor's or
higher degree or a foreign equivalent from a program in accountancy that
is registered by the department, or deemed comparable to a registered
program as determined by the department. To meet the professional
education requirements for licensure, the applicant shall present
satisfactory evidence of completion of one of the following:
 a. A curriculum of at least one hundred twenty semester hours in a
program in accountancy, provided that the applicant shall satisfy the
undergraduate curriculum semester hour requirements for the specified
subjects set forth in the commissioner's regulations; or
 b. A curriculum of at least one hundred fifty semester hours in a
program in accountancy, provided that the applicant shall satisfy the
curriculum semester hour requirements for the specified subjects set
forth in the commissioner's regulations;
 * NB Effective November 21, 2026
 * (3) Experience: have experience satisfactory to the board of
regents and in accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 * NB Effective until November 21, 2026
 * (3) Experience:
 Present evidence of completion of the following experience,
satisfactory to the board of regents and in accordance with the
commissioner's regulations:
 (i) two years of acceptable full-time experience, or the equivalent
thereof, for an applicant who is applying for licensure on the basis of
the education described in subparagraph a of paragraph two of this
subdivision; or
 (ii) one year of acceptable full-time experience, or the equivalent
thereof, for an applicant who is applying for licensure on the basis of
the education described in subparagraph b of paragraph two of this
subdivision;
 * NB Effective November 21, 2026
 * (4) Examination: pass a written examination satisfactory to the
board and in accordance with the commissioner's regulations and the
requirement with respect to such examination may not be waived;
 * NB Effective until November 21, 2026
 * (4) Examination: pass a written examination satisfactory to the
board and in accordance with the commissioner's regulations, provided
that the required educational attainment for such examination shall not
be greater than that set out in subparagraph a of paragraph two of this
subdivision, and the requirement with respect to such examination may
not be waived;
 * NB Effective November 21, 2026
 (5) Age: be at least twenty-one years of age;
 (6) Citizenship: meet no requirements as to United States citizenship;
 (7) Character: be of good moral character as determined by the
department; and
 (8) Fees: pay a fee of two hundred twenty dollars to the department
for admission to a department conducted examination and for an initial
license, a fee of one hundred fifteen dollars for each reexamination, a
fee of one hundred thirty-five dollars for an initial license for
persons not requiring admission to a department conducted examination,
and a fee of two hundred ten dollars for each triennial registration
period.
 2. In lieu of professional requirements specified in paragraphs two
and three of subdivision one of this section, fifteen years in the
practice of public accountancy satisfactory to the board may be accepted
by the department.
 § 7405. Requirements for a license as a public accountant. To qualify
for a license as a public accountant, an applicant shall fulfill the
following requirements:
 (1) Application: file an application with the department;
 (2) Declaration of intention: a. Have filed a declaration of intention
to practice as a public accountant with the department on or before
October first, nineteen hundred fifty-nine, on the basis of evidence
that the applicant was engaged for a total of six years during the ten
years immediately preceding April twenty-third, nineteen hundred
fifty-nine, in the practice of public accountancy as an individual
practitioner or as a partner of a partnership or as an employee of such
an individual practitioner or partnership engaged in the practice of
public accountancy or as an employee of a department, agency or
instrumentality of the United States, the state, or a political
subdivision of the state in which employment his duties entailed the
performance of all or some of the services which would constitute the
practice of public accountancy, or a combination of the foregoing
duties, or in the opinion of the board the equivalent thereof;
 b. Establish by evidence satisfactory to the board that at the date of
the filing of said declaration of intention, the applicant had complied
with the conditions established by law on April twenty-third, nineteen
hundred fifty-nine, has not violated the provisions relating to practice
in public accountancy, and is about to engage in the practice of public
accountancy as his principal occupation as an individual practitioner or
as a partner of a partnership;
 (3) Character: be of good moral character as determined by the
department; and
 (4) Fees: pay a fee to the department for an initial license of two
hundred twenty dollars, and a fee of two hundred ten dollars for each
triennial registration period.
 § 7406. Limited permits and practice privilege. 1. Limited permits. On
recommendation of the board, the department may issue a limited permit
to an applicant of good moral character, who is the holder of a
certificate, license or degree in a foreign country constituting a
recognized qualification for the performance in such country of the acts
set forth in section seventy-four hundred one of this article, provided
the applicant has professional qualifications that are determined by the
board to be significantly comparable to the licensure requirements for
certified public accountancy pursuant to this article, and the applicant
resides or has a place for the regular transaction of business within
the state, and equal recognition is granted by the foreign country
concerned to certified public accountants or public accountants licensed
in the United States. Such limited permit shall be valid for a period of
two years and may be renewed on recommendation of the board. Such permit
shall authorize the applicant to use only the title or designation under
which he or she is generally known in his or her own country, followed
by the name of the country from which he or she received his or her
certificate, license or degree, notwithstanding the provisions of
subdivision two of section seventy-four hundred eight of this article.
The fee for each limited permit and each renewal shall be established in
regulation by the board of regents.
 * 2. Practice privilege. a. Except as otherwise provided in
subparagraph two or three of paragraph f of this subdivision, a
certified public accountant, licensed by another state which the board
of regents has determined to have substantially equivalent certified
public accountant licensure requirements, or whose individual licensure
qualifications are verified by the department to be substantially
equivalent to New York's requirements, and in good standing, who intends
to perform any of the services in subdivision one, two or three of
section seventy-four hundred one of this article may practice public
accountancy in this state, if the certified public accountant:
 (1) holds a valid license to practice public accountancy in the other
state, and
 (2) practices public accountancy in another state that is his or her
principal place of business.
 b. The practice privilege allows such certified public accountant, who
meets the requirements of paragraph a of this subdivision to practice
public accountancy in this state.
 c. An individual who has been granted practice privileges under this
section who performs any of the services in subdivision one or two of
section seventy-four hundred one of this article may only do so through
a firm which has obtained a registration under section seventy-four
hundred eight of this article. Such an individual, as well as an
individual with a New York license who does not have a principal place
of business in New York, may provide services in subdivision three of
section seventy-four hundred one of this article through a firm of
certified public accountants that does not have a registration in this
state but that holds a valid license, registration, or permit in another
state.
 d. Any certified public accountant who practices in this state
pursuant to this section, and any firm that employs such certified
public accountant to provide such services in New York, consents to all
of the following as a condition of the exercise of such practice
privilege:
 (1) to the personal and subject matter jurisdiction and disciplinary
authority of the board of regents as if the practice privilege is a
license, and an individual with a practice privilege is a licensee;
 (2) to comply with this article, the rules of the board of regents and
the regulations of the commissioner; and
 (3) to the appointment of the secretary of state or other public
official acceptable to the department, in the certified public
accountant's state of licensure or the state in which the firm has its
principal place of business, as the certified public accountant or
firm's agent upon whom process may be served in any action or proceeding
by the department against such certified public accountant or firm.
 e. For purposes of this subdivision, the board of regents may
determine that nationally-recognized certified public accountant
licensure requirements are substantially equivalent to New York's
requirements, such that an individual licensed in a state determined to
have licensure requirements substantially equivalent to the
nationally-recognized CPA licensure requirements, or an individual whose
licensure qualifications are determined to be substantially equivalent
to the nationally-recognized CPA licensure requirements, may practice
under the practice privilege pursuant to the requirements contained in
this subdivision.
 f. (1) A person who wishes to practice public accountancy in this
state but does not meet the requirements of paragraph a of this
subdivision is subject to the full licensing and registration
requirements of this article.
 (2) In the event the license from the other state of the certified
public accountant's principal place of business is no longer valid or in
good standing, or that the certified public accountant has had any final
disciplinary action taken by the licensing or disciplinary authority of
any other state concerning the practice of public accountancy that has
resulted in (i) the suspension or revocation of his or her license, or
(ii) other disciplinary action against his or her license that arises
from (a) gross negligence, recklessness or intentional wrongdoing
relating to the practice of public accountancy, (b) fraud or
misappropriation of funds relating to the practice of public
accountancy, or (c) preparation, publication, or dissemination of false,
fraudulent, or materially incomplete or misleading financial statements,
reports or information relating to the practice of public accountancy,
the certified public accountant shall cease offering to perform or
performing such services in this state individually and on behalf of his
or her firm, until and unless such certified public accountant receives
written permission from the department to resume the practice of public
accountancy in this state pursuant to subparagraph three of this
paragraph.
 (3) Any certified public accountant who, within the last seven years,
immediately preceding the date on which he or she wishes to practice in
New York, (i) has been the subject of any final disciplinary action
taken against him or her by the licensing or disciplinary authority of
any other jurisdiction with respect to any professional license or has
any charges of professional misconduct pending against him or her in any
other jurisdiction, or (ii) has had his or her license in another
jurisdiction reinstated after a suspension or revocation of said
license, or (iii) has been denied issuance or renewal of a professional
license or certificate in any other jurisdiction for any reason other
than an inadvertent administrative error, or (iv) has been convicted of
a crime or is subject to pending criminal charges in any jurisdiction,
shall so notify the department, on a form prescribed by the department,
and shall not practice public accountancy in this state under paragraph
a of this subdivision until he or she has received from the department
written permission to do so. In determining whether the certified public
accountant shall be allowed to practice in this state, the department
shall follow the procedure to determine whether an applicant for
licensure is of good moral character. Anyone failing to provide the
notice required by this paragraph shall be subject to the personal and
subject matter jurisdiction and disciplinary authority of the board of
regents as if the practice privilege is a license, and an individual
with a practice privilege is a licensee, and may be deemed to be
practicing in violation of section sixty-five hundred twelve of this
title.
 g. (1) Notwithstanding subparagraph two of paragraph a of this
subdivision or any other inconsistent law or rule to the contrary, a
certified public accountant licensed by another state and in good
standing who otherwise meets the practice privilege requirements under
this section and files an application for licensure under section
seventy-four hundred four of this article may continue to practice under
such privilege for a period coterminous with the period during which his
or her application for licensure remains pending with the department,
including any period after the certified public accountant establishes a
principal place of business in New York while his or her application is
pending.
 (2) Nothing in this section shall limit the applicability of section
seventy-four hundred seven of this article.
 * NB Effective until November 21, 2026
 * 2. Practice privilege. a. Except as otherwise provided in
subparagraph two or three of paragraph e of this subdivision, a
certified public accountant, licensed by another state, who intends to
perform any of the services in subdivision one, two or three of section
seventy-four hundred one of this article may practice public accountancy
in this state, if the certified public accountant:
 (1) holds a valid license to practice public accountancy which is in
good standing in the other state,
 (2) practices public accountancy in another state that is such
certified public accountant's principal place of business,
 (3) has completed either of the professional education and experience
requirements as described in paragraphs two and three of subdivision one
of section seventy-four hundred four of this article, and
 (4) has passed the written examination described in paragraph four of
subdivision one of section seventy-four hundred four of this article.
 b. The practice privilege allows such certified public accountant, who
meets the requirements of paragraph a of this subdivision to practice
public accountancy in this state.
 c. An individual who has been granted practice privileges under this
section who performs any of the services in subdivision one or two of
section seventy-four hundred one of this article may only do so through
a firm which has obtained a registration under section seventy-four
hundred eight of this article. Such an individual, as well as an
individual with a New York license who does not have a principal place
of business in New York, may provide services in subdivision three of
section seventy-four hundred one of this article through a firm of
certified public accountants that does not have a registration in this
state but that holds a valid license, registration, or permit in another
state.
 d. Any certified public accountant who practices in this state
pursuant to this section, and any firm that employs such certified
public accountant to provide such services in New York, consents to all
of the following as a condition of the exercise of such practice
privilege:
 (1) to the personal and subject matter jurisdiction and disciplinary
authority of the board of regents as if the practice privilege is a
license, and an individual with a practice privilege is a licensee;
 (2) to comply with this article, the rules of the board of regents and
the regulations of the commissioner; and
 (3) to the appointment of the secretary of state or other public
official acceptable to the department, in the certified public
accountant's state of licensure or the state in which the firm has its
principal place of business, as the certified public accountant or
firm's agent upon whom process may be served in any action or proceeding
by the department against such certified public accountant or firm.
 e. (1) A person who wishes to practice public accountancy in this
state but does not meet the requirements of paragraph a of this
subdivision is subject to the full licensing and registration
requirements of this article.
 (2) In the event the license from the other state of the certified
public accountant's principal place of business is no longer valid or in
good standing, or that the certified public accountant has had any final
disciplinary action taken by the licensing or disciplinary authority of
any other state concerning the practice of public accountancy that has
resulted in (i) the suspension or revocation of such certified public
accountant's license, or (ii) other disciplinary action against such
certified public accountant's license that arises from (a) gross
negligence, recklessness or intentional wrongdoing relating to the
practice of public accountancy, (b) fraud or misappropriation of funds
relating to the practice of public accountancy, or (c) preparation,
publication, or dissemination of false, fraudulent, or materially
incomplete or misleading financial statements, reports or information
relating to the practice of public accountancy, the certified public
accountant shall cease offering to perform or performing such services
in this state individually and on behalf of such certified public
accountant's firm, until and unless such certified public accountant
receives written permission from the department to resume the practice
of public accountancy in this state pursuant to subparagraph three of
this paragraph.
 (3) Any certified public accountant who, within the last seven years,
immediately preceding the date on which such certified public accountant
wishes to practice in New York, (i) has been the subject of any final
disciplinary action taken against such certified public accountant by
the licensing or disciplinary authority of any other jurisdiction with
respect to any professional license or has any charges of professional
misconduct pending against such certified public accountant in any other
jurisdiction, or (ii) has had such certified public accountant license
in another jurisdiction reinstated after a suspension or revocation of
said license, or (iii) has been denied issuance or renewal of a
professional license or certificate in any other jurisdiction for any
reason other than an inadvertent administrative error, or (iv) has been
convicted of a crime or is subject to pending criminal charges in any
jurisdiction, shall so notify the department, on a form prescribed by
the department, and shall not practice public accountancy in this state
under paragraph a of this subdivision until such certified public
accountant has received from the department written permission to do so.
In determining whether the certified public accountant shall be allowed
to practice in this state, the department shall follow the procedure to
determine whether an applicant for licensure is of good moral character.
Anyone failing to provide the notice required by this paragraph shall be
subject to the personal and subject matter jurisdiction and disciplinary
authority of the board of regents as if the practice privilege is a
license, and an individual with a practice privilege is a licensee, and
may be deemed to be practicing in violation of section sixty-five
hundred twelve of this title.
 f. (1) Notwithstanding subparagraph two of paragraph a of this
subdivision or any other inconsistent law or rule to the contrary, a
certified public accountant licensed by another state and in good
standing who otherwise meets the practice privilege requirements under
this section and files an application for licensure under section
seventy-four hundred four of this article may continue to practice under
such privilege for a period coterminous with the period during which
such certified public accountant's application for licensure remains
pending with the department, including any period after the certified
public accountant establishes a principal place of business in New York
while such certified public accountant's application is pending.
 (2) Nothing in this section shall limit the applicability of section
seventy-four hundred seven of this article.
 * NB Effective November 21, 2026
 § 7407. Exempt persons. Nothing contained in this article shall be
construed to prohibit:
 a. Any individual other than a certified public accountant or public
accountant who is an officer of a corporation or partner of a
partnership or sole proprietor of a business enterprise or member of a
joint venture or member of a committee appointed by stockholders,
creditors, courts, trustees, executors or administrators, or an employee
of any of the foregoing, in his capacity as such, from signing,
delivering, or issuing any financial, accounting or related statement or
report thereon, relating to said corporation, partnership, business
venture, joint venture, committee, trust or estate, provided, however,
that in so doing such person does not hold himself or herself out to be
a certified public accountant or public accountant;
 b. An attorney-at-law, or a partnership, limited liability
partnership, limited liability company or professional service
corporation of attorneys-at-law from signing a financial, accounting or
related statement or report thereon, prepared by such attorney or
organizations of attorneys as incidental to the practice of law;
 c. Any individual from serving as an employee of a certified public
accountant, public accountant or firm licensed under this article;
 d. Any individual, not engaged in practice as a certified public
accountant or public accountant within the state, from performing
services within the state which are incidental to the practice conducted
by him outside the state;
 e. Any official or employee of a governmental unit, agency or
instrumentality other than a certified public accountant or public
accountant in the performance of his official duties from signing,
delivering or issuing any financial, accounting, or related statement or
report thereon relating to said unit, agency or instrumentality; or
 f. A corporation chartered in the state of New York to engage in the
practice of public accountancy and so engaged as its principal activity
on and before the first day of July, nineteen hundred fifty-nine, from
continuing in such practice as long as its corporate acts comply with
the board of regents rules, provided all employees of such corporation
performing any acts constituting the practice of public accountancy as
defined herein and who are not certified public accountants or public
accountants licensed under this article shall in the performance of such
acts be under the supervision of certified public accountants or public
accountants licensed in this state; or
 g. An individual other than a certified public accountant or public
accountant, or an entity not required to register under paragraph a of
subdivision three of section seventy-four hundred eight of this article,
from offering to perform or performing the types of services set forth
in subdivision three of section seventy-four hundred one of this article
or preparing financial statements in accordance with subdivision five of
section seventy-four hundred eight of this article.
 § 7408. Special provisions. 1. Nothing contained in this article shall
be deemed to prohibit one or more certified public accountants or one or
more public accountants, or any combination thereof, from forming a
firm.
 2. No firm shall use the words "certified public accountant" or
"certified public accountants" or the letters "CPA" or "CPAs" in
connection with its name unless the sole proprietor of such firm or each
partner of a partnership or limited liability partnership, member of a
limited liability company or shareholder of a professional service
corporation engaged within the United States in the practice of public
accountancy is in good standing as a certified public accountant of one
or more of the states of the United States.
 3. a. Any firm that is established for the business purpose of
lawfully engaging in the practice of public accountancy pursuant to
subdivisions one and two of section seventy-four hundred one of this
article or uses the title "CPA" or "CPA firm" or the title "PA" or "PA
firm" must register with the department. A firm of certified public
accountants or public accountants engaged in the practice of public
accountancy pursuant to subdivision three of section seventy-four
hundred one of this article, but not engaged in the practice of public
accountancy pursuant to subdivisions one and two of section seventy-four
hundred one of this article, may register with the department under this
subdivision. As a condition of registration or renewal, the firm shall
affirm that it has not violated the provisions of this article, any
other applicable laws and such other requirements as the department may
impose, consistent with this article, except that the provisions of
section seventy-four hundred ten of this article shall not apply on
initial registration.
 b. A registration shall be issued to a firm upon payment of the fee
prescribed by the commissioner upon application showing that:
 (1) At least one partner of a partnership or limited liability
partnership, member of a limited liability company or shareholder of a
professional service corporation or the sole proprietor is licensed or
otherwise authorized to practice under this article and his or her
license to practice is not currently suspended, annulled or revoked in
any jurisdiction and he or she is regularly engaged in practice on
behalf of the firm within the state or, in the case of a firm that holds
a license, registration, or permit as a firm of certified public
accountants in another state and is required to register in this state,
an individual with practice privileges under subdivision two of section
seventy-four hundred six of this article;
 (2) The firm, other than a sole proprietorship, consists of at least
two present partners, members or shareholders;
 (3) The firm, other than a sole proprietorship, contains at least as
many present partners, members or shareholders as the total number of
names in the firm name, or, where the word "company" or abbreviation
"co." is used, the number of present partners, members or shareholders
shall be greater than the number of names in the firm name;
 (4) Such application includes a list of the location of all offices
within this state, including the names of the persons in charge of such
offices; and
 (5) Such application includes a list of all states in which the firm
has applied for or holds registrations, licenses, or permits as a public
accounting firm and a list of any past denial, revocation, or suspension
of a license, registration or permit by any other state or jurisdiction
within the last three years.
 c. In addition to authority granted under any other provision of law,
the board of regents may revoke such registration or take other action
pursuant to a consent order or surrender of registration in accordance
with this title and the rules of the board of regents, in the same
manner and to the same extent as is provided with respect to individuals
licensed pursuant to this article, or pursuant to a settlement in which
the firm neither admits nor denies the allegations of professional
misconduct, or after a hearing conducted in accordance with the
provisions of section sixty-five hundred ten of this title upon proof:
 (1) That the registration was obtained by either misrepresentation or
suppression of any material fact;
 (2) That the license or authorization to practice of any sole
proprietor, partner of a partnership or limited liability partnership,
member of a limited liability company or shareholder of a professional
service corporation is suspended, annulled or revoked in any
jurisdiction;
 (3) That any sole proprietor, partner of a partnership or limited
liability partnership, member of a limited liability company or
shareholder of a professional service corporation in such firm is or has
been engaged in the practice of public accountancy in this state who is
not licensed or otherwise authorized to practice in this state;
 (4) That the firm failed to file the written notification required
pursuant to paragraph e of this subdivision;
 (5) That the firm failed to undergo a peer review of its attest
services pursuant to section seventy-four hundred ten of this article at
least once every three years; or
 (6) That the firm has engaged in professional misconduct pursuant to
section sixty-five hundred nine of this title.
 d. Personal service on a sole proprietor, any general partner of a
partnership or limited liability partnership, member of a limited
liability company or shareholder of a professional service corporation
licensed in this state of a notice of a hearing to revoke the
registration of, or take other disciplinary action against a firm
registered hereunder shall be deemed service on the firm.
 e. A firm registered to practice pursuant to this section shall file
with the department annually on or before the anniversary of the date of
the firm's first registration written notification of:
 (1) Any admission of a partner, member or shareholder,
 (2) Any resignation, termination, retirement or death of a partner,
member or shareholder,
 (3) Any termination of a firm,
 (4) Any change in the number or location of offices within this state
and any change in the identity of the persons in charge of such offices,
or
 (5) Any occurrence of any event or events which would eliminate as to
such firm conformity with the applicable requirements of this section.
 f. The commissioner shall establish in regulations a registration
process for certified public accountancy firms and public accountancy
firms, including the imposition of application and registration fees and
procedures to suspend or revoke a registration or take other
disciplinary action for cause.
 g. Firms shall register triennially.
 h. An individual licensee or individual practicing under subdivision
two of section seventy-four hundred six of this article who signs or
authorizes someone to sign the accountant's report on the financial
statements on behalf of a firm shall meet the competency requirements
set out in the professional standards for such services, as recognized
in subdivision one of section seventy-four hundred one-a of this
article, and as set out in the rules of the board of regents.
 4. Any person shall be guilty of a class A misdemeanor who shall use,
in connection with the practice of public accountancy, or in any manner
tending to imply that he or she is an independent accountant or auditor,
the designations "chartered accountant", "certified accountant", "expert
accountant", "certified tax accountant", "tax accountant", "enrolled
accountant", "enrolled public accountant", "registered accountant",
"licensed accountant", "incorporated accountant", "registered public
accountant", "licensed public accountant", or any abbreviation thereof,
or the letters "C.A.", "E.A.", "C.T.A.", "T.A.", "E.P.A.", "R.A.",
"L.A.", "I.A.", "P.A.", "R.P.A.", or, "L.P.A.", except as provided
elsewhere in this article, or any other designation tending to imply
that he or she has expert knowledge in accounting or auditing. The title
"enrolled agent" or the designation "E.A." may only be used by
individuals so designated by the United States Internal Revenue Service.
 5. An individual not licensed as a certified public accountant or
public accountant or otherwise authorized to practice public
accountancy, or an entity not required to register under this section
may prepare a financial statement so long as it is not accompanied by
any statement, report, or wording indicating such individual is a
certified public accountant or public accountant or that such entity is
registered to practice public accountancy under this article. Such
non-licensed individuals and non-registered entities shall include the
following written language when preparing financial statements:
 a. "(I, We) have prepared the accompanying financial statement(s) of
(name of business or organization) as of the (time period) and for the
(period) then ended. This presentation is limited to preparing, in the
form of a financial statement(s), information that is the representation
of (name of business or organization)"; and
 b. "(I, We) have not audited or reviewed the accompanying financial
statement(s) and accordingly do not express an opinion or any other form
of assurance on them."
 § 7409. Mandatory continuing education. 1. a. Each certified public
accountant and public accountant required under article one hundred
thirty of this title to register triennially with the department to
practice in the state shall comply with the provisions of the mandatory
continuing education requirements except as set forth in paragraphs (b)
and (c) of this subdivision. Such certified public accountants and
public accountants who do not satisfy the mandatory continuing education
requirements shall not practice until they have met such requirements,
they have paid all applicable fees, and they have been issued a
registration or conditional registration certificate.
 b. In accordance with the intent of this section, adjustments to the
mandatory continuing education requirement may be granted by the
department for reasons of health certified by a physician, for extended
active duty with armed forces of the United States, or for other good
cause acceptable to the department which may prevent compliance.
 c. Certified public accountants or public accountants not engaged in
practice as defined in section seventy-four hundred one of this article,
shall be exempt from the mandatory continuing education requirement upon
the filing of a written statement with the department declaring such
status pursuant to subdivision four of section sixty-five hundred two of
this title. Any certified public accountant or public accountant who
resumes practice during the triennial registration period shall notify
the department prior to resuming practice and shall pay the current
mandatory continuing education fee and shall meet such mandatory
continuing education requirements as shall be prescribed by regulations
of the commissioner.
 2. a. During each year of the triennial registration period beginning
September first, nineteen hundred ninety and ending September first,
nineteen hundred ninety-three and each registration period thereafter
but ending on the period that ends on December thirty-first, two
thousand ten, an applicant for registration shall have the option of:
(1) completing a minimum of forty contact hours of acceptable formal
continuing education in recognized areas of study, or (2) completing a
minimum of twenty-four contact hours of acceptable formal continuing
education concentrated in any one of the following three subject areas:
auditing, accounting, or taxation.
 b. For applicants whose triennial registration date occurs on or after
January first, two thousand nine, for each calendar year beginning with
the two thousand nine calendar year, an applicant for registration shall
have the option of (1) completing a minimum of forty contact hours of
acceptable formal continuing education in recognized areas of study
pursuant to subdivision four of this section, or (2) completing a
minimum of twenty-four contact hours of acceptable formal continuing
education concentrated in any one of the recognized areas of study
pursuant to subdivision four of this section; provided, however, that
any continuing education contact hours earned between September first,
two thousand eight and December thirty-first, two thousand eight may be
credited toward the minimum contact hours required for the calendar year
beginning January first, two thousand nine.
 c. A certified public accountant or public accountant who has not
satisfied the mandatory continuing education requirements shall not be
issued a triennial registration certificate by the department and shall
not practice unless and until a registration or conditional registration
certificate is issued as provided in subdivision three of this section.
No hourly credits may be transferred from one year to a subsequent year
except as provided in paragraph b of this subdivision. The individual
certified public accountant or public accountant shall determine the
selection of courses or programs of study pursuant to subdivision four
of this section.
 3. The department, in its discretion, may issue a conditional
registration to a certified public accountant or public accountant who
fails to meet the continuing education requirements established in
subdivision two of this section but who agrees to make up any
deficiencies and take any additional education which the department may
require. The fee for such a conditional registration shall be the same
as, and in addition to, the fee for the triennial registration. The
duration of such conditional registration shall be determined by the
department. Any certified public accountant or public accountant who is
notified of the denial of registration for failure to submit evidence,
satisfactory to the department, of required continuing education and who
practices public accountancy without such registration, may be subject
to disciplinary proceedings pursuant to section sixty-five hundred ten
of this title.
 4. As used in subdivision two of this section, "acceptable formal
continuing education" shall mean formal programs of learning which
contribute to the growth in the professional knowledge and professional
competence of the licensee which meet the standards prescribed by
regulations of the commissioner. Recognized areas of study shall include
but not be limited to: accounting, attest, auditing, taxation, advisory
services, specialized knowledge and applications related to specialized
industries, and such other areas appropriately related to the practice
of accounting as may be acceptable to the department. To fulfill the
mandatory continuing education requirement, programs must be taken from
sponsors approved by the department, pursuant to the regulations of the
commissioner.
 5. The mandatory continuing education fee shall be determined by the
regents, shall be payable on or before the first day of each triennial
registration period, and shall be paid in addition to the triennial
registration fee required by section seventy-four hundred four of this
article.
 § 7410. Mandatory peer review. 1. The department shall require as a
condition to renewal of registrations under section seventy-four hundred
eight of this article, that unless otherwise exempted by the department,
applicants for firm registrations, undergo, no more frequently than once
every three years, except pursuant to a disciplinary action brought
under section seventy-four hundred eight of this article, peer reviews
of the firm's attest services conducted in such manner as the
commissioner shall specify in regulations, and such review shall include
a verification that individuals in the firm who are responsible for
supervising attest services sign or authorize someone to sign the
accountant's report on the financial statements on behalf of the firm
meet the competency requirements set out in the professional standards
for such services, provided that any such regulations:
 a. shall include reasonable provisions for compliance by an applicant
for firm registration showing that it has, within the preceding three
years, undergone a peer review in this state or a peer review in another
state that is a satisfactory equivalent to peer review required pursuant
to this section;
 b. shall require, with respect to any organization administering peer
review programs contemplated by paragraph a of this subdivision, that it
be subject to evaluations by the department or its designee, to
periodically assess the effectiveness of the peer review program under
its charge;
 c. shall require the peer review to be conducted by reviewers
acceptable to the department in accordance with the commissioner's
regulations; and
 d. may require with respect to peer reviews contemplated by paragraph
a of this subdivision that firms undergoing peer reviews and
organizations administering peer review programs timely remit such peer
review reports to the state board for public accountancy and such
reports shall be maintained by the board in a manner consistent with
subdivision two of this section.
 2. Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the reports
submitted in accordance with subdivision one of this section shall be
confidential and shall not constitute a public record and shall not be
subject to disclosure under articles six and six-A of the public
officers law. However, when any such report is admitted into evidence in
a hearing held by the department, it shall then be a public record
subject to disclosure under articles six and six-A of the public
officers law.
 3. Notwithstanding any provision of law or regulation to the contrary,
a firm that performs attest services for any New York state or municipal
department, board, bureau, division, commission, committee, public
authority, public corporation, council, office, or other governmental
entity performing a governmental or proprietary function for New York
state or any one or more municipalities thereof, or performs attest
services specifically required to be performed pursuant to New York
state law, or performs attest services for any federal governmental
entity pursuant to federal law, shall be in conformity with the
requirements pursuant to the government auditing standards of the
comptroller general of the United States.
 ARTICLE 151
 SHORTHAND REPORTING
Section 7500. Introduction.
 7501. Definition of practice as a certified shorthand reporter.
 7502. Use of title "certified shorthand reporter".
 7503. State board for certified shorthand reporting.
 7504. Requirements for a professional license.
 § 7500. Introduction. This article applies to the use of the title
"certified shorthand reporter". The general provisions for all
professions contained in article one hundred thirty of this title apply
to this article.
 § 7501. Definition of practice as a certified shorthand reporter. The
practice as a certified shorthand reporter is defined as engaging, under
such title, in making by a written system of either manual shorthand or
machine shorthand, a verbatim record of any oral court proceeding,
disposition, hearing or proceeding before any grand jury, referee,
commissioner, or arbitrator, or of any convention, deliberative
assembly, or meeting of like character.
 § 7502. Use of title "certified shorthand reporter". Only a person
licensed under this article shall be authorized to use the title
"certified shorthand reporter".
 § 7503. State board for certified shorthand reporting. A state board
for certified shorthand reporting shall be appointed by the board of
regents on recommendation of the commissioner for the purpose of
assisting the board of regents and the department on matters of
professional licensing and professional conduct in accordance with
section sixty-five hundred eight of this title. The board shall be
composed of not less than five shorthand reporters licensed in this
state. An executive secretary to the board shall be appointed by the
board of regents on recommendation of the commissioner.
 § 7504. Requirements for a professional license. 1. To qualify for a
license as a certified shorthand reporter, an applicant shall fulfill
the following requirements:
 (1) Application: file an application with the department;
 (2) Education: have received an education, including high school
graduation and completion of a program in shorthand reporting, in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 (3) Experience: have experience satisfactory to the board and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 (4) Examination: pass an examination satisfactory to the board and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 (5) Age: be at least twenty-one years of age;
 (6) Citizenship or immigration status: be a United States citizen or a
noncitizen lawfully admitted for permanent residence in the United
States;
 (7) Character: be of good moral character as determined by the
department; and
 (8) Fees: pay a fee of one hundred fifteen dollars to the department
for admission to a department conducted examination and for an initial
license, a fee of forty-five dollars for each reexamination, a fee of
fifty dollars for an initial license for persons not requiring admission
to a department conducted examination, and a fee of fifty dollars for
each triennial registration period.
 2. In lieu of professional qualifications specified in subparagraphs
(2) and (3) of subdivision one of this section, five years of experience
in shorthand reporting satisfactory to the board may be accepted by the
department.
 ARTICLE 153
 PSYCHOLOGY
Section 7600. Introduction.
 7601. Practice of psychology and use of the title
 "psychologist".
 7601-a. Definition of the practice of psychology.
 7602. State board for psychology.
 7603. Requirements for a professional license.
 7604. Limited permits.
 7605. Exempt persons.
 7606. Prohibitions.
 7607. Mandatory continuing education.
 § 7600. Introduction. This article applies to the profession and
practice of psychology and to the use of the title "psychologist". The
general provisions for all professions contained in article one hundred
thirty of this title apply to this article.
 § 7601. Practice of psychology and use of the title "psychologist".
Only a person licensed or otherwise authorized under this article shall
be authorized to practice psychology or to use the title "psychologist"
or to describe his or her services by use of the words "psychologist",
"psychology" or "psychological" in connection with his or her practice.
 § 7601-a. Definition of the practice of psychology. 1. The practice of
psychology is the observation, description, evaluation, interpretation,
and modification of behavior for the purpose of preventing or
eliminating symptomatic, maladaptive or undesired behavior; enhancing
interpersonal relationships, personal, group or organizational
effectiveness and work and/or life adjustment; and improving behavioral
health and/or mental health. The practice includes, but is not limited
to psychological (including neuropsychological) testing and counseling;
psychoanalysis; psychotherapy; the diagnosis and treatment of mental,
nervous, emotional, cognitive or behavioral disorders, disabilities,
ailments or illnesses, alcoholism, substance abuse, disorders of habit
or conduct, the psychological aspects of physical illness, accident,
injury or disability, psychological aspects of learning (including
learning disorders); and the use of accepted classification systems.
 2. The term "diagnosis and treatment" means the appropriate
psychological diagnosis and the ordering or providing of treatment
according to need. Treatment includes, but is not limited to counseling,
psychotherapy, marital or family therapy, psychoanalysis, and other
psychological interventions, including verbal, behavioral, or other
appropriate means as defined in regulations promulgated by the
commissioner.
 § 7602. State board for psychology. A state board for psychology
shall be appointed by the board of regents on recommendation of the
commissioner for the purpose of assisting the board of regents and the
department on matters of professional licensing and professional conduct
in accordance with section sixty-five hundred eight of this title. The
board shall be composed of not less than eleven psychologists licensed
in this state. An executive secretary to the board shall be appointed
by the board of regents upon the recommendation of the commissioner and
shall be a psychologist, licensed in this state.
 § 7603. Requirements for a professional license. To qualify for a
license as a psychologist, an applicant shall fulfill the following
requirements:
 (1) Application: file an application with the department;
 (2) Education: have received an education, including a doctoral degree
in psychology, granted on the basis of completion of a program of
psychology registered with the department or the substantial equivalent
thereof, in accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 (3) Experience: have two years of supervised employment or engagement
in appropriate psychology activities satisfactory to the board and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations. Satisfactory experience
obtained in an entity operating pursuant to a waiver issued by the
department pursuant to section sixty-five hundred three-a of this title
may be accepted by the department, notwithstanding that such experience
may have been obtained prior to the effective date of such section
sixty-five hundred three-a and/or prior to the entity having obtained a
waiver. The department may, for good cause shown, accept satisfactory
experience that was obtained in a setting that would have been eligible
for a waiver but which has not obtained a waiver with the department or
experience that was obtained in good faith by the applicant under the
belief that appropriate authorization had been obtained for the
experience, provided that such experience meets all other requirements
for acceptable experience;
 (4) Examination: pass an examination satisfactory to the board and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 (5) Age: be at least twenty-one years of age;
 (6) Citizenship: meet no requirement as to United States citizenship;
 (7) Character: be of good moral character as determined by the
department; and
 (8) Fees: pay a fee of one hundred seventy dollars to the department
for admission to a department conducted examination and for an initial
license, a fee of eighty-five dollars for each reexamination, a fee of
one hundred fifteen dollars for an initial license for persons not
requiring admission to a department conducted examination, and a fee of
one hundred fifty-five dollars for each triennial registration period.
 § 7604. Limited permits. 1. On recommendation of the board, the
department may issue a limited permit to practice as psychologist to an
applicant holding a certificate or license to practice psychology issued
by another state or country, and whose qualifications have been approved
for admission to the examination for a license as psychologist and who
has resided in this state for a period of not more than six months prior
to the filing of such application. The limited permit shall be valid for
a period of not more than twelve months, or until ten days after
notification to the applicant of failure of the professional licensing
examination or until the results of a licensing examination for which
the applicant is eligible are officially released, whichever comes
first.
 1-a. On the recommendation of the board, the department may issue a
limited permit valid for an aggregate of three years to a person who has
completed the doctoral dissertation and other doctoral degree
requirements and is gaining supervised experience to meet the experience
requirements for licensure. This permit may be re-issued for a maximum
period of one year for good cause, as determined by the department.
 2. Fees. The fee for each limited permit shall be seventy dollars.
 § 7605. Exempt persons. Nothing in this article shall be construed to
affect or prevent:
 * 1. The activities, services, and use of the title of psychologist,
or any derivation thereof, on the part of a person in the employ of a
federal, state, county or municipal agency, or other political
subdivision, or a chartered elementary or secondary school or
degree-granting educational institution insofar as such activities and
services are a part of the duties of such salaried position; or on the
part of a person in the employ as a certified school psychologist on a
full-time or part-time salary basis, which may include on an hourly,
weekly, or monthly basis, or on a fee for evaluation services basis
provided that such person employed as a certified school psychologist is
employed by and under the dominion and control of a preschool special
education program approved pursuant to paragraph b of subdivision nine
or subdivision nine-a of section forty-four hundred ten of this chapter
to provide activities, services and to use the title "certified school
psychologist", so long as this shall not be construed to permit the use
of the title "licensed psychologist", to students enrolled in such
approved program or to conduct a multidisciplinary evaluation of a
preschool child having or suspected of having a disability, where each
such preschool special education program is authorized by paragraph a of
subdivision six of section sixty-five hundred three-b of this title in
the course of their employment. Nothing in this subdivision shall be
construed to authorize a certified school psychologist or group of such
school psychologists to engage in independent practice or practice
outside of an employment relationship.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2026
 * 1. The activities, services, and use of the title of psychologist,
or any derivation thereof, on the part of a person in the employ of a
federal, state, county or municipal agency, or other political
subdivision, or a chartered elementary or secondary school or
degree-granting educational institution insofar as such activities and
services are a part of the duties of his salaried position.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2026
 2. The activities and services required of a student, intern, or
resident in psychology, pursuing a course of study leading to a doctoral
degree in psychology in an institution approved by the department,
provided that such activities and services constitute a part of his
supervised course of study in psychology. Such persons shall be
designated by title as "psychological intern", "psychological trainee"
or other such title which clearly indicates his training status.
 3. The practice, conduct, activities or services by any person
licensed or otherwise authorized to practice medicine within the state
pursuant to article one hundred thirty-one of this title or by any
person registered to perform services as a physician assistant within
the state pursuant to article one hundred thirty-one-B of this title.
 4. The practice, conduct, activities, or services by any person
licensed or otherwise authorized to practice nursing as a registered
professional nurse or nurse practitioner within the state pursuant to
article one hundred thirty-nine of this title or by any person licensed
or otherwise authorized to practice social work within the state
pursuant to article one hundred fifty-four of this title, or by any
person licensed or otherwise authorized to practice mental health
counseling, marriage and family therapy, creative arts therapy, or
psychoanalysis within the state pursuant to article one hundred
sixty-three of this title, or any person licensed or otherwise
authorized to practice applied behavior analysis within the state
pursuant to article one hundred sixty-seven of this title or any
individual who is credentialed under any law, including attorneys, rape
crisis counselors, certified alcoholism counselors, and certified
substance abuse counselors from providing mental health services within
their respective established authorities.
 5. The conduct, activities, or services of any member of the clergy or
Christian Science practitioner, in the provision of pastoral counseling
services within the context of his or her ministerial charge or
obligation.
 6. The conduct, activities, or services of individuals, churches,
schools, teachers, organizations, or not-for-profit businesses in
providing instruction, advice, support, encouragement, or information to
individuals, families, and relational groups.
 7. The practice, conduct, activities, or services of an occupational
therapist from performing work consistent with article one hundred
fifty-six of this title.
 8. The representation as a psychologist and the rendering of services
as such in this state for a temporary period of a person who resides
outside the state of New York and who engages in practice as a
psychologist and conducts the major part of his practice as such outside
this state, provided such person has filed with the department evidence
that he has been licensed or certified in another state or has been
admitted to the examination in this state pursuant to section
seventy-six hundred three of this article. Such temporary period shall
not exceed ten consecutive business days in any period of ninety
consecutive days or in the aggregate exceed more than fifteen business
days in any such ninety-day period.
 9. The provision of psychotherapy as defined in subdivision two of
section eighty-four hundred one of this title to the extent permissible
within the scope of practice of psychology, by any not-for-profit
corporation or education corporation providing services within the state
of New York and operating under a waiver pursuant to section sixty-five
hundred three-a of this title, provided that such entities offering
psychology services shall only provide such services through an
individual appropriately licensed or otherwise authorized to provide
such services or a professional entity authorized by law to provide such
services.
 10. (a) A person without a license from: performing assessments
including but not limited to basic information collection, gathering of
demographic data, and informal observations, screening and referral used
for general eligibility for a program or service and determining the
functional status of an individual for the purpose of determining need
for services; advising individuals regarding the appropriateness of
benefits they are eligible for; providing general advice and guidance
and assisting individuals or groups with difficult day to day problems
such as finding employment, locating sources of assistance, and
organizing community groups to work on a specific problem; providing
peer services; selecting for suitability and providing substance abuse
treatment services or group re-entry services to incarcerated
individuals in state correctional facilities; or providing substance
abuse treatment services or re-entry services to incarcerated
individuals in local correctional facilities.
 (b) A person without a license from creating, developing or
implementing a service plan or recovery plan that is not a behavioral
health diagnosis or treatment plan. Such service or recovery plans shall
include, but are not limited to, coordinating, evaluating or determining
the need for, or the provision of the following services: job training
and employability; housing; homeless services and shelters for homeless
individuals and families; refugee services; residential, day or
community habilitation services; general public assistance; in home
services and supports or home-delivered meals; recovery supports; adult
or child protective services including investigations; detention as
defined in section five hundred two of the executive law; prevention and
residential services for victims of domestic violence; services for
runaway and homeless youth; foster care, adoption, preventive services
or services in accordance with an approved plan pursuant to section four
hundred four of the social services law, including, adoption and foster
home studies and assessments, family service plans, transition plans,
permanency planning activities, and case planning or case management as
such terms are defined in the regulations of the office of children and
family services; residential rehabilitation; home and community based
services; and de-escalation techniques, peer services or skill
development.
 (c)(i) A person without a license from participating as a member of a
multi-disciplinary team to assist in the development of or
implementation of a behavioral health services or treatment plan;
provided that such team shall include one or more professionals licensed
under this article or articles one hundred thirty-one, one hundred
thirty-nine, one hundred fifty-four or one hundred sixty-three of this
chapter; and provided, further, that the activities performed by members
of the team shall be consistent with the scope of practice for each team
member licensed or authorized under title VIII of this chapter, and
those who are not so authorized may not engage in the following
restricted practices: the diagnosis of mental, emotional, behavioral,
addictive and developmental disorders and disabilities; patient
assessment and evaluating; the provision of psychotherapeutic treatment;
the provision of treatment other than psychotherapeutic treatment; or
independently developing and implementing assessment-based treatment
plans as defined in section seventy-seven hundred one of this title.
 (ii) For the purposes of this paragraph, "assist" shall include, but
not be limited to, the provision or performance of the following tasks,
services, or functions by an individual who has obtained the training
and experience required by the applicable state oversight agency to
perform such task, service or function in facilities or programs
operating pursuant to article nineteen-G of the executive law; articles
seven, sixteen, thirty-one or thirty-two of the mental hygiene law; or
title three of article seven of the social services law:
 (1) helping an individual with the completion of forms or
questionnaires;
 (2) reviewing existing case records and collecting background
information about an individual which may be used by the licensed
professional or multi-disciplinary team;
 (3) gathering and reporting information about previous behavioral
health interventions, hospitalizations, documented diagnosis, or prior
treatment for review by the licensed professional and multi-disciplinary
team;
 (4) discussing with the individual his or her situation, needs,
concerns, and thoughts in order to help identify services that support
the individual's goals, independence, and quality of life;
 (5) providing advice, information, and assistance to individuals and
family members to identify needs and available resources in the
community to help meet the needs of the individual or family member;
 (6) engaging in immediate and long-term problem solving, engaging in
the development of social skills, or providing general help in areas
including, but not limited to, housing, employment, child care,
parenting, community based services, and finances;
 (7) distributing paper copies of self-administered tests for the
individual to complete when such tests do not require the observation
and judgment of a licensed professional;
 (8) monitoring treatment by the collection of written and/or
observational data in accordance with the treatment plan and providing
verbal or written reports to the multi-disciplinary team;
 (9) identifying gaps in services and coordinating access to or
arranging services for individuals such as home care, community based
services, housing, employment, transportation, child care, vocational
training, or health care;
 (10) offering education programs that provide information about
disease identification and recommended treatments that may be provided,
and how to access such treatment;
 (11) reporting on behavior, actions, and responses to treatment by
collecting written and/or observational data as part of a
multi-disciplinary team;
 (12) using de-escalation techniques consistent with appropriate
training;
 (13) performing assessments using standardized, structured interview
tools or instruments;
 (14) directly delivering services outlined in the service plan that
are not clinical in nature but have been tailored to an individual based
on any diagnoses such individual may have received from a licensed
professional; and
 (15) advocating with educational, judicial or other systems to protect
an individual's rights and access to appropriate services.
 (d) Provided, further, that nothing in this subdivision shall be
construed as requiring a license for any particular activity or function
based solely on the fact that the activity or function is not listed in
this subdivision.
 11. The conduct, activities or services of a technician to administer
and score standardized objective (non-projective) psychological or
neuropsychological tests which have specific predetermined and
manualized administrative procedures which entail observing and
describing test behavior and test responses, and which do not require
evaluation, interpretation or other judgments; provided, however, that
such technician shall: (i) hold no less than a Bachelor's degree in
psychology or a related field; (ii) undergo a process of regular
training by a licensed psychologist, which shall include, but not be
limited to a minimum of eighty total hours of (a) professional ethics,
(b) studying and mastering information from test manuals, and (c) direct
observation of a licensed psychologist or trained technician
administering and scoring tests, in addition to a minimum of forty total
hours of administering and scoring tests in the presence of a licensed
psychologist or trained technician, provided such interaction with the
licensed psychologist equals or exceeds fifty percent of the total
training time; (iii) be under the direct and ongoing supervision of a
licensed psychologist in no greater than a 3:1 ratio or the part time
equivalent thereto; (iv) not be employed within a school setting and (v)
not select tests, analyze patient data or communicate results to
patients. The supervising licensed psychologist must submit, pursuant to
a form to be prescribed and developed within ninety days of the
effective date of this subdivision by the department, a sworn statement
detailing compliance with the above requirements. The licensed
psychologist's use of such individual pursuant to the terms of this
subdivision shall be undertaken only with special care and professional
judgment in order to ensure the safety and well-being of the patient
considering the severity of the symptoms, the age of the patient and the
length of the examination process, and shall include appropriate ongoing
contact with the licensed psychologist at appropriate intervals. Such
use shall be subject to the full disciplinary and regulatory authority
of the board of regents and the department pursuant to this title. The
licensed psychologist must notify the patient or designated health care
surrogate that the licensed psychologist may utilize the services of a
technician to administer certain exams, and must provide the patient or
designated health care surrogate the opportunity to object to the
licensed psychologist's plan to utilize a technician.
 12. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary,
nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit or limit the
activities or services provided under this article by any person who is
employed or who commences employment in a program or service operated,
regulated, funded, or approved by the department of mental hygiene, the
office of children and family services, or a local governmental unit as
that term is defined in section 41.03 of the mental hygiene law or a
social services district as defined in section sixty-one of the social
services law on or before two years from the date that the regulations
issued in accordance with section six of part Y of chapter fifty-seven
of the laws of two thousand eighteen appear in the state register or are
adopted, whichever is later. Such prohibitions or limitations shall not
apply to such employees for as long as they remain employed by such
programs or services and whether they remain employed by the same or
other employers providing such programs or services. Provided, however,
that any person who commences employment in such program or service
after such date and performs services that are restricted under this
article shall be appropriately licensed or authorized under this
article. Each state oversight agency shall create and maintain a process
to verify employment history of individuals exempt under this
subdivision.
 13. The activities or services provided by a person with a master's
level degree in psychology or its equivalent, working under the
supervision of a licensed psychologist in a program or service operated,
regulated, funded, or approved by the department of mental hygiene, the
office of children and family services, or a local government unit as
that term is defined in section 41.03 of the mental hygiene law or a
social services district as defined in section sixty-one of the social
services law.
 § 7606. Prohibitions. Any individual whose license or authority to
practice derives from the provisions of this article shall be prohibited
from:
 1. prescribing or administering drugs as defined in this chapter as a
treatment, therapy, or professional service in the practice of his or
her profession; or
 2. using invasive procedures as a treatment, therapy, or professional
service in the practice of his or her profession. For purposes of this
subdivision, "invasive procedure" means any procedure in which human
tissue is cut, altered, or otherwise infiltrated by mechanical or other
means. Invasive procedure includes surgery, lasers, ionizing radiation,
therapeutic ultrasound, or electroconvulsive therapy.
 § 7607. Mandatory continuing education. 1. (a) Each psychologist
required under this article to register triennially with the department
to practice in this state, shall comply with the provisions for
mandatory continuing education prescribed in subdivision two of this
section, except as set forth in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this
subdivision. Psychologists who do not satisfy the mandatory continuing
education requirements shall not practice until they have met such
requirements and they have been issued a registration certificate,
except that a psychologist may practice without having met such
requirements if he or she is issued a conditional registration
certificate pursuant to subdivision three of this section.
 (b) Each psychologist shall be exempt from the mandatory continuing
education requirements for the triennial registration period during
which they are first licensed. In accordance with the intent of this
section, adjustment to the mandatory continuing education requirement
may be granted by the department for reasons of health that are
certified by an appropriate health care professional, for extended
active duty with the armed forces of the United States, or for other
good cause acceptable to the department which may prevent compliance.
 (c) A psychologist not engaged in practice, as determined by the
department, shall be exempt from the mandatory continuing education
requirement upon the filing of a statement with the department declaring
such status. Any licensee who returns to the practice of psychology
during the triennial registration period shall notify the department
prior to reentering the profession and shall meet such continuing
education requirements as shall be prescribed by regulations of the
commissioner.
 2. During each triennial registration period, an applicant for
registration as a psychologist shall complete a minimum of thirty-six
hours of acceptable learning activities, a minimum of three hours of
which shall be course work in the area of professional ethics, including
the laws, rules and regulations for practice in New York. Any
psychologist whose first registration date following the effective date
of this section occurs less than three years from such effective date,
but on or after January first, two thousand twenty-one, shall complete
continuing education hours on a prorated basis at the rate of one hour
per month for the period beginning January first, two thousand
twenty-one up to the first registration date thereafter. A psychologist
who has not satisfied the mandatory continuing education requirement
shall not be issued a triennial registration certificate by the
department and shall not practice unless and until a conditional
registration is issued as provided for in subdivision three of this
section. Continuing education hours taken during one triennium may not
be transferred to the subsequent triennium.
 3. (a) The department, in its discretion, may issue a conditional
registration to a psychologist who fails to meet the continuing
education requirements established in subdivision two of this section,
but who agrees to make up any deficiencies and complete any additional
education which the department may require. The fee for such a
conditional registration shall be the same as, and in addition to, the
fee for the triennial registration. The duration of such conditional
registration shall be determined by the department, but shall not exceed
one year. Any psychologist who is notified of the denial of registration
for failure to submit evidence, satisfactory to the department, of
required continuing education and who practices without such
registration may be subject to disciplinary proceedings pursuant to
section sixty-five hundred ten of this title.
 (b) For purposes of this section:
 (i) "acceptable learning activities" shall include, but not be limited
to, formal courses of learning which contribute to professional practice
in psychology and/or self-study activities; independent study; formal
mentoring activities; publication in professional journals; or lectures,
which meet the standards prescribed by regulations of the commissioner;
and
 (ii) "formal courses of learning" shall include, but not be limited
to, collegiate level credit and non-credit courses, professional
development programs and technical sessions offered by national, state,
and local professional associations and other organizations acceptable
to the department, and any other organized educational and technical
programs acceptable to the department. Formal courses must be taken from
a sponsor approved by the department, based upon an application and fee,
pursuant to the regulations of the commissioner.
 (c) The department may, in its discretion and as needed to contribute
to the health and welfare of the public, require the completion of
continuing education credits in specific subjects to fulfill this
mandatory continuing education requirement.
 (d) Psychologists shall maintain adequate documentation of completion
of acceptable continuing education credits and shall provide such
documentation at the request of the department. Failure to provide such
documentation upon the request of the department shall be an act of
misconduct subject to disciplinary proceedings pursuant to section
sixty-five hundred ten of this title.
 (e) The mandatory continuing education fee shall be determined by the
department. Such fee shall be payable on or before the first day of each
triennial registration period, and shall be paid in addition to the
triennial registration fee required by subdivision eight of section
seventy-six hundred three of this article.
 ARTICLE 154
 SOCIAL WORK
Section 7700. Introduction.
 7701. Definitions.
 7702. Authorized practice and the use of the titles "licensed
 master social worker" and "licensed clinical social
 worker".
 7703. State board for social work.
 7704. Requirements for a license.
 7705. Limited permits.
 7706. Exempt persons.
 7707. Special provisions.
 7708. Boundaries of professional practice.
 7709. Hospital privileges.
 7710. Mandatory continuing education.
 § 7700. Introduction. This article applies to the profession and
practice of social work, the practice of licensed master social work and
the practice of clinical social work, and to the use of the titles
"licensed master social worker", and "licensed clinical social worker".
The general provisions for all professions contained in article one
hundred thirty of this title apply to this article.
 § 7701. Definitions. 1. Practice of licensed master social work.
 (a) The practice of licensed master social work shall mean the
professional application of social work theory, principles, and the
methods to prevent, assess, evaluate, formulate and implement a plan of
action based on client needs and strengths, and intervene to address
mental, social, emotional, behavioral, developmental, and addictive
disorders, conditions and disabilities, and of the psychosocial aspects
of illness and injury experienced by individuals, couples, families,
groups, communities, organizations, and society.
 (b) Licensed master social workers engage in the administration of
tests and measures of psychosocial functioning, social work advocacy,
case management, counseling, consultation, research, administration and
management, and teaching.
 (c) Licensed master social workers provide all forms of supervision
other than supervision of the practice of licensed clinical social work
as defined in subdivision two of this section.
 (d) Licensed master social workers practice licensed clinical social
work in facility settings or other supervised settings approved by the
department under supervision in accordance with the commissioner's
regulations.
 2. Practice of clinical social work. (a) The practice of clinical
social work encompasses the scope of practice of licensed master social
work and, in addition, includes the diagnosis of mental, emotional,
behavioral, addictive and developmental disorders and disabilities and
of the psychosocial aspects of illness, injury, disability and
impairment undertaken within a psychosocial framework; administration
and interpretation of tests and measures of psychosocial functioning;
development and implementation of appropriate assessment-based treatment
plans; and the provision of crisis oriented psychotherapy and brief,
short-term and long-term psychotherapy and psychotherapeutic treatment
to individuals, couples, families and groups, habilitation,
psychoanalysis and behavior therapy; all undertaken for the purpose of
preventing, assessing, treating, ameliorating and resolving psychosocial
dysfunction with the goal of maintaining and enhancing the mental,
emotional, behavioral, and social functioning and well-being of
individuals, couples, families, small groups, organizations, communities
and society.
 (b) Diagnosis in the context of licensed clinical social work practice
is the process of distinguishing, beyond general social work assessment,
between similar mental, emotional, behavioral, developmental and
addictive disorders, impairments and disabilities within a psychosocial
framework on the basis of their similar and unique characteristics
consistent with accepted classification systems.
 (c) Psychotherapy in the context of licensed clinical social work
practice is the use of verbal methods in interpersonal relationships
with the intent of assisting a person or persons to modify attitudes and
behavior which are intellectually, socially, or emotionally maladaptive.
 (d) Development of assessment-based treatment plans in the context of
licensed clinical social work practice refers to the development of an
integrated plan of prioritized interventions, that is based on the
diagnosis and psychosocial assessment of the client, to address mental,
emotional, behavioral, developmental and addictive disorders,
impairments and disabilities, reactions to illnesses, injuries,
disabilities and impairments, and social problems.
 § 7702. Authorized practice and the use of the titles "licensed master
social worker" and "licensed clinical social worker". 1. In addition to
the licensed social work services included in subdivisions one and two
of section seventy-seven hundred one of this article, licensed master
social workers and licensed clinical social workers may perform the
following social work functions that do not require a license under this
article, including but not limited to:
 (a) Serve as a community organizer, planner, or administrator for
social service programs in any setting.
 (b) Provide supervision and/or consultation to individuals, groups,
institutions and agencies.
 (c) Serve as a faculty member or instructor in an educational setting.
 (d) Plan and/or conduct research projects and program evaluation
studies.
 (e) Maintain familiarity with both professional and self-help systems
in the community in order to assist the client in those services when
necessary.
 (f) Provide advice and guidance and assist individuals or groups with
difficult day to day problems such as finding employment, locating
sources of assistance, and organizing community groups to work on a
specific problem.
 (g) Consult with other agencies on problems and cases served in common
and coordinating services among agencies or providing case management.
 (h) Conduct data gathering on social problems.
 (i) Serve as an advocate for those clients or groups of clients whose
needs are not being met by available programs or by a specific agency.
 (j) Assess, evaluate and formulate a plan of action based on client
need.
 (k) Provide training to community groups, agencies, and other
professionals.
 (l) Provide administrative supervision.
 (m) Provide peer services.
 (n) Collect basic information, gathering of demographic data, and
informal observations, screening and referral used for general
eligibility for a program or service and determining the functional
status of an individual for the purpose of determining the need for
services.
 2. Practice of "licensed master social work" and use of the title
"licensed master social worker" and designation "LMSW". (a) Only a
person licensed or exempt under this article shall practice "licensed
master social work" as defined in subdivision one of section
seventy-seven hundred one of this article.
 (b) Only a person licensed pursuant to subdivision one of section
seventy-seven hundred four of this article shall use the title "licensed
master social worker" or the designation "LMSW".
 3. Practice of "licensed clinical social work" and use of the title
"licensed clinical social worker" and designation "LCSW". (a) Only a
person licensed or exempt under this article shall practice "licensed
clinical social work" as defined in subdivision two of section
seventy-seven hundred one of this article.
 (b) Only a person licensed pursuant to subdivision two of section
seventy-seven hundred four of this article shall use the title "licensed
clinical social worker" or the designation "LCSW".
 § 7703. State board for social work. A state board for social work
shall be appointed by the board of regents on recommendation of the
commissioner for the purpose of assisting the board of regents and the
department on matters of professional licensing, practice, and conduct
in accordance with section sixty-five hundred eight of this title. The
board shall be composed of not less than twelve members, of which five
shall be licensed clinical social workers, five shall be licensed master
social workers and two members of the public. Members of the first board
need not be licensed prior to their appointment to the board. The terms
of the first appointed members shall be staggered so that four are
appointed for three years, four are appointed for four years, and four
are appointed for five years. An executive secretary to the board shall
be appointed by the board of regents on recommendation of the
commissioner and shall be licensed pursuant to this article.
 § 7704. Requirements for a license. 1. To qualify for a license as a
"licensed master social worker" an applicant shall fulfill the following
requirements:
 (a) Application: file an application with the department;
 (b) Education: have received an education, including a master's of
social work degree from a program registered by the department, or
determined by the department to be the substantial equivalent, in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 (c) Experience: meet no requirement as to experience;
 (d) Examination: pass an examination satisfactory to the board and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 (e) Age: be at least twenty-one years of age;
 (f) Character: be of good moral character as determined by the
department; and
 (g) Fees: pay a fee of one hundred fifteen dollars to the department
for an initial license, and a fee of one hundred fifty-five dollars for
each triennial registration period. An additional surcharge in the
amount of five dollars shall be paid with each triennial registration
fee and shall be used for the marketing and evaluation of the regents
licensed social worker loan forgiveness program established by section
six hundred five of this chapter.
 2. To qualify for a license as a "licensed clinical social worker", an
applicant shall fulfill the following requirements:
 (a) Application: file an application with the department;
 (b) Education: have received an education, including a master's of
social work degree from a program registered by the department, or
determined by the department to be the substantial equivalent, that
includes completion of a core curriculum which includes at least twelve
credit hours of clinical courses, in accordance with the commissioner's
regulations; a person who has received a master's, or equivalent degree
in social work, during which they did not complete a core curriculum
which includes clinical courses, may satisfy this requirement by
completing equivalent post-graduate clinical coursework, in accordance
with the commissioner's regulations;
 (c) Experience: have at least three years full-time supervised
post-graduate clinical social work experience in diagnosis,
psychotherapy, and assessment-based treatment plans, or its part-time
equivalent, obtained over a continuous period not to exceed six years,
under the supervision, satisfactory to the department, of a
psychiatrist, a licensed psychologist, or a licensed clinical social
worker in a facility setting or other supervised settings approved by
the department. Satisfactory experience obtained in an entity operating
under a waiver issued by the department pursuant to section sixty-five
hundred three-a of this title may be accepted by the department,
notwithstanding that such experience may have been obtained prior to the
effective date of such section sixty-five hundred three-a and/or prior
to the entity having obtained a waiver. The department may, for good
cause shown, accept satisfactory experience that was obtained in a
setting that would have been eligible for a waiver but which has not
obtained a waiver from the department or experience that was obtained in
good faith by the applicant under the belief that appropriate
authorization had been obtained for the experience, provided that such
experience meets all other requirements for acceptable experience;
 (d) Examination: pass an examination satisfactory to the board and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 (e) Age: be at least twenty-one years of age;
 (f) Character: be of good moral character as determined by the
department; and
 (g) Fees: pay a fee of one hundred fifteen dollars to the department
for an initial license and a fee of one hundred fifty-five dollars for
each triennial registration period.
 § 7705. Limited permits. 1. On recommendation of the board, the
department may issue a limited permit to practice licensed clinical
social work and use the title licensed clinical social worker, or to
practice licensed master social work and use the title licensed master
social worker to an applicant who has met all requirements for licensure
as a licensed master social worker or a licensed clinical social worker
except those relating to the examination and provided that the
individual is under the general supervision of a licensed master social
worker or a licensed clinical social worker, as determined by the
department. This limited permit shall be valid for a period of not more
than twelve months.
 2. The fee for each limited permit shall be seventy dollars.
 § 7706. Exempt persons. Nothing contained in this article shall be
construed to:
 1. Apply to the practice, conduct, activities, services or use of any
title by any person licensed or otherwise authorized to practice
medicine within the state pursuant to article one hundred thirty-one of
this title or by any person registered to perform services as a
physician assistant within the state pursuant to article one hundred
thirty-one-B of this title or by any person licensed or otherwise
authorized to practice psychology within this state pursuant to article
one hundred fifty-three of this title or by any person licensed or
otherwise authorized to practice nursing as a registered professional
nurse or nurse practitioner within this state pursuant to article one
hundred thirty-nine of this title or by any person licensed or otherwise
authorized to practice occupational therapy within this state pursuant
to article one hundred fifty-six of this title or by any person licensed
or otherwise authorized to practice mental health counseling, marriage
and family therapy, creative arts therapy, or psychoanalysis within the
state pursuant to article one hundred sixty-three of this title or by
any person licensed or otherwise authorized to practice applied behavior
analysis within the state pursuant to article one hundred sixty-seven of
this title; provided, however, that no physician, physician assistant,
registered professional nurse, nurse practitioner, psychologist,
occupational therapist, licensed mental health counselor, licensed
marriage and family therapist, licensed creative arts therapist,
licensed psychoanalyst, licensed behavior analyst or certified behavior
analyst assistant may use the titles "licensed clinical social worker"
or "licensed master social worker", unless licensed under this article.
 2. Prevent or prohibit an individual possessing a baccalaureate of
social work degree or its equivalent from the performance of activities
and services within the scope of practice of licensed master social work
as defined in paragraphs (a) and (b) of subdivision one of section
seventy-seven hundred one of this article under supervision by a
licensed master social worker, a licensed clinical social worker or in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations.
 3. Prevent or prohibit a licensed master social worker from the
performance of activities and services within the scope of practice of
licensed clinical social work as defined in subdivision two of section
seventy-seven hundred one of this article in a facility setting and
under supervision in accordance with the commissioner's regulations.
 4. Prevent or prohibit the performance of activities and services
within the scope of practice of licensed master social work as defined
in subdivision one of section seventy-seven hundred one of this article
by individuals, churches, schools, teachers, organizations, or
not-for-profit businesses which are providing instruction, advice,
support, encouragement or information to individuals, families and
relational groups.
 5. Prevent or prohibit the performance of activities and services
within the scope of practice of licensed master social work or licensed
clinical social work as defined in section seventy-seven hundred one of
this article by the following:
 (a) any individual who is credentialed under any law, including
attorneys, rape crisis counselors, credentialed alcoholism and substance
abuse counselors whose scope of practice includes the practices defined
in section seventy-seven hundred one of this article from performing or
claiming to perform work authorized by applicable provisions of this
chapter and the mental hygiene law;
 (b) provision of pastoral counseling services by any member of the
clergy or christian science practitioner, from providing pastoral
counselling services within the context of his or her ministerial charge
or obligation;
 (c) students who are enrolled in a baccalaureate of social work or
professional graduate level social work program of study, and which are
required to perform as part of the field work component of that program,
services provided under the supervision of a field work supervisor
approved by the program;
 (d) on the part of a student or trainee who is enrolled in an
institution or program registered by the department or accredited by an
accrediting organization acceptable to the department to provide
training in a discipline or profession, other than social work or
clinical social work, that is licensed pursuant to this title, where
such activities and services are authorized within the definition of the
scope of practice of the profession, or discipline in which he or she is
being trained as set forth in the education law or the commissioner's
regulations, provided that such services are performed under the regular
and ongoing supervision of a licensee in the profession or discipline in
which he or she is being trained who assumes professional responsibility
for the services performed under his or her supervision and that such
activities and the provision of such services are a formal part of the
professional training program in which he or she is enrolled;
 (e) any federal, state, county or municipal employee performing
clinical social work services upon the effective date of this section
for the period during which they maintain such employment with such
governmental unit within the context of such employment and shall be
limited to the services provided upon such effective date; and
 (f) any employee performing clinical social work services on the
effective date of this section for the period during which they maintain
such employment with such entity within the context of such employment,
and shall be limited to the services provided prior to such effective
date.
 6. Prohibit the practice of licensed master social work or licensed
clinical social work, to the extent permissible within the scope of
practice of such professions, by any not-for-profit corporation or
education corporation providing services within the state of New York
and operating under a waiver pursuant to section sixty-five hundred
three-a of this title, provided that such entities offering licensed
master social work or licensed clinical social work services shall only
provide such services through an individual appropriately licensed or
otherwise authorized to provide such services or a professional entity
authorized by law to provide such services.
 7. (a) Prevent a person without a license from: performing assessments
including but not limited to basic information collection, gathering of
demographic data, and informal observations, screening and referral used
for general eligibility for a program or service and determining the
functional status of an individual for the purpose of determining need
for services; advising individuals regarding the appropriateness of
benefits they are eligible for; providing general advice and guidance
and assisting individuals or groups with difficult day to day problems
such as finding employment, locating sources of assistance, and
organizing community groups to work on a specific problem; providing
peer services; selecting for suitability and providing substance abuse
treatment services or group re-entry services to incarcerated
individuals in state correctional facilities; or providing substance
abuse treatment services or re-entry services to incarcerated
individuals in local correctional facilities.
 (b) Prevent a person without a license from creating, developing or
implementing a service plan or recovery plan that is not a behavioral
health diagnosis or treatment plan. Such service or recovery plans shall
include, but are not limited to, coordinating, evaluating or determining
the need for, or the provision of the following services: job training
and employability; housing; homeless services and shelters for homeless
individuals and families; refugee services; residential, day or
community habilitation services; general public assistance; in home
services and supports or home-delivered meals; recovery supports; adult
or child protective services including investigations; detention as
defined in section five hundred two of the executive law; prevention and
residential services for victims of domestic violence; services for
runaway and homeless youth; foster care, adoption, preventive services
or services in accordance with an approved plan pursuant to section four
hundred four of the social services law, including, adoption and foster
home studies and assessments, family service plans, transition plans,
permanency planning activities, and case planning or case management as
such terms are defined in the regulations of the office of children and
family services; residential rehabilitation; home and community based
services; and de-escalation techniques, peer services or skill
development.
 (c)(i) Prevent a person without a license from participating as a
member of a multi-disciplinary team to assist in the development of or
implementation of a behavioral health services or treatment plan;
provided that such team shall include one or more professionals licensed
under this article or articles one hundred thirty-one, one hundred
thirty-nine, one hundred fifty-three or one hundred sixty-three of this
chapter; and provided, further, that the activities performed by members
of the team shall be consistent with the scope of practice for each team
member licensed or authorized under title VIII of this chapter, and
those who are not so authorized may not engage in the following
restricted practices: the diagnosis of mental, emotional, behavioral,
addictive and developmental disorders and disabilities; patient
assessment and evaluating; the provision of psychotherapeutic treatment;
the provision of treatment other than psychotherapeutic treatment; or
independently developing and implementing assessment-based treatment
plans as defined in section seventy-seven hundred one of this article.
 (ii) For the purposes of this paragraph, "assist" shall include, but
not be limited to, the provision or performance of the following tasks,
services, or functions by an individual who has obtained the training
and experience required by the applicable state oversight agency to
perform such task, service or function in facilities or programs
operating pursuant to article nineteen-G of the executive law; articles
seven, sixteen, thirty-one or thirty-two of the mental hygiene law; or
title three of article seven of the social services law:
 (1) helping an individual with the completion of forms or
questionnaires;
 (2) reviewing existing case records and collecting background
information about an individual which may be used by the licensed
professional or multi-disciplinary team;
 (3) gathering and reporting information about previous behavioral
health interventions, hospitalizations, documented diagnosis, or prior
treatment for review by the licensed professional and multi-disciplinary
team;
 (4) discussing with the individual his or her situation, needs,
concerns, and thoughts in order to help identify services that support
the individual's goals, independence, and quality of life;
 (5) providing advice, information, and assistance to individuals and
family members to identify needs and available resources in the
community to help meet the needs of the individual or family member;
 (6) engaging in immediate and long-term problem solving, engaging in
the development of social skills, or providing general help in areas
including, but not limited to, housing, employment, child care,
parenting, community based services, and finances;
 (7) distributing paper copies of self-administered tests for the
individual to complete when such tests do not require the observation
and judgment of a licensed professional;
 (8) monitoring treatment by the collection of written and/or
observational data in accordance with the treatment plan and providing
verbal or written reports to the multi-disciplinary team;
 (9) identifying gaps in services and coordinating access to or
arranging services for individuals such as home care, community based
services, housing, employment, transportation, child care, vocational
training, or health care;
 (10) offering education programs that provide information about
disease identification and recommended treatments that may be provided,
and how to access such treatment;
 (11) reporting on behavior, actions, and responses to treatment by
collecting written and/or observational data as part of a
multi-disciplinary team;
 (12) using de-escalation techniques consistent with appropriate
training;
 (13) performing assessments using standardized, structured interview
tools or instruments;
 (14) directly delivering services outlined in the service plan that
are not clinical in nature but have been tailored to an individual based
on any diagnoses such individual may have received from a licensed
professional; and
 (15) advocating with educational, judicial or other systems to protect
an individual's rights and access to appropriate services.
 (d) Provided, further, that nothing in this subdivision shall be
construed as requiring a license for any particular activity or function
based solely on the fact that the activity or function is not listed in
this subdivision.
 8. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, nothing
in this article shall be construed to prohibit or limit the activities
or services provided under this article by any person who is employed or
who commences employment in a program or service operated, regulated,
funded, or approved by the department of mental hygiene, the office of
children and family services, the department of corrections and
community supervision, the office of temporary and disability
assistance, the state office for the aging and the department of health
or a local governmental unit as that term is defined in section 41.03 of
the mental hygiene law or a social services district as defined in
section sixty-one of the social services law on or before two years from
the date that the regulations issued in accordance with section six of
part Y of chapter fifty-seven of the laws of two thousand eighteen
appear in the state register or are adopted, whichever is later. Such
prohibitions or limitations shall not apply to such employees for as
long as they remain employed by such programs or services and whether
they remain employed by the same or other employers providing such
programs or services. Provided however, that any person who commences
employment in such program or service after such date and performs
services that are restricted under this article shall be appropriately
licensed or authorized under this article. Each state oversight agency
shall create and maintain a process to verify employment history of
individuals exempt under this subdivision.
 § 7707. Special provisions. 1. Any person who is licensed as a
certified social worker on the effective date of this article shall be
licensed as a licensed master social worker without meeting any
additional requirements.
 2. Any person who possesses a master's of social work degree on the
effective date of this section, who has five years of post-graduate
social work employment and meets the requirements for a license pursuant
to this article, except for examination, and who files with the
department within one year of the effective date of this section shall
be licensed as a licensed master social worker.
 3. Any person who is licensed as a certified social worker on the
effective date of this section and who has been authorized pursuant to
section three thousand two hundred twenty-one or section four thousand
three hundred three of the insurance law shall be licensed as a licensed
clinical social worker without meeting any additional requirements.
 4. Any person who is licensed as a certified social worker on the
effective date of this section, but who has not received authorization
pursuant to section three thousand two hundred twenty-one or four
thousand three hundred three of the insurance law, who files with the
department within one year of the effective date of this section an
application pursuant to subdivision two of section seventy-seven hundred
four of this article, who demonstrates to the satisfaction of the
department that they meet the experience requirements for authorization
pursuant to section three thousand two hundred twenty-one or four
thousand three hundred three of the insurance law, shall be licensed as
a licensed clinical social worker without meeting any further
requirements.
 5. Licensed master social workers and licensed clinical social workers
may use accepted classifications of signs, symptoms, dysfunctions and
disorders, including, but not limited to, classifications used in the
practice setting for the purpose of providing mental health services.
 § 7708. Boundaries of professional practice. Any individual whose
license or authority to practice derives from the provisions of this
article shall be prohibited from:
 1. Prescribing or administering drugs as defined in this chapter or as
a treatment, therapy, or professional service in the practice of his or
her profession; or
 2. Using invasive procedures as a treatment, therapy, or professional
service in the practice of his or her profession. For purposes of this
subdivision, "invasive procedure" means any procedure in which human
tissue is cut, altered, or otherwise infiltrated by mechanical or other
means. Invasive procedure includes surgery, lasers, ionizing radiation,
therapeutic ultrasound, or electroconvulsive therapy.
 § 7709. Hospital privileges. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed
to authorize, grant, or extend hospital privileges to individuals
licensed under this article.
 § 7710. Mandatory continuing education. 1. (a) Each licensed master
social worker or licensed clinical social worker required under this
article to register triennially with the department to practice in this
state, shall comply with the provisions of mandatory continuing
education requirements prescribed in subdivision two of this section,
except as set forth in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this subdivision.
Licensed master social workers or licensed clinical social workers who
do not satisfy the mandatory continuing education requirements shall not
practice until they have met such requirements and they have been issued
a registration certificate, except that a licensed master social worker
or licensed clinical social worker may practice without having met such
requirements if he or she is issued a conditional registration
certificate pursuant to subdivision three of this section.
 (b) Each licensed master social worker or licensed clinical social
worker shall be exempt from the mandatory continuing education
requirements for the triennial registration period during which they are
first licensed. In accordance with the intent of this section,
adjustment to the mandatory continuing education requirement may be
granted by the department for reasons of health that are certified by an
appropriate health care professional, for extended active duty with the
armed forces of the United States, or for other good cause acceptable to
the department which may prevent compliance.
 (c) A licensed master social worker or a licensed clinical social
worker not engaged in practice, as determined by the department, shall
be exempt from the mandatory continuing education requirement upon the
filing of a statement with the department declaring such status. Any
licensee who returns to the practice of social work during the triennial
registration period shall notify the department prior to reentering the
profession and shall meet such mandatory education requirements as shall
be prescribed by regulations of the commissioner.
 (d) A licensed clinical social worker who is also licensed and
registered to practice as a licensed master social worker in the same
triennial registration period, shall not be required to complete more
than thirty-six hours of continuing education in the triennial
registration period, or one hour per month for a registration period
other than thirty-six months.
 2. During each triennial registration period an applicant for
registration as a licensed master social worker or licensed clinical
social worker shall complete a minimum of thirty-six hours of acceptable
formal continuing education. Any licensed master social worker or
licensed clinical social worker whose first registration date following
the effective date of this section occurs less than three years from
such effective date, but on or after January first, two thousand
fifteen, shall complete continuing education hours on a prorated basis
at the rate of one hour per month for the period beginning January
first, two thousand fifteen up to the first registration date
thereafter. A licensee who has not satisfied the mandatory continuing
education requirement shall not be issued a triennial registration
certificate by the department and shall not practice unless and until a
conditional registration is issued as provided for in subdivision three
of this section. Continuing education hours taken during one triennium
may not be transferred to the subsequent triennium.
 3. (a) The department, in its discretion, may issue a conditional
registration to a licensee who fails to meet the continuing education
requirements established in subdivision two of this section but who
agrees to make up any deficiencies and complete any additional education
which the department may require. The fee for such a conditional
registration shall be the same as, and in addition to, the fee for the
triennial registration. The duration of such conditional registration
shall be determined by the department but shall not exceed one year. Any
licensee who is notified of the denial of registration for failure to
submit evidence, satisfactory to the department, of required continuing
education and who practices without such registration may be subject to
disciplinary proceedings pursuant to section sixty-five hundred ten of
this title.
 (b) For purposes of this section "acceptable formal education" shall
mean formal courses of learning which contribute to professional
practice in social work and which meet the standards prescribed by
regulations of the commissioner. Such formal courses of learning shall
include, but not be limited to, collegiate level credit and non-credit
courses, professional development programs and technical sessions
offered by national, state and local professional associations and other
organizations acceptable to the department, and any other organized
educational and technical programs acceptable to the department.
Continuing education courses must be taken from a provider who has been
approved by the department, based upon an application and fee, pursuant
to the regulations of the commissioner. The department may, in its
discretion and as needed to contribute to the health and welfare of the
public, require the completion of continuing education courses in
specific subjects to fulfill this mandatory continuing education
requirement. Licensed master social workers or licensed clinical social
workers shall maintain adequate documentation of completion of
acceptable formal continuing education and shall provide such
documentation at the request of the department. Failure to provide such
documentation upon the request of the department shall be an act of
misconduct subject to disciplinary proceedings pursuant to section
sixty-five hundred ten of this title.
 (c) The mandatory continuing education fee shall be determined by the
department. Such fee shall be payable on or before the first day of each
triennial registration period, and shall be paid in addition to the
triennial registration fee required by paragraph (g) of subdivision one
and paragraph (g) of subdivision two of section seventy-seven hundred
four of this article.
 ARTICLE 155
 MASSAGE THERAPY
Section 7800. Introduction.
 7801. Definition of practice of massage therapy.
 7802. Practice of massage therapy and use of title "masseur",
 "masseuse" or "massage therapist" or the term "massage"
 or "massage therapy".
 7803. State board for massage therapy.
 7804. Requirements for a professional license.
 7805. Exempt persons.
 7806. Limited permits.
 7807. Mandatory continuing education.
 § 7800. Introduction. This article applies to the profession of
massage therapy. The general provisions for all professions contained in
article one hundred thirty of this title apply to this article.
 § 7801. Definition of practice of massage therapy. The practice of the
profession of massage therapy is defined as engaging in applying a
scientific system of activity to the muscular structure of the human
body by means of stroking, kneading, tapping and vibrating with the
hands or vibrators for the purpose of improving muscle tone and
circulation.
 § 7802. Practice of massage therapy and use of title "masseur",
"masseuse" or "massage therapist" or the term "massage" or "massage
therapy". Only a person licensed or authorized pursuant to this chapter
shall practice massage therapy and only a person licensed under this
article shall use the title "masseur", "masseuse" or "massage
therapist". No person, firm, partnership or corporation claiming to be
engaged in the practice of massage or massage therapy shall in any
manner describe, advertise, or place any advertisement for services as
defined in section seventy-eight hundred one of this article unless such
services are performed by a person licensed or authorized pursuant to
this chapter.
 § 7803. State board for massage therapy. A state board for massage
therapy shall be appointed by the board of regents on recommendation of
the commissioner for the purpose of assisting the board of regents and
the department on matters of professional licensing and professional
conduct in accordance with section sixty-five hundred eight of this
title. The board shall be composed of not less than seven persons, four
of whom shall have been engaged in the teaching, research, or practice
of massage therapy for at least three years. The remaining three
members of the board shall be physicians licensed in this state. An
executive secretary to the board shall be appointed by the board of
regents on recommendation of the commissioner.
 § 7804. Requirements for a professional license. To qualify for a
license as a massage therapist, masseur or masseuse, an applicant shall
fulfill the following requirements:
 (1) Application: file an application with the department;
 (2) Education: have received an education, including high school
graduation and graduation from a school or institute of massage therapy
with a program registered by the department, or its substantial
equivalent in both subject matter and extent of training, provided that
the program in such school or institute shall consist of classroom
instruction of a total of not less than five hundred hours in subjects
satisfactory to the department;
 (3) Examination: pass an examination satisfactory to the board and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 (4) Age: be at least eighteen years of age;
 (5) Citizenship or immigration status: be a United States citizen or a
noncitizen lawfully admitted for permanent residence in the United
States;
 (6) Character: be of good moral character as determined by the
department; and
 (7) Fees: pay a fee of one hundred fifteen dollars to the department
for admission to a department conducted examination and for an initial
license, a fee of forty-five dollars for each reexamination, a fee of
fifty dollars for an initial license for persons not requiring admission
to a department conducted examination, and a fee of fifty dollars for
each triennial registration period.
 § 7805. Exempt persons. Nothing contained in this article shall be
construed to prohibit:
 1. The practice of massage therapy by any person who is authorized to
practice medicine, nursing, osteopathy, physiotherapy, chiropractic, or
podiatry in accordance with the provisions of this title.
 2. The practice of that massage which is customarily given in barber
shops or beauty parlors for the purpose of beautification by any
licensed barber or beauty culturist.
 3. The practice of massage therapy by any person employed in a medical
institution licensed or chartered by the state of New York, provided
that such person is under the on-site supervision of a person licensed
to practice massage therapy or authorized to practice massage therapy by
subdivision one of this section, or by any person enrolled in a program
of a school or institute of massage therapy registered by the
department, or enrolled in a program which satisfies the requirements of
section seventy-eight hundred four of this article, provided that such
person is under the on-site supervision of a person licensed to practice
massage therapy or authorized to practice massage therapy by subdivision
one of this section.
 4. The practice of massage therapy by any person duly employed as a
trainer by a professional athletic association, club or team, or as a
member of the physical education department of an accredited university,
college or high school.
 5. The practice of massage therapy by any person employed by a
corporation or association organized exclusively for the moral or mental
improvement of men, women or children.
 6. A massage therapist licensed and in good standing in another state
or country from conducting a teaching demonstration of modalities and
techniques that are within the practice of massage therapy in connection
with a program of continuing education that is conducted by approved
sponsors of continuing education by the department. Any massage
therapist conducting a teaching demonstration of modalities and
techniques in New York state pursuant to this subdivision shall be
subject to the personal and subject matter jurisdiction and disciplinary
and regulatory authority of the board of regents as if he or she is a
licensee and as if the exemption pursuant to this subdivision is a
license. Such massage therapist shall comply with the provisions of this
article, the rules of the board of regents, and the regulations of the
commissioner, relating to professional misconduct, disciplinary
proceedings and penalties for professional misconduct.
 § 7806. Limited permits. 1. The department may issue a limited permit
to practice massage therapy as a licensed massage therapist, masseur or
masseuse to a person who has not previously held such a permit and who
fulfills all except the examination and citizenship requirements for a
license, provided however that a permit shall not be issued to a person
who has failed the state licensing examination.
 2. The limited permit shall be valid for a period of not more than
twelve months or until the results of the next licensing examination for
which the person is eligible are officially available, whichever comes
first.
 3. A limited permit shall entitle the holder to practice massage
therapy only under the personal supervision of a person currently
licensed and registered to practice massage therapy in this state.
 4. The fee for a limited permit shall be thirty-five dollars.
 § 7807. Mandatory continuing education. 1. (a) Each massage therapist
licensed pursuant to this article required to register triennially with
the department to practice in the state shall comply with the provisions
of the mandatory continuing education requirements prescribed in
subdivision two of this section except as set forth in paragraphs (b)
and (c) of this subdivision. Massage therapists who do not satisfy the
mandatory continuing education requirements shall not practice until
they have met such requirements, and they have been issued a
registration certificate, except that a massage therapist may practice
without having met such requirements if he or she is issued a
conditional registration certificate pursuant to subdivision three of
this section.
 (b) Massage therapists shall be exempt from the mandatory continuing
education requirement for the triennial registration period during which
they are first licensed. In accord with the intent of this section,
adjustments to the mandatory continuing education requirement may be
granted by the department for reasons of health certified by an
appropriate health care professional, for extended active duty with the
armed forces of the United States, or for other good cause acceptable to
the department which may prevent compliance.
 (c) A licensed massage therapist not engaged in professional practice,
as determined by the department, shall be exempt from the mandatory
continuing education requirement upon the filing of a statement with the
department declaring such status. Any licensee who returns to the
practice of massage therapy during the triennial registration period
shall notify the department prior to reentering the profession and shall
meet such mandatory education requirements as shall be prescribed by
regulations of the commissioner.
 2. During each triennial registration period an applicant for
registration as a massage therapist shall complete a minimum of
thirty-six hours of acceptable formal continuing education, a maximum of
twelve hours of which may be self-instructional course work acceptable
to the department. Any massage therapist whose first registration date
following the effective date of this section occurs less than three
years from such effective date, shall complete continuing education
hours on a prorated basis at the rate of one hour per month for the
period beginning January first, two thousand twelve up to the first
registration date thereafter. A licensee who has not satisfied the
mandatory continuing education requirements shall not be issued a
triennial registration certificate by the department and shall not
practice unless and until a conditional registration certificate is
issued as provided for in subdivision three of this section, or until he
or she has otherwise met the requirements of this section.
 3. The department, in its discretion, may issue a conditional
registration to a licensee who fails to meet the continuing education
requirements established in subdivision two of this section but who
agrees to make up any deficiencies and complete any additional education
which the department may require. The fee for such a conditional
registration shall be the same as, and in addition to, the fee for the
triennial registration. The duration of such conditional registration
shall be determined by the department but shall not exceed one year. Any
licensee who is notified of the denial of registration for failure to
submit evidence, satisfactory to the department, of required continuing
education and who practices without such registration, may be subject to
disciplinary proceedings pursuant to section sixty-five hundred ten of
this chapter.
 4. As used in subdivision two of this section, "acceptable formal
continuing education" may mean formal programs of learning which
contribute to professional practice in massage therapy which are offered
by sponsors of massage therapy continuing education approved by the
department in consultation with the state board for massage therapy, to
fulfill the mandatory continuing education requirement. Sponsors of
massage therapy continuing education may include, but are not limited
to, state or national professional associations established to further
the massage therapy profession, and may include any affiliates of
international massage therapy conferences at which professional
continuing education is a major component of such conferences, as well
as programs registered as licensure-qualifying for the profession of
massage therapy by the department. Sponsors of massage therapy shall
file an application with the department and pay a fee of nine hundred
dollars. While presenters of didactic instruction may be provided by
persons who are not licensed by the state of New York as massage
therapists, the practical application of such modalities and techniques
must be done by licensed massage therapists, or those otherwise
authorized, when this continuing education occurs in the state of New
York.
 5. Massage therapists shall maintain adequate documentation of
completion of acceptable formal continuing education and shall provide
such documentation at the request of the department. Failure to provide
such documentation upon the request of the department shall be an act of
misconduct subject to disciplinary proceedings pursuant to section
sixty-five hundred ten of this chapter.
 6. The mandatory continuing education fee shall be forty-five dollars,
shall be payable on or before the first day of each triennial
registration period, and shall be paid in addition to the triennial
registration fee required by section seventy-one hundred twenty-four of
this chapter.
 ARTICLE 156
 OCCUPATIONAL THERAPY
Section 7900. Introduction.
 7901. Definition.
 7902. Practice of occupational therapy and use of title
 "occupational therapist".
 7902-a. Practice of occupational therapy assistant and use of
 the title "occupational therapy assistant."
 7903. State board for occupational therapy.
 7904. Requirements for a professional license.
 7904-a. Requirements for license as an occupational therapy
 assistant.
 7905. Limited permits.
 7906. Exempt persons.
 7907. Special conditions.
 7908. Mandatory continuing competency.
 § 7900. Introduction. This article applies to the profession of
occupational therapy. The general provisions for all professions
contained in article one hundred thirty of this title apply to this
article.
 § 7901. Definition. 1. The practice of the profession of occupational
therapy is defined as the functional evaluation of the client, the
planning and utilization of a program of purposeful activities, the
development and utilization of a treatment program, and/or consultation
with the client, family, caregiver or organization in order to restore,
develop or maintain adaptive skills, and/or performance abilities
designed to achieve maximal physical, cognitive and mental functioning
of the client associated with his or her activities of daily living and
daily life tasks. A treatment program designed to restore function,
shall be rendered on the prescription or referral of a physician, nurse
practitioner or other health care provider acting within his or her
scope of practice pursuant to this title, except as provided for in
subdivision two of this section. However, nothing contained in this
article shall be construed to permit any licensee hereunder to practice
medicine or psychology, including psychotherapy or to otherwise expand
such licensee's scope of practice beyond what is authorized by this
chapter.
 2. Treatment may be rendered by a licensed occupational therapist for
ten visits, or thirty days, whichever shall occur first, without a
referral from a physician or nurse practitioner provided that:
 (a) the licensed occupational therapist has practiced occupational
therapy on a full time basis equivalent to not less than three years;
and
 (b) each occupational therapist licensed pursuant to this article
shall provide written notice to each patient receiving treatment absent
a referral from a physician or nurse practitioner that occupational
therapy may not be covered by the patient's health care plan or insurer
without such a referral and that such treatment may be a covered expense
if rendered pursuant to a referral. The occupational therapist shall
keep on file with the patient's records a form attesting to the
patient's notice of such advice. Such form shall be in duplicate, with
one copy to be retained by the patient, signed and dated by both the
occupational therapist and the patient in such form as prescribed
pursuant to regulations promulgated by the commissioner.
 § 7902. Practice of occupational therapy and use of title
"occupational therapist". Only a person licensed or otherwise authorized
to practice under this article shall practice occupational therapy or
use the title "occupational therapist".
 § 7902-a. Practice of occupational therapy assistant and use of the
title "occupational therapy assistant." Only a person licensed or
otherwise authorized under this title shall participate in the practice
of occupational therapy as an occupational therapy assistant or use the
title "occupational therapy assistant." Practice as an occupational
therapy assistant shall include the providing of occupational therapy
and client related services under the direction and supervision of an
occupational therapist or licensed physician in accordance with the
commissioner's regulations.
 § 7903. State board for occupational therapy. A state board for
occupational therapy shall be appointed by the board of regents on the
recommendation of the commissioner for the purpose of assisting the
board of regents and the department on matters of professional licensing
and professional conduct in accordance with section sixty-five hundred
eight of this title. The board shall be composed of not less than six
licensed occupational therapists, one licensed occupational therapy
assistant, one physician, and two members of the public who are not
licensed under this title. An executive secretary to the board shall be
appointed by the board of regents on recommendation of the commissioner.
 § 7904. Requirements for a professional license. To qualify for a
license as an occupational therapist, an applicant shall fulfill the
following requirements:
 (1) File an application with the department.
 (2) Have satisfactorily completed an approved occupational therapy
curriculum in at least a baccalaureate or masters program, or its
equivalent, as determined by the department in accordance with the
commissioner's regulations.
 (3) Have a minimum of six months of supervised occupational therapy
experience which supervision and experience shall be satisfactory to the
board of occupational therapy and in accordance with the commissioner's
regulations.
 (4) Pass an examination satisfactory to the board of occupational
therapy and in accordance with the commissioner's regulations.
 (5) Be at least twenty-one years of age.
 (6) Meet no requirements as to United States citizenship.
 (7) Be of good moral character as determined by the department.
 (8) Pay a fee of one hundred forty dollars to the department for
admission to a department conducted examination and for an initial
license, a fee of seventy dollars for each re-examination, a fee of one
hundred fifteen dollars for an initial license for persons not requiring
admission to a department conducted examination, and a fee of one
hundred fifty-five dollars for each triennial registration period.
 § 7904-a. Requirements for license as an occupational therapy
assistant. To qualify for a license as an occupational therapy assistant
an applicant shall fulfill the following requirements:
 (a) file an application with the department;
 (b) have received an education as follows: completion of at least a
two-year associate degree program for occupational therapy assistants
registered by the department or accredited by a national accreditation
agency which is satisfactory to the department, or its equivalent, as
determined by the department in accordance with the commissioner's
regulations;
 (c) have a minimum of sixteen weeks clinical experience satisfactory
to the state board for occupational therapy and in accordance with
standards established by a national accreditation agency which is
satisfactory to the department;
 (d) be at least eighteen years of age;
 (e) be of good moral character as determined by the department;
 (f) pay a fee for an initial license and a fee for each triennial
registration period that shall be one-half of the fee for initial
license and for each triennial registration period established for
occupational therapists; and
 (g) except as otherwise provided by subdivision two of section
seventy-nine hundred seven of this article, pass an examination
acceptable to the department.
 § 7905. Limited permits. Permits limited as to eligibility, practice,
and duration, shall be issued by the department to eligible applicants,
as follows:
 (1) The following persons shall be eligible for a limited permit:
 (a) An occupational therapist who has graduated from an occupational
therapy curriculum with a baccalaureate degree or certificate in
occupational therapy which is substantially equivalent to a
baccalaureate degree satisfactory to the board of occupational therapy
and in accordance with the commissioner's regulations; or
 (b) A foreign occupational therapist who is in this country on a
non-immigration visa for the continuation of occupational therapy study,
pursuant to the exchange student program of the United States Department
of State.
 (c) An occupational therapy assistant who has graduated from an
accredited occupational therapy assistant curriculum with an associate's
degree satisfactory to the board of occupational therapy and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations.
 (2) A limited permittee shall be authorized to practice occupational
therapy, or in the case of a limited permit issued pursuant to paragraph
(c) of subdivision one of this section, only under the direct
supervision of a licensed occupational therapist or a licensed physician
and shall practice only in a public, voluntary, or proprietary hospital,
health care agency or in a preschool or an elementary or secondary
school for the purpose of providing occupational therapy as a related
service for a handicapped child.
 For purposes of this subdivision, supervision of an individual with a
limited permit to practice occupational therapy issued by the department
shall be direct supervision as defined by the commissioner's
regulations.
 (3) A limited permit shall be valid for one year. It may be renewed
once for a period not to exceed one additional year, at the discretion
of the department, upon the submission of an explanation satisfactory to
the department for an applicant's failure to become licensed within the
original one-year period.
 (4) The fee for a limited permit shall be seventy dollars.
 § 7906. Exempt persons. This article shall not be construed to affect
or prevent the following, provided that no title, sign, card or device
shall be used in such manner as to tend to convey the impression that
the person rendering such service is a licensed occupational therapist:
 (1) A licensed physician from practicing his or her profession as
defined under article one hundred thirty-one and article one hundred
thirty-one-B of this title.
 (2) Qualified members of other licensed or legally recognized
professions from performing work incidental to the practice of their
profession, except that such persons may not hold themselves out under
the title occupational therapist or as performing occupational therapy.
 (3) A student from engaging in clinical practice as part of an
accredited program in occupational therapy, pursuant to subdivision
three of section seventy-nine hundred four of this article.
 (4) An occupational therapy assistant student from engaging in
clinical practice under the direction and supervision of an occupational
therapist or an occupational therapy assistant who is under the
supervision of an occupational therapist, as part of an accredited
occupational therapy assistant program, as defined by the commissioner
and in accordance with the commissioner's regulations.
 (5) The care of the sick by any person, provided such person is
employed primarily in a domestic capacity. This shall not authorize the
treatment of patients in a home care service of any hospital, clinic,
institution or agency.
 (6) An employee of a federal agency from using the title or practicing
as an occupational therapist insofar as such activities are required by
his salaried position and the use of such title shall be limited to such
employment.
 (7) The following people from working under the direct supervision of
a licensed occupational therapist:
 An individual employed by the state or municipal government at the
effective date of this article who performs supportive services in
occupational therapy solely for the time such person continues in that
employment.
 (8) Any occupational therapist who is licensed in another state,
United States possession or country or who has received at least a
baccalaureate degree or its equivalent in occupational therapy and who
is either in this state for the purposes of (a) consultation, provided
such practice is limited to such consultation; or (b) an occupational
therapist authorized to practice in another state or country from
conducting a teaching clinical demonstration in connection with a
program of basic clinical education, graduate education or post graduate
education in an approved school of occupational therapy or its
affiliated clinical facility or health care agency or before a group of
licensed occupational therapists; or (c) because he or she resides near
a border of this state, provided such practice is limited in this state
to the vicinity of such border and said occupational therapist does not
maintain an office or place to meet patients or receive calls in this
state.
 § 7907. Special conditions. (1) A person who on the effective date of
this article:
 (a) submits evidence of a minimum of three years experience with
training satisfactory to the board in occupational therapy and in
accordance with the regulations of the commissioner; or
 (b) a baccalaureate degree or its equivalent in occupational therapy,
shall be licensed upon the filing of an application with the department
within six months of the effective date of this article.
 (2) A person who on the effective date of chapter four hundred sixty
of the laws of two thousand eleven which added this subdivision has a
current registration with the department as an occupational therapy
assistant, if such person meets the requirements for a license
established within this article, except for examination, the department
shall issue a license without examination.
 § 7908. Mandatory continuing competency. (1)(a) Each licensed
occupational therapist and occupational therapy assistant required under
this article to register triennially with the department to practice in
the state shall comply with the provisions of the mandatory continuing
competency requirements prescribed in subdivision two of this section,
except as provided in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this subdivision.
Occupational therapists and occupational therapy assistants who do not
satisfy the mandatory continuing competency requirements shall not be
authorized to practice until they have met such requirements, and they
have been issued a registration certificate, except that an occupational
therapist or occupational therapy assistant may practice without having
met such requirements if he or she is issued a conditional registration
pursuant to subdivision three of this section.
 (b) Occupational therapists and occupational therapy assistants shall
be exempt from the mandatory continuing competency requirement for the
triennial registration period during which they are first licensed.
Adjustment to the mandatory continuing competency requirements may be
granted by the department for reasons of health of the licensee where
certified by an appropriate health care professional, for extended
active duty with the armed forces of the United States, or for other
good cause acceptable to the department which may prevent compliance.
 (c) A licensed occupational therapist or occupational therapy
assistant not engaged in practice, as determined by the department,
shall be exempt from the mandatory continuing competency requirement
upon the filing of a statement with the department declaring such
status. Any licensee who returns to the practice of occupational therapy
during the triennial registration period shall notify the department
prior to reentering the profession and shall meet such mandatory
continuing competency requirements as shall be prescribed by regulations
of the commissioner.
 (2) (a) During each triennial registration period an applicant for
registration as an occupational therapist shall complete a minimum of
thirty-six hours of learning activities which contribute to continuing
competence, as specified in subdivision four of this section, provided
further that at least twenty-four hours shall be in areas of study
pertinent to the scope of practice of occupational therapy. With the
exception of continuing education hours taken during the registration
period immediately preceding the effective date of this section,
continuing education hours taken during one triennium may not be
transferred to a subsequent triennium.
 (b) During each triennial registration period an applicant for
registration as an occupational therapy assistant shall complete a
minimum of thirty-six hours of learning activities which contribute to
continuing competence as specified in subdivision four of this section,
provided further that at least twenty-four hours shall be in recognized
areas of study pertinent to the licensee's professional scope of
practice of occupational therapy. With the exception of continuing
education hours taken during the registration period immediately
preceding the effective date of this section, continuing education hours
taken during one triennium may not be transferred to a subsequent
triennium.
 (c) Any occupational therapist or occupational therapy assistant whose
first registration date following the effective date of this section
occurs less than three years from such effective date but on or after
January first, two thousand thirteen, shall complete continuing
competency hours on a prorated basis at the rate of one-half hour per
month for the period beginning January first, two thousand thirteen up
to the first registration date.
 (d) Thereafter, a licensee who has not satisfied the mandatory
continuing competency requirements shall not be issued a triennial
registration certificate by the department and shall not practice unless
and until a conditional registration certificate is issued as provided
for in subdivision three of this section.
 (3) The department, in its discretion, may issue a conditional
registration to a licensee who fails to meet the continuing competency
requirements established in subdivision two of this section, but who
agrees to make up any deficiencies and complete any additional learning
activities which the department may require. The fee for such a
conditional registration shall be the same as, and in addition to, the
fee for the triennial registration. The duration of such conditional
registration shall be determined by the department but shall not exceed
one year. Any licensee who is notified of the denial of registration for
failure to submit evidence, satisfactory to the department, of required
continuing competency learning activities and who practices without such
registration, may be subject to disciplinary proceedings pursuant to
section sixty-five hundred ten of this title.
 (4) As used in subdivision two of this section, "acceptable learning
activities" shall mean activities which contribute to professional
practice in occupational therapy, and which meet the standards
prescribed in the regulations of the commissioner. Such learning
activities shall include, but not be limited to, collegiate level credit
and non-credit courses, self-study activities, independent study, formal
mentoring activities, publications in professional journals,
professional development programs and technical sessions; such learning
activities may be offered and sponsored by national, state and local
professional associations and other organizations or parties acceptable
to the department, and any other organized educational and technical
learning activities acceptable to the department. The department may, in
its discretion and as needed to contribute to the health and welfare of
the public, require the completion of continuing competency learning
activities in specific subjects to fulfill this mandatory continuing
competency requirement. Learning activities must be taken from a sponsor
approved by the department, pursuant to the regulations of the
commissioner.
 (5) Occupational therapists and occupational therapy assistants shall
maintain adequate documentation of completion of (a) a learning plan
that shall record current and anticipated roles and responsibilities but
shall not require the records of peer review or self-assessment of
competencies, and (b) acceptable continuing competency learning
activities and shall provide such documentation at the request of the
department. Failure to provide such documentation upon request of the
department shall be an act of misconduct subject to the disciplinary
proceedings pursuant to section sixty-five hundred ten of this title.
 (6) The mandatory continuing competency fee shall be forty-five
dollars for occupational therapists and twenty-five dollars for
occupational therapy assistants, shall be payable on or before the first
day of each triennial registration period, and shall be paid in addition
to the triennial registration fee required by section seventy-nine
hundred four of this article.
 ARTICLE 157
 DIETETICS AND NUTRITION
Section 8000. Introduction.
 8001. Definitions.
 8002. Use of titles.
 8003. State board for dietetics and nutrition.
 8004. Requirements for certification.
 8005. Special provisions.
 8006. Special conditions.
 § 8000. Introduction. This article applies to the use of the titles
"certified dietitian" and "certified nutritionist". The general
provision for all professions contained in article one hundred thirty of
this title shall apply to this article.
 § 8001. Definitions. 1. Dietetics and nutrition are herein each
defined as the integration and application of principles derived from
the sciences of nutrition, biochemistry, physiology, food management and
behavioral and social sciences to achieve and maintain people's health.
 2. Where the title "certified dietitian" or "certified nutritionist"
is used in this article it shall mean "certified dietitian", "certified
dietician", or "certified nutritionist".
 3. A certified dietitian or certified nutritionist is one who engages
in the integration and application of principles derived from the
sciences of nutrition, biochemistry, physiology, food management and
behavioral and social sciences to achieve and maintain people's health,
and who is certified as such by the department pursuant to section eight
thousand four of this article. The primary function of a certified
dietitian or certified nutritionist is the provision of nutrition care
services that shall include:
 (a) Assessing nutrition needs and food patterns;
 (b) Planning for and directing the provision of food appropriate for
physical and nutrition needs; and
 (c) Providing nutrition counseling.
 § 8002. Use of titles. Only a person certified under this article
shall be authorized to use the title "certified dietitian", "certified
dietician", or "certified nutritionist".
 § 8003. State board for dietetics and nutrition. A state board for
dietetics and nutrition shall be appointed by the board of regents, on
recommendation of the commissioner, for the purpose of assisting the
board of regents and the department on matters of certification and
professional conduct in accordance with section sixty-five hundred eight
of this chapter.
 The board shall consist of not less than thirteen members, ten of whom
shall be certified dietitians or certified nutritionists, except that
the members of the first board need not be certified but shall be
persons who are eligible for certification under the provisions of this
article prior to their appointment to the board. The first board, with
respect to members representing the profession, shall consist of five
members registered by a national dietetic association having
registration standards acceptable to the department and five members who
are members of or registered by a national nutritional association
having membership and/or registration standards acceptable to the
department. Thereafter, members of the profession appointed to such
board shall be certified pursuant to this article. To the extent
reasonable, the board of regents should insure the state board is
broadly representative of various professional interests within the
dietetic and nutritional community. Three members shall be
representatives of the general public. An executive secretary to the
board shall be appointed by the board of regents on the recommendation
of the commissioner.
 § 8004. Requirements for certification. To qualify for certification,
an applicant shall fulfill the following requirements:
 1. File an application with the department;
 2. (a)(1) Have received an education including a bachelor's degree, or
its equivalent as determined by the department, in dietetics/nutrition
or an equivalent major course of study which shall include appropriate
core curriculum courses in dietetics/nutrition from an accredited
college or university as approved by the department, in accordance with
the commissioner's regulations; and
 (2) Have completed a planned, continuous, experience component, in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations, in dietetic or nutrition
practice under the supervision of a certified dietitian or certified
nutritionist or a dietitian or nutritionist who is registered by or is a
member of a national dietetic association or national nutrition
association having registration or membership standards acceptable to
the department; such experience shall be satisfactory to the board and
in accordance with the commissioner's regulations; or
 (b)(1) Have received an education including an associates degree in
dietetics or nutrition acceptable to the department,
 (2) In the last fifteen years have completed ten years of experience
and education in the field of dietetics or nutrition satisfactory to the
board in accordance with the commissioner's regulations. These ten years
must be the full time equivalent of any combination of post secondary
dietetic or nutrition education and dietetic or nutrition work
experience satisfactory to the board in accordance with the
commissioner's regulations, and
 (3) Have obtained the endorsement of three dietitians or nutritionists
acceptable to the department;
 3. Pass an examination satisfactory to the board and in accordance
with the commissioner's regulations; provided that such examination
shall test a level of knowledge and experience equivalent to that
obtained by an individual satisfactorily meeting the requirements of
paragraph (a) of subdivision two of this section;
 4. Pay a fee of one hundred seventy-five dollars to the department for
admission to a department conducted examination and for initial
certification, a fee of eighty-five dollars for each reexamination, a
fee of one hundred fifteen dollars for an initial certification for
persons not requiring admission to a department conducted examination, a
fee of one hundred fifty-five dollars for each triennial registration
period;
 5. Be at least eighteen years of age.
 § 8005. Special provisions. Nothing contained in this article shall
be deemed to alter, modify or impair any conditions of employment
relating to service in the federal government, the state of New York,
its political subdivisions, including school districts, or special
districts and authorities or any facilities or institutions under the
jurisdiction of or subject to the certification of any agency of the
state of New York or its political subdivisions.
 § 8006. Special conditions. A person shall be certified without
examination provided that, within three years of the effective date of
this article, the individual:
 1. files an application and pays the appropriate fees to the
department; and
 2. (a) is registered as a dietitian or nutritionist by a national
dietetic or national nutrition association having registration standards
acceptable to the department;
 (b) meets the requirements of subparagraph one of paragraph (a) of
subdivision two and subdivision five of section eight thousand four of
this article and has been actively engaged in the provision of nutrition
care services for a minimum of three years during the five years
immediately preceding the effective date of this article; or
 (c) meets all the requirements of paragraph (b) of subdivision two and
subdivision five of section eight thousand four of this article.
 ARTICLE 159
 SPEECH-LANGUAGE PATHOLOGISTS AND AUDIOLOGISTS
Section 8200. Introduction.
 8201. Definition of practice of speech-language pathology.
 8202. Practice of speech-language pathology.
 8203. Definition of practice of audiology.
 8204. Practice of audiology.
 8205. State board for speech-language pathology and audiology.
 8206. Requirements for a professional license.
 8206-a. Limited license.
 8207. Exempt persons.
 8208. Special provisions.
 8209. Mandatory continuing competency.
 § 8200. Introduction. This article applies to the professions of
speech-language pathology and audiology. The general provisions for all
professions contained in article one hundred thirty of this title apply
to this article.
 § 8201. Definition of practice of speech-language pathology. The
practice of the profession of speech-language pathology shall mean the
application of principles, methods and procedures of measurement,
prediction, non-medical diagnosis, testing, counselling, consultation,
rehabilitation and instruction related to the development and disorders
of speech, voice, swallowing, and/or language for the purpose of
preventing, ameliorating or modifying such disorder conditions in
individuals and/or groups of individuals.
 § 8202. Practice of speech-language pathology. Only a person licensed
or otherwise authorized under this article shall practice
speech-language pathology or use the title of speech-language
pathologist.
 § 8203. Definition of practice of audiology. The practice of the
profession of audiology shall mean the application of principles,
methods and procedures of measurement, testing, evaluation,
consultation, counselling, instruction and habilitation or
rehabilitation related to hearing and its disorders, related
communication impairments and vestibular disorders for the purpose of
non-medical diagnosis, prevention, identification, amelioration or
modification of such disorders and conditions in individuals and/or
groups of individuals.
 § 8204. Practice of audiology. Only a person licensed or otherwise
authorized under this article shall practice audiology or use the title
audiologist.
 § 8205. State board for speech-language pathology and audiology. A
state board for speech-language pathology and audiology shall be
appointed by the board of regents on recommendation of the commissioner
for the purpose of assisting the board of regents and the department on
matters of professional licensing and professional conduct in accordance
with section sixty-five hundred eight of this title. The board shall
consist of not less than seven members, three of whom shall be
audiologists and four of whom shall be speech-language pathologists.
Each speech-language pathologist and audiologist on the board shall be
licensed and have practiced in this state for at least five years, as
provided under this article except that the members of the first board
need not be licensed prior to their appointment to the board. An
executive secretary to the board shall be appointed by the board of
regents on recommendation of the commissioner.
 § 8206. Requirements for a professional license. To qualify for a
license as a speech-language pathologist or audiologist, an applicant
shall fulfill the following requirements.
 (1) Application: file an application with the department;
 (2) Education: have obtained at least a Masters degree in
speech-language pathology and/or audiology or its equivalent, as
determined by the department, in accordance with the commissioner's
regulations;
 (3) Experience: have experience satisfactory to the board and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 (4) Examination: pass an examination satisfactory to the board and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 (5) Age: be at least twenty-one years of age;
 (6) Character: be of good moral character as determined by the
department; and
 (7) Fees: pay a fee of one hundred forty dollars to the department for
admission to a department conducted examination and for an initial
license, a fee of seventy dollars for each reexamination, a fee of one
hundred fifteen dollars for an initial license for persons not requiring
admission to a department conducted examination, and a fee of one
hundred fifty-five dollars for each triennial registration period.
 § 8206-a. Limited license. 1. The department shall issue a limited
license to an applicant for a license as a speech-language pathologist
who meets all requirements set forth in this section.
 2. Any person engaging in clinical or academic practice under the
supervision of a licensed speech-language pathologist for such period of
time as may be necessary to complete an experience requirement for a
professional license as a speech-language pathologist shall be eligible
for a limited license.
 3. A limited licensee shall be authorized to practice speech-language
pathology only under the supervision of a licensed speech-language
pathologist.
 4. A limited license shall be valid for one year. It may be renewed
for additional one year periods until such time as may be necessary to
complete an experience requirement for a professional license as a
speech-language pathologist.
 5. The fee for a limited license shall be seventy dollars.
 § 8207. Exempt persons. This article shall not be construed as
prohibiting:
 (1) The practice of any other professions licensed or registered under
this title.
 (2) Any person employed by the federal, state or a local government or
by a public or non-public elementary or secondary school or an
institution of higher learning from performing the duties of a
speech-language pathologist, an audiologist, a teacher of the speech and
hearing handicapped, or a teacher of the deaf in the course of such
employment.
 (3) Any person from engaging in clinical or academic practice under
the supervision of a licensed speech-language pathologist or audiologist
for such period of time as may be necessary to complete an experience
requirement for a professional license, as provided in this article and
in rules or regulations approved by the board of regents with the advice
of the state board for speech-language pathology and audiology.
 (4) A person from another state from performing speech-language
pathology or audiology services in this state provided such services are
performed for no more than thirty days in any calendar year and provided
that such services are performed in conjunction with and/or under the
supervision of a speech-language pathologist or audiologist licensed
under this article.
 (5) Any hearing aid dealer from performing hearing measurements by
means of an audiometer or other testing equipment when used solely for
the purpose of selecting, fitting, selling or dispensing an instrument
designed to aid or improve human hearing, including the taking of
impressions for the making and fitting of ear molds and the
demonstration of use and instructions of persons in the use of such
hearing aids and accessories thereto.
 (6) A student from engaging in clinical practice, under the
supervision of a licensed audiologist or a licensed speech-language
pathologist as part of a nationally accredited program or a state
licensure qualifying program in speech-language pathology or audiology,
pursuant to subdivision three of section eighty-two hundred six of this
article.
 § 8208. Special provisions. (1) Every person regularly employed in
teaching or working as a speech-language pathologist or audiologist for
not less than two years prior to the effective date of this article
shall be issued a license by the department, if he is a person of good
moral character; twenty-one years or older, has been engaged in such
practice in the state for at least two years in accordance with
regulations of the commissioner of education, and possesses
 (a) the American Speech-Language-Hearing Association certificate of
clinical competence in speech-language pathology and/or audiology, or
the equivalent thereof as determined by the board in accordance with the
commissioner's regulations; or
 (b) a masters degree in speech-language pathology, audiology or
communication disorders appropriate to the license being sought and a
total of five years experience; or
 (c) a bachelors degree in speech-language pathology, audiology or
communication disorders appropriate to the license being sought and
thirty postgraduate semester hours in subjects satisfactory to the board
and a total of five years experience; or
 (d) a bachelors degree and sufficient postgraduate study to be the
equivalent of a masters degree in speech-language pathology, audiology
or communication disorders as determined by the board in accordance with
the commissioner's regulations and a total of five years experience.
 Applications for a license under this section shall be submitted by
January first, nineteen hundred eighty and applicants shall have until
that date to fulfill the requirements set forth by this chapter.
 (2) This article shall not prohibit the practice of speech-language
pathology or audiology by a corporation provided that such practice is
carried on by a licensed speech-language pathologist or audiologist or
persons exempt under this article and a violation of this provision
shall be a class A misdemeanor.
 (3) Any person or firm offering the services of a speech-language
pathologist or audiologist shall employ only persons licensed or exempt
under this article and a violation of this provision shall be a Class A
misdemeanor.
 (4) (a) The commissioner, pursuant to the recommendation of the board
shall promulgate regulations defining appropriate standards of conduct
for the dispensing of hearing aids by licensed audiologists. Such
regulations shall also define continuing education requirements which
such dispensing audiologist shall meet as a condition of maintaining
registration pursuant to this article.
 (b) Audiologists engaged in the practice of dispensing hearing aids
shall comply with the applicable provisions of article thirty-seven-a of
the general business law.
 § 8209. Mandatory continuing competency. (1)(a) Each licensed
speech-language pathologist and audiologist required under this article
to register triennially with the department to practice in the state
shall comply with the provisions of the mandatory continuing competency
requirements prescribed in subdivision two of this section, except as
provided in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this subdivision. Speech-language
pathologists and audiologists who do not satisfy the mandatory
continuing competency requirements shall not be authorized to practice
until they have met such requirements, and they have been issued a
registration certificate, except that a speech-language pathologist or
audiologist may practice without having met such requirements if he or
she is issued a conditional registration pursuant to subdivision three
of this section.
 (b) Speech-language pathologists and audiologists shall be exempt from
the mandatory continuing competency requirement for the triennial
registration period during which they are first licensed. Adjustment to
the mandatory continuing competency requirements may be granted by the
department for reasons of health of the licensee where certified by an
appropriate health care professional, for extended active duty with the
armed forces of the United States, or for other good cause acceptable to
the department which may prevent compliance.
 (c) A licensed speech-language pathologist or audiologist not engaged
in practice, as determined by the department, shall be exempt from the
mandatory continuing competency requirement upon the filing of a
statement with the department declaring such status. Any licensee who
returns to the practice of speech-language pathology or audiology during
the triennial registration period shall notify the department prior to
reentering the profession and shall meet such mandatory continuing
competency requirements as shall be prescribed by regulations of the
commissioner.
 (2) During each triennial registration period an applicant for
registration as either a speech-language pathologist or audiologist
shall complete a minimum of thirty hours of learning activities which
contribute to continuing competence, as specified in subdivision four of
this section, provided further that at least twenty hours shall be in
recognized areas of study pertinent to the licensee's professional scope
of practice of speech language pathology and/or audiology. Any
speech-language pathologist or audiologist whose first registration date
following the effective date of this section occurs less than three
years from such effective date, but on or after January first, two
thousand one, shall complete continuing competency hours on a prorated
basis at the rate of one-half hour per month for the period beginning
January first, two thousand one up to the first registration date.
Thereafter, a licensee who has not satisfied the mandatory continuing
competency requirements shall not be issued a triennial registration
certificate by the department and shall not practice unless and until a
conditional registration certificate is issued as provided for in
subdivision three of this section. Continuing competency hours taken
during one triennium may not be transferred to a subsequent triennium.
 (3) The department, in its discretion, may issue a conditional
registration to a licensee who fails to meet the continuing competency
requirements established in subdivision two of this section, but who
agrees to make up any deficiencies and complete any additional learning
activities which the department may require. The fee for such a
conditional registration shall be the same as, and in addition to, the
fee for the triennial registration. The duration of such conditional
registration shall be determined by the department but shall not exceed
one year. Any licensee who is notified of the denial of registration for
failure to submit evidence, satisfactory to the department, of required
continuing competency learning activities and who practices without such
registration, may be subject to disciplinary proceedings pursuant to
section sixty-five hundred ten of this title.
 (4) As used in subdivision two of this section, "acceptable learning
activities" shall mean activities which contribute to professional
practice in speech-language pathology and/or audiology, and which meet
the standards prescribed in the regulations of the commissioner. Such
learning activities shall include, but not be limited to, collegiate
level credit and non-credit courses, self-study activities, independent
study, formal mentoring activities, publications in professional
journals, professional development programs and technical sessions; such
learning activities may be offered and sponsored by national, state and
local professional associations and other organizations or parties
acceptable to the department, and any other organized educational and
technical learning activities acceptable to the department. The
department may, in its discretion and as needed to contribute to the
health and welfare of the public, require the completion of continuing
competency learning activities in specific subjects to fulfill this
mandatory continuing competency requirement. For speech-language
pathologists who are employed in school settings as teachers of the
speech and hearing handicapped or as teachers of students with speech
and language disabilities, acceptable learning activities shall also
include professional development programs and technical sessions
specific to teaching students with speech and language disabilities
including those designed to improve methods for teaching such students,
aligned with professional development plans in accordance with
regulations of the commissioner and promoting the attainment of
standards for such students. Learning activities must be taken from a
sponsor approved by the department, pursuant to the regulations of the
commissioner.
 (5) Speech-language pathologists and audiologists shall maintain
adequate documentation of completion of acceptable continuing competency
learning activities and shall provide such documentation at the request
of the department. Failure to provide such documentation upon the
request of the department shall be an act of misconduct subject to
disciplinary proceedings pursuant to section sixty-five hundred ten of
this title.
 (6) The mandatory continuing competency fee shall be fifty dollars,
shall be payable on or before the first day of each triennial
registration period, and shall be paid in addition to the triennial
registration fee required by section eighty-two hundred six of this
article.
 ARTICLE 160
 ACUPUNCTURE
Section 8210. Introduction.
 8211. Definitions.
 8212. Practice of acupuncture and use of title "licensed
 acupuncturist" or "certified acupuncturist".
 8213. State board for acupuncture.
 8214. Requirements for a professional license.
 8215. Limited permits.
 8216. Exemptions; waiver.
 § 8210. Introduction. This article applies to the profession of
acupuncture. The general provisions for all professions contained in
article one hundred thirty of this title apply to this article.
 § 8211. Definitions. As used in this article the following terms shall
have the following meanings:
 (1) (a) "Profession of acupuncture" is the treating, by means of
mechanical, thermal or electrical stimulation effected by the insertion
of needles or by the application of heat, pressure or electrical
stimulation at a point or combination of points on the surface of the
body predetermined on the basis of the theory of the physiological
interrelationship of body organs with an associated point or combination
of points for diseases, disorders and dysfunctions of the body for the
purpose of achieving a therapeutic or prophylactic effect. The
profession of acupuncture includes recommendation of dietary supplements
and natural products including, but not limited to, the recommendation
of diet, herbs and other natural products, and their preparation in
accordance with traditional and modern practices of East Asian (Chinese,
Korean or Japanese) medical theory.
 (b) Each acupuncturist licensed pursuant to this article, shall advise
each patient as to the importance of consulting with a licensed
physician regarding the patient's condition and shall keep on file with
the patient's records, a form attesting to the patient's notice of such
advice. Such form shall be in duplicate, one copy to be retained by the
patient, signed and dated by both the acupuncturist and the patient and
shall be prescribed in the following manner:
 WE, THE UNDERSIGNED, DO AFFIRM THAT (THE PATIENT) HAS
BEEN ADVISED BY , (A LICENSED ACUPUNCTURIST), TO CONSULT
A PHYSICIAN REGARDING THE CONDITION OR CONDITIONS FOR WHICH SUCH PATIENT
SEEKS ACUPUNCTURE TREATMENT.
___________________________ ________________________
 (Signature) Date
___________________________ ________________________
 (Signature) Date
 (c) Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit an individual who is
not subject to regulation in this state as a licensed acupuncturist from
engaging in the recommendation of traditional remedies and supplements
as defined herein, nor shall this section be construed to authorize an
individual to practice pharmacy under article one hundred thirty-seven
of this title.
 (2) "Board" is the state board for acupuncture as created by section
eighty-two hundred thirteen of this article.
 § 8212. Practice of acupuncture and use of title "licensed
acupuncturist" or "certified acupuncturist". Only a person licensed or
authorized pursuant to section eighty-two hundred fourteen of this
article or certified pursuant to section eighty-two hundred sixteen of
this article shall practice acupuncture. Only a person licensed
pursuant to section eighty-two hundred fourteen of this article shall
use the title "licensed acupuncturist" and only a person certified
pursuant to section eighty-two hundred sixteen of this article shall use
the title "certified acupuncturist".
 § 8213. State board for acupuncture. (1) There is hereby established
within the department a state board for acupuncture. The board shall
consist of not less than eleven members to be appointed by the board of
regents on the recommendation of the commissioner for the purpose of
assisting the board of regents and the department on matters of
professional licensing and professional conduct in accordance with
section sixty-five hundred eight of this chapter, four of whom shall be
licensed acupuncturists, four of whom shall be licensed physicians
certified to use acupuncture and three of whom shall be public members
representing the consumer and community. Of the acupuncturists first
appointed to the board, one may be a registered specialist's
assistant-acupuncture provided that the term of such registered
specialist's assistant-acupuncture shall not be more than four years. Of
the members first appointed, three shall be appointed for a one year
term, three shall be appointed for a two year term and three shall be
appointed for a three year term, and two shall be appointed for a four
year term. Thereafter all members shall serve for five year terms. In
the event that more than eleven members are appointed, a majority of the
additional members shall be licensed acupuncturists. The members of the
board shall select one of themselves as chairman to serve for a one year
term.
 (2) An executive secretary to the board shall be appointed by the
board of regents on recommendation of the commissioner.
 (3) The board of regents and the commissioner shall promulgate such
rules and regulations as they deem necessary and appropriate to
effectuate the provisions of this article.
 § 8214. Requirements for a professional license. To qualify for a
license as a licensed acupuncturist an applicant shall fulfill the
following requirements.
 (1) Application: file an application with the department;
 (2) Education: provide evidence of satisfactory completion of a course
of formal study or its substantial equivalent in accordance with the
commissioner's regulations;
 (3) Experience: have experience in accordance with the commissioner's
regulations;
 (4) Examination: pass an examination satisfactory to the board and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations. Such examination shall
be given at least once within twelve months of the effective date of
this article, and at least once annually thereafter, and shall consist
of both written and practical parts. Either part may be given at the
discretion of the department in English and/or Chinese or other
language. Nothing in this subdivision is to be construed to require the
department to issue an exam in a language other than English. The
practical part of the exam must be directly administered by an
acupuncturist acceptable to the department, who may also be a member of
the board. The cost of the initial examination or reexamination shall be
borne by the applicant in accordance with a schedule established by the
department and approved by the director of the budget;
 (5) Age: be at least twenty-one years of age;
 (6) Character: be of good moral character as determined by the
department;
 (7) Fees: pay a fee of five hundred dollars to the department for
initial licensure, and a fee of two hundred fifty dollars for each
triennial registration;
 (8) Registration: if a license is granted, register triennially with
the department, including present home and business address and such
other pertinent information as the department requires.
 § 8215. Limited permits. (1) The department shall issue a limited
permit to an applicant who meets all requirements for admission to the
licensing examination;
 (2) All practice under a limited permit shall be under the supervision
of a licensed or certified acupuncturist in a public hospital, an
incorporated hospital or clinic, a licensed proprietary hospital, a
licensed nursing home, a public health agency, the office of a licensed
or certified acupuncturist or in the civil service of the federal or
state government;
 (3) Limited permits shall be for one year and may be renewed at the
discretion of the department for one additional year;
 (4) Supervision of a permittee by a licensed or certified
acupuncturist shall be on-site supervision and not necessarily direct
personal supervision;
 (5) No practitioner shall supervise more than one permittee;
 (6) The fee for each limited permit and for each renewal shall be
determined by the department.
 § 8216. Exemptions; waiver. (1) A person who is validly registered as
a "specialist's assistant-acupuncture" in accordance with section
sixty-five hundred forty-one of this chapter and the commissioner's
regulations shall not be subject to the provisions of this article;
 (2) Any person who is validly licensed under the provisions of the
former chapter nine hundred fifty-nine of the laws of nineteen hundred
seventy-four is deemed to be licensed pursuant to this article;
 (3) Any person who is validly certified under the provisions of the
former chapter nine hundred fifty-nine of the laws of nineteen hundred
seventy-four shall continue to be certified to practice acupuncture and
may continue to use the title certified acupuncturist. The department
may establish rules and regulations providing for the certification of
physicians and dentists as acupuncturists, provided that such certified
acupuncturists do not represent themselves as licensed acupuncturists.
Certified acupuncturists seeking to become licensed acupuncturists shall
be subject to all provisions of this article;
 (4) A person who does not otherwise possess the credentials or
qualifications required for the practice of acupuncture prescribed by
this article or the regulations promulgated hereunder or any other law
but who is authorized by the division of alcoholism and alcohol abuse,
the division of substance abuse services, or the department of health to
provide treatment for alcoholism, substance dependence, or chemical
dependency in a hospital or clinical program which has been approved for
such treatment by the division of alcoholism and alcohol abuse, the
division of substance abuse services, or the department of health and
who has been trained to practice acupuncture for the treatment of
alcoholism, substance dependence, or chemical dependency through an
educational program acceptable to the education department may
nevertheless practice acupuncture provided such practice is limited to
the treatment of alcoholism, substance dependence, or chemical
dependency in such clinical or hospital programs, or in a program that
if statutorily exempt from such approval meets standards approved by the
division of alcoholism and alcohol abuse, the division of substance
abuse services, or the department of health, and further provided that
such practice is done in accordance with regulations promulgated by the
division of alcoholism and alcohol abuse, the division of substance
abuse services, or the department of health. Such person shall work only
under the general supervision of a physician or dentist certified to
practice acupuncture or an individual licensed to practice acupuncture
in the state of New York pursuant to this article. Notwithstanding any
other law, rule or regulation to the contrary, persons authorized on or
before the effective date of this article to practice acupuncture for
the treatment of alcoholism, substance dependence, or chemical
dependency within a hospital or clinical program which has been approved
for such treatment by the division of alcoholism and alcohol abuse, the
division of substance abuse services, or the department of health may
nevertheless continue to practice acupuncture under the provisions of
this subdivision;
 (5) Any person who is pursuing qualification for licensure through a
course of formal study pursuant to this article may practice acupuncture
without a license, provided such practice is limited to such study;
 (6) Any person who has completed a formal course of study or a
tutorial apprenticeship acceptable to the department and in accordance
with the commissioner's regulations, prior to the effective date of this
article, and presents satisfactory proof of such completion, shall be
exempt from the education requirements set forth in subdivision two of
section eighty-two hundred fourteen of this article provided an
application pursuant to subdivision one of section eighty-two hundred
fourteen of this article is filed with the department not later than one
year from the effective date of this article, and in no event shall
participation in such tutorial apprenticeship or formal course of study
constitute a violation of this chapter.
 (7) Any person who is pursuing qualification for certification through
a formal course of study in a registered program and any person
appointed to the faculty of such program may practice acupuncture
without a license, provided that such practice is limited to such
research, study and training.
 (8) Any person who is licensed and in good standing to practice
acupuncture in another state or country may practice acupuncture in this
state without a license solely for the purpose of conducting clinical
training, practice demonstrations or clinical research that is within
the practice of acupuncture in connection with a program of basic
clinical education, graduate education, or post-graduate education in an
approved school of acupuncture or in its affiliated clinical facility or
health care agency, or before a group of licensed acupuncturists who are
members of a professional society. Any person practicing acupuncture in
New York state pursuant to this subdivision shall be subject to the
personal and subject matter jurisdiction and disciplinary and regulatory
authority of the board of regents as if he or she is a licensee and as
if the exemption pursuant to this subdivision is a license. Such
individual shall comply with the provisions of this article, the rules
of the board of regents, and the regulations of the commissioner,
relating to professional misconduct, disciplinary proceedings and
penalties for professional misconduct.
 ARTICLE 161
 INTERIOR DESIGN
Section 8300. Application.
 8301. Use of the title "certified interior designer".
 8302. Signature of a certified interior designer.
 8303. Definition of practice of interior design.
 8304. State board for interior design.
 8305. Requirements for certification.
 8306. Limited permits.
 8307. Separability.
 § 8300. Application. This article applies to the use of a title by a
certified interior designer. The general provisions for all professions
contained in article one hundred thirty of this title apply to this
article.
 § 8301. Use of the title "certified interior designer". Only a person
certified pursuant to this article may use the title "certified interior
designer". Authorization contained within this article to use the title
"certified interior designer" shall not be construed to permit the
practice of engineering, as described in article one hundred forty-five
of this title, or the practice of architecture, as described in article
one hundred forty-seven of this title, by persons not otherwise
authorized to engage in such practices.
 § 8302. Signature of a certified interior designer. All original
final interior design documents, plans and specifications, prepared by a
certified interior designer or by a full-time or part-time subordinate
employed under his or her supervision, shall be manually signed by the
certified interior designer.
 § 8303. Definition of practice of interior design. For the purposes
of this article, the practice of interior design is defined as rendering
or offering to render services for a fee or other valuable
consideration, in the preparation and administration of interior design
documents (including drawings, schedules and specifications) which
pertain to the planning and design of interior spaces including
furnishings, layouts, fixtures, cabinetry, lighting, finishes,
materials, and interior construction not materially related to or
materially affecting the building systems, all of which shall comply
with applicable laws, codes, regulations, and standards. The scope of
work described herein shall not be construed as authorizing the planning
and design of engineering and architectural interior construction as
related to the building systems, including structural, electrical,
plumbing, heating, ventilating, air conditioning or mechanical systems
and shall not be construed as authorizing the practice of engineering or
architecture as described in article one hundred forty-five or one
hundred forty-seven of this title. The interior design plans as
described above are not to be construed as those required to be filed
with local municipalities or building departments as required by the
state education law regulating the practices of architecture or
engineering.
 § 8304. State board for interior design. 1. A state board for
interior design shall be appointed by the board of regents on
recommendation of the commissioner for the purpose of assisting the
board of regents and the department on matters of certification and
professional conduct in accordance with section sixty-five hundred eight
of this title. The board shall be composed of nine members, four of whom
shall be interior designers certified in this state, two of whom shall
be licensed architects who practice primarily interior design in this
state, one who shall be a professional engineer in this state with an
expertise in interior design, one who shall be a full-time interior
design educator in this state and one who shall be the public
representative. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the members of the first
board who are interior designers need not be certified prior to their
appointment to the board.
 2. Two interior designers and a licensed architect who practices
primarily interior design shall serve initial five year terms. Two
interior designers and a professional engineer with an expertise in
interior design shall serve initial four year terms. One licensed
architect who practices primarily interior design, the interior design
educator, and the public representative shall serve initial two year
terms. Following the establishment of the initial membership of the
board, all succeeding appointments shall be for five year terms. Any
vacancy on the board shall be filled by appointment for the remainder of
such member's terms in accordance with the provisions of this section.
 § 8305. Requirements for certification. 1. To qualify for
certification to use the title "certified interior designer", an
applicant shall fulfill all the following requirements:
 (a) Application: file an application with the department;
 (b) Education: have received at least seven years of professional
training consisting of academic study and work experience relating to
interior design and in accordance with the commissioner's regulations.
These seven years shall contain at least two but not more than five
years of post secondary education, including an associate degree or the
equivalent, in an approved program of interior design;
 (c) Experience: have experience satisfactory to the board and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 (d) Examination: (1) pass an examination satisfactory to the board in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations, and (2) pass a separate
examination satisfactory to the board relative to the fire, safety and
building codes of the state;
 (e) Age: be at least twenty-one years of age;
 (f) Citizenship: meet no requirements as to United States citizenship;
 (g) Character: be of good moral character as determined by the
department; and
 (h) Fees: pay a fee of three hundred dollars to the department for
admission to the two department conducted examinations and for an
initial license, a fee of one hundred fifty dollars for each
reexamination, a fee of one hundred thirty-five dollars for an initial
license for persons not requiring admission to a department conducted
examination, and a fee of two hundred ten dollars for each triennial
registration period.
 2. On recommendation of the board, the department may exempt:
 (a) from the requirement of subparagraph one of paragraph (d) of
subdivision one of this section, an applicant who holds a license of
certification to practice as an interior designer issued to him or her
upon examination by a legally constituted board of examiners in any
other state or political subdivision of the United States, provided that
at the time the license or certificate was issued by such state or
political subdivision the applicant met the requirements of paragraph
(b) of subdivision one of this section for certification to use the
title "certified interior designer" established by this article; or
 (b) from the requirements specified in paragraph (b) of subdivision
one of this section provided the applicant submits, prior to January
first, nineteen hundred ninety-six, satisfactory evidence that the
applicant has held himself or herself out as an interior designer and
has prepared interior design documents in accordance with the
requirements set forth in section eighty-three hundred three of this
article for a minimum of seven years, has received a secondary school
diploma or equivalent, and has passed the examinations required under
paragraph (d) of subdivision one of this section.
 § 8306. Limited permits. 1. On recommendation of the board, the
department may issue a limited permit, valid for a period of two years
and renewable once on the recommendation of the board, for use of the
title "certified interior designer" in accordance with this article by
one who is not a resident of this state and has no established business
in this state. This individual shall (a) be qualified to practice or
engage, under such title, in the practice of interior design in his or
her own country or state, (b) submit evidence satisfactory to the board
of established and recognized professional standing in his or her own
country or state, and (c) submit satisfactory certifications as to his
or her qualifications.
 2. The limited permit shall authorize the holder to use the title
"certified interior designer".
 3. A limited permit of a certified interior designer shall be used
only in connection with the specific project for which the limited
permit is issued and authorized in writing by the department.
 4. The fee for each limited permit shall be one hundred five dollars.
 § 8307. Separability. If any section of this article, or part
thereof, shall be adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be
invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the
remainder or any other section or part thereof.
 ARTICLE 162
 ATHLETIC TRAINERS
Section 8350. Introduction.
 8351. Definition.
 8352. Definition of athletic training.
 8353. Use of the title "licensed athletic trainer".
 8354. State committee for athletic trainers.
 8355. Requirements and procedure for professional licensure.
 8356. Exempt persons.
 8356-a. Mandatory continuing education.
 8357. Non-liability of licensed athletic trainers for first
 aid or emergency treatment.
 8358. Limited permits.
 8359. Special provisions.
 8360. Separability.
 § 8350. Introduction. This article applies to the profession of
athletic training. The general provisions of all professions contained
in article one hundred thirty of this chapter shall apply to this
article.
 § 8351. Definition. 1. As used in this article "athletic trainer"
means any person who is duly licensed in accordance with this article to
perform athletic training under the supervision of a physician and
limits his or her practice to secondary schools, institutions of
postsecondary education, professional athletic organizations, amateur
athletic organizations, non-profit athletic organizations, dance
organizations, military academies and facilities of the United States,
fire training programs or academies, and police training schools and
academies. An athletic trainer may also, under the supervision of a
physician in a health care organization or a physician's private
practice, carry out comparable functions on orthopedic athletic
injuries.
 2. Supervision of an athletic trainer by a physician shall be
continuous but shall not be construed as requiring the physical presence
of the supervising physician at the time and place where such services
are performed, provided however, that such supervision shall include a
signed written agreement or protocol created collaboratively between the
supervising physician and licensed athletic trainer. The written
agreement or protocol shall address and describe the nature and scope of
athletic training services to be performed by such licensed athletic
trainer, in accordance with this title. Such written agreement or
protocol shall be reviewed at least once a year by the supervising
physician and athletic trainer and revised if necessary. No physician
shall supervise more than four athletic trainers, except that such
limitation shall not apply for athletic trainers practicing in secondary
schools, and institutions of postsecondary education, who are practicing
under the supervision of a physician who serves as the medical director
for such school or institution.
 3. An athletic trainer shall make a written or oral referral to a
physician of any individual being treated for an orthopedic athletic
injury whose symptoms have not improved for a period of four days from
the day of onset. An individual treated for an orthopedic athletic
injury by an athletic trainer in a healthcare organization or a
physician's private practice shall receive a medical evaluation or
reevaluation if treatment by the athletic trainer exceeds two weeks.
 4. The scope of work described in this section shall not be construed
as authorizing the management and treatment of acute, subacute, or
chronic neurological pathologies and comorbidities or neurological
disease processes. Athletic trainers may, however, perform an initial
evaluation and triage of emergent neurological conditions such as
potential concussions, spinal cord injuries or nerve injuries that
result from engagement in athletic activity, and following the
individual's clearance by the supervising physician, the athletic
trainer may work with the individual pursuant to the signed written
agreement or protocol to manage, monitor and treat concussions and
peripheral nerve injuries in such settings as part of the rehabilitation
to return to athletic activity subject to the limitations of subdivision
one of this section.
 § 8352. Definition of athletic training. The practice of the
profession of athletic training is defined as:
 1. The prevention, recognition, examination, evaluation, assessment,
management, treatment and rehabilitation of athletic injuries;
 2. The recognition of illness and referral to the appropriate medical
professional with implementation of treatment pursuant to physician's
orders;
 3. Instruction to coaches, athletes, parents, medical personnel, and
communities in the area of care and prevention of athletic injuries; and
 4. The use of clinically appropriate therapeutic modalities and
techniques, including the use of:
 (a) Physical, chemical, and mechanical means including the use of
heat, cold, light, air, water, sound, electricity, massage, mobilization
as it relates to athletic training, including non-thrust mobilization,
and exercise; and
 (b) Appropriate preventative and supportive devices and temporary
splinting or bracing.
 § 8353. Use of the title "licensed athletic trainer". Only a person
licensed or otherwise authorized under this article shall use the title
"licensed athletic trainer", "athletic trainer", or the abbreviation
"AT" or "LAT" in connection with his or her name or with any trade name
in the conduct of his or her profession. Only a person licensed or
otherwise authorized under this article shall practice athletic
training.
 § 8354. State committee for athletic trainers. A state committee for
athletic trainers shall be appointed by the board of regents, upon the
recommendation of the commissioner and shall assist on matters of
professional licensing and professional conduct in accordance with
section six thousand five hundred eight of this title. The committee
shall consist of seven members, five of whom are athletic trainers
licensed in this state, one physician who is licensed in the state and
certified by a physician specialty certification organization acceptable
to the department in the specialties of orthopedic surgery, primary
care, family practice, sports medicine, or neurology, and one public
member that is a consumer of the profession. The committee shall assist
the state board for medicine in athletic training matters. Nominations
and terms of office of the members of the state committee for athletic
trainers shall conform to the corresponding provisions relating thereto
for state boards under article one hundred thirty of title eight of this
chapter.
 § 8355. Requirements and procedure for professional licensure. To
qualify for a license as an athletic trainer under this article, an
applicant shall fulfill the following requirements:
 1. Application: file an application with the department;
 2. Education: have received an education including a bachelor's, its
equivalent or higher degree in accordance with the commissioner's
regulations;
 3. Experience: have experience in accordance with the commissioner's
regulations;
 4. Examination: pass an examination in accordance with the
commissioner's regulations;
 5. Age: be at least twenty-one years of age;
 6. Fees: pay a fee for an initial license of one hundred fifty-eight
dollars to the department; and a fee of fifty-eight dollars for each
triennial registration period; and
 7. Character: be of good moral character as determined by the
department.
 § 8356. Exempt persons. This article shall not be construed to affect
or prevent:
 1. Qualified members of other licensed or legally recognized
professions from performing work incidental to the practice of their
profession, except that such persons may not hold themselves out under
the title athletic trainer or as performing athletic training.
 2. An athletic training student from engaging in clinical practice
under the supervision of a licensed athletic trainer as part of a
program of study approved by the department.
 3. An athletic trainer licensed in another state or country from
conducting a teaching clinical demonstration in connection with a
program of basic clinical education, graduate education, or
post-graduate education in an approved school of athletic training, or
in a clinical facility, or a health care agency.
 4. (a) Any person who is licensed or title-protected as an athletic
trainer, or as an athletic therapist credentialed by a foreign
government and in good standing in another state, territory, or country,
and who has a written agreement to provide athletic training services to
athletes and team personnel of a United States sports team recognized by
the United States Olympic and Paralympic Committees or an out-of-state
secondary school, an institution of postsecondary education, a
professional or amateur athletic organization sports team, or a
performing arts troupe, may provide athletic training services to such
athletes and team personnel at a discrete sanctioned team sporting event
or performance at a secondary school, institution of postsecondary
education, professional athletic organization, amateur athletic
organization, non-profit athletic organization, dance organization,
military academy or facility of the United States, fire training program
or academy, or police training school or academy in this state, provided
such services are provided only to such athletes and team personnel at
such discrete sanctioned team sporting event or performance. Any such
athletic training services shall be provided only five days before
through three days after each such discrete sanctioned team sporting
event or traveling performance.
 (b) Any person practicing as an athletic trainer in this state
pursuant to this subdivision shall be subject to the personal and
subject matter jurisdiction and disciplinary and regulatory authority of
the board of regents as if such person is a licensee and as if the
exemption pursuant to this subdivision is a license. Such individual
shall comply with applicable provisions of the rules of the board of
regents, and the regulations of the commissioner, relating to
professional misconduct, disciplinary proceedings and penalties for
professional misconduct.
 * § 8356-a. Mandatory continuing education. 1. (a) Each licensed
athletic trainer, licensed pursuant to this article, shall be required
to register triennially with the department to practice in the state and
shall comply with the provisions of the mandatory continuing education
requirements prescribed in subdivision two of this section except as set
forth in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this subdivision. Licensed athletic
trainers who do not satisfy such mandatory continuing education
requirements shall not practice until they have met such requirements,
and have been issued a registration certificate, except that a licensed
athletic trainer may practice without having met such requirements if he
or she is issued a conditional registration certificate pursuant to
subdivision three of this section.
 (b) Each licensed athletic trainer shall be exempt from the mandatory
continuing education requirement for the triennial registration period
during which he or she is first licensed. In accordance with the intent
of this section, adjustment to the mandatory continuing education
requirement may be granted by the department for reasons of health
certified by an appropriate health care professional, for extended
active duty with the armed forces of the United States, or for other
good cause acceptable to the department which may prevent compliance.
 (c) A licensed athletic trainer not engaged in practice, as determined
by the department, shall be exempt from the mandatory continuing
education requirement upon the filing of a statement with the department
declaring such status. Any licensee who returns to the practice of
athletic training during the triennial registration period shall notify
the department prior to reentering the profession and shall meet such
mandatory education requirements as shall be prescribed by regulations
of the commissioner.
 2. During each triennial registration period, an applicant for
registration as a licensed athletic trainer shall complete a minimum of
forty-five hours of acceptable formal continuing education, as specified
in subdivision four of this section, provided that no more than fifteen
hours of such continuing education shall consist of self-study courses.
Any licensed athletic trainer whose first registration date following
the effective date of this section occurs less than three years from
such effective date shall complete continuing education hours on a
prorated basis, as determined by the department, beginning on such
effective date until his or her first registration date thereafter. A
licensee who has not satisfied the mandatory continuing education
requirements shall not be issued a triennial registration certificate by
the department and shall not practice unless and until a conditional
registration certificate is issued as provided for in subdivision three
of this section. Continuing education hours taken during one triennium
shall not be transferred to a subsequent triennium.
 3. The department, in its discretion, may issue a conditional
registration to a licensee who fails to meet the continuing education
requirements established in subdivision two of this section but who
agrees to make up any deficiencies and complete any additional education
which the department may require. The fee for such a conditional
registration shall be the same as, and in addition to, the fee for the
triennial registration. The duration of such conditional registration
shall be determined by the department but shall not exceed one year. Any
licensee who is notified of the denial of registration for failure to
submit evidence, satisfactory to the department, of required continuing
education and who practices without such registration may be subject to
disciplinary proceedings pursuant to section sixty-five hundred ten of
this title.
 4. For purposes of this section: (a) "Acceptable learning activities"
shall include, but not be limited to, formal courses of learning which
contribute to professional practice in athletic training and/or
self-study activities; independent study; formal mentoring activities;
publication in professional journals; or lectures, which meet the
standards prescribed by regulations of the commissioner; and
 (b) "Formal courses of learning" shall include, but not be limited to,
collegiate level credit and non-credit courses, professional development
programs and technical sessions offered by national, state and local
professional associations and any other organizations acceptable to the
department, and any other organized educational and technical programs
acceptable to the department. Formal courses shall be taken from a
sponsor approved by the department, based upon an application and fee,
pursuant to the regulations of the commissioner.
 5. The department may, in its discretion and as needed to contribute
to the health and welfare of the public, require the completion of
continuing education credits in specific subjects to fulfill the
mandatory continuing education requirement under this section.
 6. A licensed athletic trainer shall maintain adequate documentation
of completion of acceptable formal continuing education and shall
provide such documentation at the request of the department. Failure to
provide such documentation upon the request of the department shall be
an act of misconduct subject to disciplinary proceedings pursuant to
section sixty-five hundred ten of this title.
 7. The mandatory continuing education fee shall be payable on or
before the first day of each triennial registration period, and shall be
paid in addition to the triennial registration fee required by section
eighty-three hundred fifty-five of this article.
 * NB Effective December 22, 2028
 § 8357. Non-liability of licensed athletic trainers for first aid or
emergency treatment. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of any
general, special or local law, any licensed athletic trainer who
voluntarily and without the expectation of monetary compensation renders
first aid or emergency treatment at the scene of an accident or other
emergency, outside a hospital, doctor's office or any other place having
proper and necessary athletic training equipment, to a person who is
unconscious, ill or injured, shall not be liable for damages for
injuries alleged to have been sustained by such person or for damages
for the death of such person alleged to have occurred by reason of an
act or omission in the rendering of such first aid or emergency
treatment unless it is established that such injuries were or such death
was caused by gross negligence on the part of such athletic trainer.
Nothing in this section shall be deemed or construed to relieve a
licensed athletic trainer from liability for damages for injuries or
death caused by an act or omission on the part of an athletic trainer
while rendering professional services in the normal and ordinary course
of his or her practice.
 § 8358. Limited permits. 1. The department may issue a limited permit
to an applicant who meets all qualifications for licensure, except the
examination, in accordance with regulations promulgated therefor.
 2. Limited permits shall be valid for one year, and such limited
permits may be renewed, at the discretion of the department, for one
additional year.
 3. The fee for each limited permit and for each renewal shall be
seventy dollars.
 4. A limited permit holder shall practice only under the supervision
of a physician as determined in accordance with the commissioner's
regulations.
 § 8359. Special provisions. Any person who is certified as an athletic
trainer on the effective date of this article shall be licensed as an
athletic trainer without meeting any additional requirements.
 § 8360. Separability. If any section of this article, or part thereof,
shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid,
such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of
any other section or part thereof.
 ARTICLE 163
 MENTAL HEALTH PRACTITIONERS
Section 8400. Introduction.
 8401. Definitions.
 8401-a. Diagnostic privilege.
 8402. Mental health counseling.
 8403. Marriage and family therapy.
 8404. Creative arts therapy.
 8405. Psychoanalysis.
 8406. State board for mental health practitioners.
 8407. Boundaries of professional competency.
 8408. Hospital privileges.
 8409. Limited permits.
 8410. Exemptions.
 8411. Special provisions.
 8412. Mandatory continuing education.
 § 8400. Introduction. This article applies to the professions of
mental health counseling, marriage and family therapy, creative arts
therapy, and psychoanalysis and provides for the licensing of such
practitioners. The general provisions for all professions contained in
article one hundred thirty of this title apply to this article.
 § 8401. Definitions. For purposes of this article, the following terms
shall have the following meanings:
 1. "Board" means the state board for mental health practitioners
authorized by section eighty-four hundred six of this article.
 2. "Psychotherapy" means the treatment of mental, nervous, emotional,
behavioral and addictive disorders, and ailments by the use of both
verbal and behavioral methods of intervention in interpersonal
relationships with the intent of assisting the persons to modify
attitudes, thinking, affect, and behavior which are intellectually,
socially and emotionally maladaptive.
 3. "Diagnosis" means the process of distinguishing, beyond a general
assessment, between similar mental, emotional, behavioral,
developmental, and addictive disorders, impairments, and disabilities
within a psychosocial framework on the basis of their similar and unique
characteristics consistent with accepted classification systems.
 4. "Development of assessment-based treatment plans" means the
development of an integrated plan of prioritized interventions, that is
based on the diagnosis and psychosocial assessment of the client, to
address mental, emotional, behavioral, developmental, and addictive
disorders, impairments, and disabilities.
 § 8401-a. Diagnostic privilege. 1. For issuance of a privilege to
diagnose and develop assessment-based treatment plans, as defined in
section eighty-four hundred one of this article, the applicant shall
fulfill the following requirements:
 (a) Application: File an application with the department;
 (b) License: Be licensed and registered as a mental health counselor,
marriage and family therapist, or a psychoanalyst in the state;
 (c) Education: Verify the completion of a sixty semester hour master's
degree or higher, or the clock hour equivalent program of study in a
psychoanalytic institute, that includes completion of a core curriculum
which includes at least twelve semester hours or clock hour equivalent
of clinical courses that prepares the applicant to diagnose and develop
assessment-based treatment plans acceptable to the department. A person
who has received a master's or higher degree during which they did not
complete the required hours, may satisfy such requirement by completing
the equivalent post-graduate courses in accordance with the
commissioner's regulations;
 (d) Experience: (i) Have completed at least two thousand hours of
supervised, direct client contact that shall include, but not be limited
to, diagnosis, psychotherapy and the development of assessment-based
treatment plans, as defined in section eighty-four hundred one of this
article, satisfactory to the department.
 (ii) Subparagraph (i) of this paragraph shall not apply to a mental
health counselor, marriage and family therapist, or psychoanalyst who
was licensed prior to June twenty-fourth, two thousand twenty-four, and
who provides attestation, on a form prescribed by the department, from a
supervisor in a facility setting or other supervised setting approved by
the department under supervision in accordance with the commissioner's
regulations, that such licensee has at least three years of experience
engaged in direct client contact that shall include diagnosis,
psychotherapy and the development of assessment-based treatment plans.
Such licensee shall submit an application to the department within three
years of the effective date of this section.
 (e) Fee: Pay a fee of one hundred seventy-five dollars for issuance of
a privilege to diagnose and develop assessment-based treatment plans.
 2. A mental health counselor, marriage and family therapist or
psychoanalyst who engages in diagnosis and the development of
assessment-based treatment plans without a privilege may be charged with
professional misconduct under section sixty-five hundred nine of this
title.
 3. A privilege issued under this section shall be valid for the life
of the holder, unless revoked, annulled, or suspended by the board of
regents. Such a privilege shall be subject to the same oversight and
disciplinary provisions as licenses issued under this title. The holder
of a privilege issued under this section shall register with the
department as a privilege holder in the same manner and subject to the
same provisions as required of a licensee pursuant to section sixty-five
hundred two of this title, provided that, at the time of each
registration, the privilege holder shall certify that he or she
continues to meet the requirements for the privilege set forth in this
section. The fee for such registration shall be one hundred seventy-five
dollars. The registration period for a privilege holder shall be
coterminous with his or her registration under this article.
 § 8402. Mental health counseling. 1. Definition of the practice of
mental health counseling. The practice of the profession of mental
health counseling is defined as:
 (a) the evaluation, assessment, amelioration, treatment, modification,
or adjustment to a disability, problem, or disorder of behavior,
character, development, emotion, personality or relationships by the use
of verbal or behavioral methods with individuals, couples, families or
groups in private practice, group, or organized settings; and
 (b) the use of assessment instruments and mental health counseling and
psychotherapy to identify, evaluate and treat dysfunctions and disorders
for purposes of providing appropriate mental health counseling services.
 2. Practice of mental health counseling and use of the titles "mental
health counselor" and "licensed mental health counselor". Only a person
licensed or exempt under this article shall practice mental health
counseling or use the title "mental health counselor". Only a person
licensed under this article shall use the title "licensed mental health
counselor" or any other designation tending to imply that the person is
licensed to practice mental health counseling.
 3. Requirements for a professional license. To qualify for a license
as a "licensed mental health counselor", an applicant shall fulfill the
following requirements:
 (a) Application: File an application with the department;
 (b) Education: Have received an education, including a master's or
higher degree in counseling from a program registered by the department
or determined by the department to be the substantial equivalent
thereof, in accordance with the commissioner's regulations. The graduate
coursework shall include, but not be limited to, the following areas:
 (i) human growth and development;
 (ii) social and cultural foundations of counseling;
 (iii) counseling theory and practice and psychopathology;
 (iv) group dynamics;
 (v) lifestyle and career development;
 (vi) assessment and appraisal of individuals, couples and families and
groups;
 (vii) research and program evaluation;
 (viii) professional orientation and ethics;
 (ix) foundations of mental health counseling and consultation;
 (x) clinical instruction; and
 (xi) completion of a minimum one year supervised internship or
practicum in mental health counseling;
 (c) Experience: An applicant shall complete a minimum of three
thousand hours of post-master's supervised experience relevant to the
practice of mental health counseling satisfactory to the board and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations. Satisfactory experience
obtained in an entity operating under a waiver issued by the department
pursuant to section sixty-five hundred three-a of this title may be
accepted by the department, notwithstanding that such experience may
have been obtained prior to the effective date of such section
sixty-five hundred three-a and/or prior to the entity having obtained a
waiver. The department may, for good cause shown, accept satisfactory
experience that was obtained in a setting that would have been eligible
for a waiver but which has not obtained a waiver from the department or
experience that was obtained in good faith by the applicant under the
belief that appropriate authorization had been obtained for the
experience, provided that such experience meets all other requirements
for acceptable experience;
 (d) Examination: Pass an examination satisfactory to the board and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 (e) Age: Be at least twenty-one years of age;
 (f) Character: Be of good moral character as determined by the
department; and
 (g) Fees: Pay a fee of one hundred seventy-five dollars for an initial
license and a fee of one hundred seventy dollars for each triennial
registration period.
 § 8403. Marriage and family therapy. 1. Definition of the practice of
marriage and family therapy. The practice of the profession of marriage
and family therapy is defined as:
 (a) the assessment and treatment of nervous and mental disorders,
whether affective, cognitive or behavioral, which results in
dysfunctional interpersonal family relationships including, but not
limited to familial relationships, marital/couple relationships,
parent-child relationships, pre-marital and other personal
relationships;
 (b) the use of mental health counseling, psychotherapy and therapeutic
techniques to evaluate and treat marital, relational, and family
systems, and individuals in relationship to these systems;
 (c) the use of mental health counseling and psychotherapeutic
techniques to treat mental, emotional and behavioral disorders and
ailments within the context of marital, relational and family systems to
prevent and ameliorate dysfunction; and
 (d) the use of assessment instruments and mental health counseling and
psychotherapy to identify and evaluate dysfunctions and disorders for
purposes of providing appropriate marriage and family therapy services.
 2. Practice of marriage and family therapy and use of the titles
"marriage and family therapist" and "licensed marriage and family
therapist". Only a person licensed or exempt under this article shall
practice marriage and family therapy or use the title "marriage and
family therapist". Only a person licensed under this article shall use
the titles "licensed marriage and family therapist", "licensed marriage
therapist", "licensed family therapist" or any other designation tending
to imply that the person is licensed to practice marriage and family
therapy.
 3. Requirements for a professional license. To qualify for a license
as a "licensed marriage and family therapist", an applicant shall
fulfill the following requirements:
 (a) Application: File an application with the department;
 (b) Education: Have received a master's or doctoral degree in marriage
and family therapy from a program registered by the department, or
determined by the department to be the substantial equivalent, in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations or a graduate degree in
an allied field from a program registered by the department and graduate
level coursework determined to be equivalent to that required in a
program registered by the department. This coursework shall include, but
not be limited to:
 (i) the study of human development, including individual, child and
family development;
 (ii) psychopathology;
 (iii) marital and family therapy;
 (iv) family law;
 (v) research;
 (vi) professional ethics; and
 (vii) a practicum of at least three hundred client contact hours;
 (c) Experience: The completion of at least one thousand five hundred
client contact hours of supervised clinical experience, by persons
holding a degree from a master's or doctoral program, or the substantial
equivalent, in accordance with the commissioner's regulations or the
completion of at least one thousand five hundred client hours of
supervised post-master's clinical experience in marriage and family
therapy satisfactory to the department in accordance with the
commissioner's regulations. Satisfactory experience obtained in an
entity operating under a waiver issued by the department pursuant to
section sixty-five hundred three-a of this title may be accepted by the
department, notwithstanding that such experience may have been obtained
prior to the effective date of such section sixty-five hundred three-a
and/or prior to the entity having obtained a waiver. The department may,
for good cause shown, accept satisfactory experience that was obtained
in a setting that would have been eligible for a waiver but which has
not obtained a waiver from the department or experience that was
obtained in good faith by the applicant under the belief that
appropriate authorization had been obtained for the experience, provided
that such experience meets all other requirements for acceptable
experience;
 (d) Examination: Pass an examination satisfactory to the board and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 (e) Age: Be at least twenty-one years of age;
 (f) Character: Be of good moral character as determined by the
department; and
 (g) Fees: Pay a fee of one hundred seventy-five dollars for an initial
license and a fee of one hundred seventy dollars for each triennial
registration period.
 § 8404. Creative arts therapy. 1. Definition of the practice of
creative arts therapy. The practice of the profession of creative arts
therapy is defined as:
 (a) the assessment, evaluation, and the therapeutic intervention and
treatment, which may be either primary, parallel or adjunctive, of
mental, emotional, developmental and behavioral disorders through the
use of the arts as approved by the department; and
 (b) the use of assessment instruments and mental health counseling and
psychotherapy to identify, evaluate and treat dysfunctions and disorders
for purposes of providing appropriate creative arts therapy services.
 2. Practice of creative arts therapy and use of the titles "creative
arts therapist" and "licensed creative arts therapist". Only a person
licensed or exempt under this article shall practice creative arts
therapy or use the title "creative arts therapist". Only a person
licensed under this article shall use the title "licensed creative arts
therapist" or any other designation tending to imply that the person is
licensed to practice creative arts therapy.
 3. Requirements for a professional license. To qualify for a license
as a "licensed creative arts therapist", an applicant shall fulfill the
following requirements:
 (a) Application: File an application with the department;
 (b) Education: Have received an education, including a master's or
higher degree in creative arts therapy from a program registered by the
department or determined by the department to be the substantial
equivalent thereof, in accordance with the commissioner's regulations.
The graduate coursework shall include, but not be limited to, the
following areas:
 (i) human growth and development;
 (ii) theories in therapy;
 (iii) group dynamics;
 (iv) assessment and appraisal of individuals and groups;
 (v) research and program evaluation;
 (vi) professional orientation and ethics;
 (vii) foundations of creative arts therapy and psychopathology; and
 (viii) clinical instruction;
 (c) Experience: Have completed at least fifteen hundred hours of
postmaster's supervised experience in one or more creative arts
therapies satisfactory to the department and in accordance with the
commissioner's regulations. Satisfactory experience obtained in an
entity operating under a waiver issued by the department pursuant to
section sixty-five hundred three-a of this title may be accepted by the
department, notwithstanding that such experience may have been obtained
prior to the effective date of such section sixty-five hundred three-a
and/or prior to the entity having obtained a waiver. The department may,
for good cause shown, accept satisfactory experience that was obtained
in a setting that would have been eligible for a waiver but which has
not obtained a waiver from the department or experience that was
obtained in good faith by the applicant under the belief that
appropriate authorization had been obtained for the experience, provided
that such experience meets all other requirements for acceptable
experience;
 (d) Examination: Pass an examination in creative arts therapy
satisfactory to the department and in accordance with the commissioner's
regulations;
 (e) Age: Be at least twenty-one years of age;
 (f) Character: Be of good moral character as determined by the
department; and
 (g) Fees: Pay a fee of one hundred seventy-five dollars for an initial
license and a fee of one hundred seventy dollars for each triennial
registration period.
 § 8405. Psychoanalysis. 1. Definition of the practice of
psychoanalysis. The practice of the profession of psychoanalysis is
defined as:
 (a) the observation, description, evaluation, and interpretation of
dynamic unconscious mental processes that contribute to the formation of
personality and behavior in order to identify and resolve unconscious
psychic problems which affect interpersonal relationships and emotional
development, to facilitate changes in personality and behavior through
the use of verbal and nonverbal cognitive and emotional communication,
and to develop adaptive functioning; and
 (b) the use of assessment instruments and mental health counseling and
psychotherapy to identify, evaluate and treat dysfunctions and disorders
for purposes of providing appropriate psychoanalytic services.
 2. Practice of psychoanalysis and use of the titles "psychoanalyst"
and "licensed psychoanalyst". Only a person licensed or exempt under
this article shall practice psychoanalysis or use the title
"psychoanalyst". Only a person licensed under this article shall use
the title "licensed psychoanalyst" or any other designation tending to
imply that the person is licensed to practice psychoanalysis.
 3. Requirements for a professional license. To qualify for a license
as a "licensed psychoanalyst", an applicant shall fulfill the following
requirements:
 (a) Application: File an application with the department;
 (b) Education: Have received a master's degree or higher from a
degree-granting program registered by the department or the substantial
equivalent and have completed a program of study registered by the
department in a psychoanalytic institute chartered by the board of
regents or the substantial equivalent as determined by the department.
The program of study in a psychoanalytic institute shall include
coursework substantially equivalent to coursework required for a
master's degree in a health or mental health field of study. The
coursework shall include, but not be limited to, the following areas:
 (i) personality development;
 (ii) psychoanalytic theory of psychopathology;
 (iii) psychoanalytic theory of psychodiagnosis;
 (iv) sociocultural influence on growth and psychopathology;
 (v) practice technique (including dreams and symbolic processes);
 (vi) analysis of resistance, transference, and countertransference;
 (vii) case seminars on clinical practice;
 (viii) practice in psychopathology and psychodiagnosis;
 (ix) professional ethics and psychoanalytic research methodology; and
 (x) a minimum of three hundred hours of personal analysis and one
hundred fifty hours of supervised analysis;
 (c) Experience: Have completed a minimum of fifteen hundred hours of
supervised clinical practice satisfactory to the department and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations. Satisfactory experience
obtained in an entity operating under a waiver issued by the department
pursuant to section sixty-five hundred three-a of this title may be
accepted by the department, notwithstanding that such experience may
have been obtained prior to the effective date of such section
sixty-five hundred three-a and/or prior to the entity having obtained a
waiver. The department may, for good cause shown, accept satisfactory
experience that was obtained in a setting that would have been eligible
for a waiver but which has not obtained a waiver from the department or
experience that was obtained in good faith by the applicant under the
belief that appropriate authorization had been obtained for the
experience, provided that such experience meets all other requirements
for acceptable experience;
 (d) Examination: Pass an examination in psychoanalysis satisfactory to
the department and in accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 (e) Age: Be at least twenty-one years of age;
 (f) Character: Be of good moral character as determined by the
department; and
 (g) Fees: Pay a fee of one hundred seventy-five dollars for an initial
license and a fee of one hundred seventy dollars for each triennial
registration period.
 § 8406. State board for mental health practitioners. A state board for
mental health practitioners shall be appointed by the board of regents
on the recommendation of the commissioner for the purpose of assisting
the board of regents and the department on matters of licensing and
regulation. The board shall be composed of at least three licensed
members from each profession licensed pursuant to this article and at
least three public representatives who do not hold interests in the
organization, financing, or delivery of mental health services.
Additionally, the board shall contain one physician who shall be a
psychiatrist. Members of the first board need not be licensed prior to
their appointment to the board. The terms of the first appointed members
shall be staggered so that five are appointed for three years, five are
appointed for four years, and six are appointed for five years. An
executive secretary to the board shall be appointed by the board of
regents on recommendation of the commissioner.
 § 8407. Boundaries of professional competency. 1. It shall be deemed
practicing outside the boundaries of his or her professional competence
for a person licensed pursuant to this article, in the case of treatment
of any serious mental illness, to provide any mental health service for
such illness on a continuous and sustained basis without a medical
evaluation of the illness by, and consultation with, a physician
regarding such illness, unless such licensed professional has been
issued a privilege to diagnosis and develop assessment-based treatment
plans by the department. Such medical evaluation and consultation shall
be to determine and advise whether any medical care is indicated for
such illness. For purposes of this section, "serious mental illness"
means schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder, bipolar disorder, major
depressive disorder, panic disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder,
attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder and autism.
 2. Any individual whose license or authority to practice derives from
the provisions of this article shall be prohibited from:
 (a) prescribing or administering drugs as defined in this chapter as a
treatment, therapy, or professional service in the practice of his or
her profession; or
 (b) using invasive procedures as a treatment, therapy, or professional
service in the practice of his or her profession. For purposes of this
subdivision, "invasive procedure" means any procedure in which human
tissue is cut, altered, or otherwise infiltrated by mechanical or other
means. Invasive procedure includes surgery, lasers, ionizing radiation,
therapeutic ultrasound, or electroconvulsive therapy.
 § 8408. Hospital privileges. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed
to authorize, grant, or extend hospital privileges to individuals
licensed under this article.
 § 8409. Limited permits. The following requirements for a limited
permit shall apply to all professions licensed pursuant to this article:
 1. The department may issue a limited permit to an applicant who meets
all qualifications for licensure, except the examination and/or
experience requirements, or to an applicant who is gaining experience
for the diagnostic privilege, in accordance with regulations promulgated
therefor.
 2. Limited permits shall be for two years; such limited permits may be
renewed, at the discretion of the department, for up to two additional
one year periods.
 3. The fee for each limited permit and for each renewal shall be
seventy dollars.
 § 8410. Exemptions. Nothing contained in this article shall be
construed to:
 1. Apply to the practice, conduct, activities, services or use of any
title by any person licensed or otherwise authorized to practice
medicine within the state pursuant to article one hundred thirty-one of
this title or by any person registered to perform services as a
physician assistant within the state pursuant to article one hundred
thirty-one-B of this title or by any person licensed or otherwise
authorized to practice psychology within this state pursuant to article
one hundred fifty-three of this title or by any person licensed or
otherwise authorized to practice social work within this state pursuant
to article one hundred fifty-four of this title, or by any person
licensed or otherwise authorized to practice nursing as a registered
professional nurse or nurse practitioner within this state pursuant to
article one hundred thirty-nine of this title or by any person licensed
or otherwise authorized to practice applied behavior analysis within the
state pursuant to article one hundred sixty-seven of this title;
provided, however, that no physician, physician's assistant, registered
professional nurse, nurse practitioner, psychologist, licensed master
social worker, licensed clinical social worker, licensed behavior
analyst or certified behavior analyst assistant may use the titles
"licensed mental health counselor", "licensed marriage and family
therapist", "licensed creative arts therapist", or "licensed
psychoanalyst", unless licensed under this article.
 2. Prohibit or limit any individual who is credentialed under any law,
including attorneys, rape crisis counselors, certified alcoholism
counselors and certified substance abuse counselors from providing
mental health services within their respective established authorities.
 3. Prohibit or limit the practice of a profession licensed pursuant to
this article by a student, intern or resident in, and as part of, a
supervised educational program in an institution approved by the
department.
 4. Prohibit or limit the provision of pastoral counseling services by
any member of the clergy or Christian Science practitioner, within the
context of his or her ministerial charge or obligation.
 5. Prohibit or limit individuals, churches, schools, teachers,
organizations, or not-for-profit businesses, from providing instruction,
advice, support, encouragement, or information to individuals, families,
and relational groups.
 6. Prohibit or limit an occupational therapist from performing work
consistent with article one hundred fifty-six of this title.
 7. Prohibit the practice of mental health counseling, marriage and
family therapy, creative arts therapy or psychoanalysis, to the extent
permissible within the scope of practice of such professions, by any
not-for-profit corporation or education corporation providing services
within the state of New York and operating under a waiver pursuant to
section sixty-five hundred three-a of this title, provided that such
entities offering mental health counseling, marriage and family therapy,
creative arts therapy or psychoanalysis services shall only provide such
services through an individual appropriately licensed or otherwise
authorized to provide such services or a professional entity authorized
by law to provide such services.
 8. (a) Prevent a person without a license from: performing assessments
including but not limited to basic information collection, gathering of
demographic data, and informal observations, screening and referral used
for general eligibility for a program or service and determining the
functional status of an individual for the purpose of determining need
for services; advising individuals regarding the appropriateness of
benefits they are eligible for; providing general advice and guidance
and assisting individuals or groups with difficult day to day problems
such as finding employment, locating sources of assistance, and
organizing community groups to work on a specific problem; providing
peer services; selecting for suitability and providing substance abuse
treatment services or group re-entry services to incarcerated
individuals in state correctional facilities; or providing substance
abuse treatment services or re-entry services to incarcerated
individuals in local correctional facilities.
 (b) Prevent a person without a license from creating, developing or
implementing a service plan or recovery plan that is not a behavioral
health diagnosis or treatment plan. Such service or recovery plans shall
include, but are not limited to, coordinating, evaluating or determining
the need for, or the provision of the following services: job training
and employability; housing; homeless services and shelters for homeless
individuals and families; refugee services; residential, day or
community habilitation services; general public assistance; in home
services and supports or home-delivered meals; recovery supports; adult
or child protective services including investigations; detention as
defined in section five hundred two of the executive law; prevention and
residential services for victims of domestic violence; services for
runaway and homeless youth; foster care, adoption, preventive services
or services in accordance with an approved plan pursuant to section four
hundred four of the social services law, including, adoption and foster
home studies and assessments, family service plans, transition plans,
permanency planning activities, and case planning or case management as
such terms are defined in the regulations of the office of children and
family services; residential rehabilitation; home and community based
services; and de-escalation techniques, peer services or skill
development.
 (c)(i) Prevent a person without a license from participating as a
member of a multi-disciplinary team to assist in the development of or
implementation of a behavioral health services or treatment plan;
provided that such team shall include one or more professionals licensed
under this article or articles one hundred thirty-one, one hundred
thirty-nine, one hundred fifty-three or one hundred fifty-four of this
chapter; and provided, further, that the activities performed by members
of the team shall be consistent with the scope of practice for each team
member licensed or authorized under title VIII of this chapter, and
those who are not so authorized may not engage in the following
restricted practices: the diagnosis of mental, emotional, behavioral,
addictive and developmental disorders and disabilities; patient
assessment and evaluating; the provision of psychotherapeutic treatment;
the provision of treatment other than psychotherapeutic treatment; or
independently developing and implementing assessment-based treatment
plans as defined in section seventy-seven hundred one of this chapter.
 (ii) For the purposes of this paragraph, "assist" shall include, but
not be limited to, the provision or performance of the following tasks,
services, or functions by an individual who has obtained the training
and experience required by the applicable state oversight agency to
perform such task, service or function in facilities or programs
operating pursuant to article nineteen-G of the executive law; articles
seven, sixteen, thirty-one or thirty-two of the mental hygiene law; or
title three of article seven of the social services law:
 (1) helping an individual with the completion of forms or
questionnaires;
 (2) reviewing existing case records and collecting background
information about an individual which may be used by the licensed
professional or multi-disciplinary team;
 (3) gathering and reporting information about previous behavioral
health interventions, hospitalizations, documented diagnosis, or prior
treatment for review by the licensed professional and multi-disciplinary
team;
 (4) discussing with the individual his or her situation, needs,
concerns, and thoughts in order to help identify services that support
the individual's goals, independence, and quality of life;
 (5) providing advice, information, and assistance to individuals and
family members to identify needs and available resources in the
community to help meet the needs of the individual or family member;
 (6) engaging in immediate and long-term problem solving, engaging in
the development of social skills, or providing general help in areas
including, but not limited to, housing, employment, child care,
parenting, community based services, and finances;
 (7) distributing paper copies of self-administered tests for the
individual to complete when such tests do not require the observation
and judgment of a licensed professional;
 (8) monitoring treatment by the collection of written and/or
observational data in accordance with the treatment plan and providing
verbal or written reports to the multi-disciplinary team;
 (9) identifying gaps in services and coordinating access to or
arranging services for individuals such as home care, community based
services, housing, employment, transportation, child care, vocational
training, or health care;
 (10) offering education programs that provide information about
disease identification and recommended treatments that may be provided,
and how to access such treatment;
 (11) reporting on behavior, actions, and responses to treatment by
collecting written and/or observational data as part of a
multi-disciplinary team;
 (12) using de-escalation techniques consistent with appropriate
training;
 (13) performing assessments using standardized, structured interview
tools or instruments;
 (14) directly delivering services outlined in the service plan that
are not clinical in nature but have been tailored to an individual based
on any diagnoses such individual may have received from a licensed
professional; and
 (15) advocating with educational, judicial or other systems to protect
an individual's rights and access to appropriate services.
 (d) Provided, further, that nothing in this subdivision shall be
construed as requiring a license for any particular activity or function
based solely on the fact that the activity or function is not listed in
this subdivision.
 9. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, nothing
in this article shall be construed to prohibit or limit the activities
or services provided under this article by any person who is employed or
who commences employment in a program or service operated, regulated,
funded, or approved by the department of mental hygiene, the office of
children and family services, the department of corrections and
community supervision, the office of temporary and disability
assistance, the state office for the aging and the department of health
or a local governmental unit as that term is defined in section 41.03 of
the mental hygiene law or a social services district as defined in
section sixty-one of the social services law on or before two years from
the date that the regulations issued in accordance with section six of
part Y of chapter fifty-seven of the laws of two thousand eighteen
appear in the state register or are adopted, whichever is later. Such
prohibitions or limitations shall not apply to such employees for as
long as they remain employed by such programs or services and whether
they remain employed by the same or other employers providing such
programs or services. Provided however, that any person who commences
employment in such program or service after such date and performs
services that are restricted under this article shall be appropriately
licensed or authorized under this article. Each state oversight agency
shall create and maintain a process to verify employment history of
individuals exempt under this subdivision.
 10. The activities or services provided by a person with a master's
level degree required for licensure pursuant to this article, working
under the supervision of a professional licensed pursuant to article one
hundred fifty-three, one hundred fifty-four or this article in a program
or service operated, regulated, funded, or approved by the department of
mental hygiene, the office of children and family services, the
department of corrections and community supervision, the office of
temporary and disability assistance, the state office for the aging and
the department of health or a local government unit as that term is
defined in section 41.03 of the mental hygiene law or a social services
district as defined in section sixty-one of the social services law.
 * 11. Prohibit or limit a mental health counselor, marriage and family
therapist, or psychoanalyst licensed and registered pursuant to this
article from engaging in diagnosis and the development of
assessment-based treatment plans, as defined in section eighty-four
hundred one of this article, in a facility setting or other supervised
settings approved by the department under supervision in accordance with
the commissioner's regulations.
 * NB Repealed June 24, 2027
 § 8411. Special provisions. 1. This section shall apply to all
professions licensed pursuant to this article, unless otherwise
provided.
 2. Any nonexempt person practicing a profession to be licensed
pursuant to this article shall apply for a license of said profession
within one year of the effective date of the specified profession.
 (a) If such person does not meet the requirements for a license
established within this article, such person may meet alternative
criteria determined by the department to be the substantial equivalent
of such criteria.
 (b) If such person meets the requirements for a license established
within this article, except for examination, and has been certified or
registered by a national certifying or registering body having
certification or registration standards acceptable to the commissioner,
the department shall license without examination.
 (c) If such person meets the requirements for a license established
within this article, except for examination, and there exists no
national certifying or registering body having certification or
registration standards acceptable to the commissioner, the department
shall license without examination if the applicant submits evidence
satisfactory to the department of having been engaged in the practice of
the specified profession for at least five of the immediately preceding
eight years.
 3. Any person licensed pursuant to this article may use accepted
classifications of signs, symptoms, dysfunctions and disorders, as
approved in accordance with regulations promulgated by the department,
in the practice of such licensed profession.
 § 8412. Mandatory continuing education. 1. (a) Each licensed mental
health counselor, marriage and family therapist, psychoanalyst, and
creative arts therapist required under this article to register
triennially with the department to practice in this state, shall comply
with the provisions of mandatory continuing education requirements
prescribed in subdivision two of this section, except as set forth in
paragraphs (b) and (c) of this subdivision. Licensed mental health
counselors, marriage and family therapists, psychoanalysts, and creative
arts therapists who do not satisfy the mandatory continuing education
requirements shall not practice until they have met such requirements,
and they have been issued a registration certificate, except that a
licensed mental health counselor, marriage and family therapist,
psychoanalyst, and creative arts therapist may practice without having
met such requirements if he or she is issued a conditional registration
certificate pursuant to subdivision three of this section.
 (b) Each licensed mental health counselor, marriage and family
therapist, psychoanalyst, and creative arts therapist shall be exempt
from the mandatory continuing education requirements for the triennial
registration period during which they are first licensed. In accordance
with the intent of this section, adjustment to the mandatory continuing
education requirement may be granted by the department for reasons of
health that are certified by an appropriate health care professional,
for extended active duty with the armed forces of the United States, or
for other good cause acceptable to the department which may prevent
compliance.
 (c) A licensed mental health counselor, marriage and family therapist,
psychoanalyst, and creative arts therapist not engaged in practice, as
determined by the department, shall be exempt from the mandatory
continuing education requirement upon the filing of a statement with the
department declaring such status. Any licensee who returns to the
practice of mental health counseling, marriage and family therapy,
psychoanalysis, and creative arts therapy during the triennial
registration period shall notify the department prior to reentering the
profession and shall meet such mandatory education requirements as shall
be prescribed by regulations of the commissioner.
 2. During each triennial registration period an applicant for
registration as a licensed mental health counselor, marriage and family
therapist, psychoanalyst, and creative arts therapist shall complete a
minimum of thirty-six hours of acceptable formal continuing education, a
maximum of twelve hours of which may be self-instructional course work
acceptable to the department. Any licensed mental health counselor,
marriage and family therapist, psychoanalyst, and creative arts
therapist whose first registration date following the effective date of
this section occurs less than three years from such effective date, but
on or after January first, two thousand seventeen, shall complete
continuing education hours on a prorated basis at the rate of one hour
per month for the period beginning January first, two thousand seventeen
up to the first registration date thereafter. A licensee who has not
satisfied the mandatory continuing education requirement shall not be
issued a triennial registration certificate by the department and shall
not practice unless and until a conditional registration certificate is
issued as provided for in subdivision three of this section. Continuing
education hours taken during one triennium may not be transferred to the
subsequent triennium.
 3. (a) The department, in its discretion, may issue a conditional
registration to a licensee who fails to meet the continuing education
requirements established in subdivision two of this section but who
agrees to make up any deficiencies and complete any additional education
which the department may require. The fee for such a conditional
registration shall be the same as, and in addition to, the fee for the
triennial registration. The duration of such conditional registration
shall be determined by the department but shall not exceed one year. Any
licensee who is notified of the denial of registration for failure to
submit evidence, satisfactory to the department, of required continuing
education and who practices without such registration may be subject to
disciplinary proceedings pursuant to section sixty-five hundred ten of
this title.
 (b) For purposes of this section "acceptable formal education" shall
mean formal courses of learning which contribute to professional
practice in mental health counseling, marriage and family therapy,
psychoanalysis, or creative arts therapies and which meet the standards
prescribed by regulations of the commissioner. Such formal courses of
learning shall include, but not be limited to, collegiate level credit
and non-credit courses, professional development programs and technical
sessions offered by national, state and local professional associations
and other organizations acceptable to the department, and any other
organized educational and technical programs acceptable to the
department. Continuing education courses must be taken from a provider
who has been approved by the department, based upon an application and
fee, pursuant to the regulations of the commissioner. The department
may, in its discretion and as needed to contribute to the health and
welfare of the public, require the completion of continuing education
courses in specific subjects to fulfill this mandatory continuing
education requirement. Licensed mental health counselors, marriage and
family therapists, psychoanalysts, and creative arts therapists shall
maintain adequate documentation of completion of acceptable formal
continuing education and shall provide such documentation at the request
of the department. Failure to provide such documentation upon the
request of the department shall be an act of misconduct subject to
disciplinary proceedings pursuant to section sixty-five hundred ten of
this title.
 (c) The mandatory continuing education fee shall be determined by the
department. Such fee shall be payable on or before the first day of each
triennial registration period, and shall be paid in addition to the
triennial registration fees required by paragraph (g) of subdivision
three of section eighty-four hundred two of this article and paragraph
(g) of subdivision three of section eighty-four hundred five of this
article.
 ARTICLE 164
 RESPIRATORY THERAPISTS AND RESPIRATORY THERAPY TECHNICIANS
Section 8500. Introduction.
 8501. Definition of the practice of respiratory therapy.
 8502. Practice of respiratory therapy and use of the title
 "respiratory therapist".
 8503. State board for respiratory therapy.
 8504. Requirements for licensure as a respiratory therapist.
 8504-a. Mandatory continuing education for respiratory
 therapists.
 8505. Exempt persons.
 8506. Limited permits.
 8507. Special provisions.
 8508. Definition of the practice of respiratory therapy
 technician.
 8509. Duties of respiratory therapy technicians and use of
 the title "respiratory therapy technician".
 8510. Requirements for licensure as a respiratory therapy
 technician.
 8510-a. Mandatory continuing education for respiratory therapy
 technicians.
 8511. Limited permits.
 8512. Exempt persons.
 8513. Special provisions.
 § 8500. Introduction. This article applies to the practice of
respiratory therapy and provides for the licensing of respiratory
therapists and respiratory therapy technicians. The general provisions
for all professions contained in article one hundred thirty of this
title shall apply to this article.
 § 8501. Definition of the practice of respiratory therapy. The
practice of the profession of respiratory therapy, which shall be
undertaken pursuant to the direction of a duly licensed physician, is
defined as the performance of cardiopulmonary evaluation, respiratory
therapy treatment techniques, and education of the patient, family and
public.
 1. Evaluation shall include the acquisition, analysis and
interpretation of data obtained from physiological specimens, performing
diagnostic tests, studies and research of the cardiopulmonary system and
neurophysiological studies related to respiratory care.
 2. Therapy shall include the application and monitoring of medical
gases (excluding anesthetic gases) and environmental control systems,
mechanical ventilatory support, artificial airway care, bronchopulmonary
hygiene, pharmacologic agents related to respiratory care procedures,
and cardiopulmonary rehabilitation related and limited to respiratory
care.
 3. Respiratory therapy services may be performed pursuant to a
prescription of a licensed physician or certified nurse practitioner.
 § 8502. Practice of respiratory therapy and use of the title
"respiratory therapist". 1. Only a person licensed or exempt under this
article shall practice respiratory therapy or use the title "respiratory
therapist".
 2. A licensed respiratory therapist may supervise respiratory therapy
technicians in the practice of their profession in such capacities as
are prescribed by law and as from time to time may be set by the
commissioner.
 § 8503. State board for respiratory therapy. A state board for
respiratory therapy shall be appointed by the board of regents on the
recommendation of the commissioner for the purpose of assisting the
board of regents and the department on matters of professional licensing
and conduct in accordance with section sixty-five hundred eight of this
title. The board shall be composed of not less than five licensed
respiratory therapists, two licensed respiratory therapy technicians,
and four additional members who shall include at least one licensed
physician and at least one public member. Members of the first board who
are respiratory therapy practitioners need not be licensed prior to
appointment on the board, provided, however, that the first appointed
respiratory therapists shall be registered by a national certifying or
accrediting board, acceptable to the department and the first appointed
respiratory therapy technicians shall be certified by a national
certifying or accrediting board, acceptable to the department. An
executive secretary to the board shall be appointed by the board of
regents on recommendation of the commissioner.
 § 8504. Requirements for licensure as a respiratory therapist. To
qualify for a license as a respiratory therapist, an applicant shall
fulfill the following requirements:
 1. Application: file an application with the department;
 2. Education: have received an education, including completion of an
approved associate degree program in respiratory therapy or in a program
determined by the department to be the equivalent;
 3. Experience: have experience satisfactory to the board and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 4. Examination: pass an examination satisfactory to the board and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 5. Age: be at least eighteen years of age;
 6. Character: be of good moral character as determined by the
department; and
 7. Fees: pay a fee of one hundred seventy-five dollars to the
department for admission to a department conducted examination and for
an initial license; a fee of eighty-five dollars for each
re-examination; a fee of one hundred fifteen dollars for an initial
license for persons not requiring admission to a department conducted
examination and a fee of one hundred fifty-five dollars for each
triennial registration period commencing on and after June first,
nineteen hundred ninety-three.
 § 8504-a. Mandatory continuing education for respiratory therapists.
1. (a) Each licensed respiratory therapist required under this article
to register triennially with the department to practice in the state
shall comply with provisions of the mandatory continuing education
requirements prescribed in subdivision two of this section except as set
forth in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this subdivision. Respiratory
therapists who do not satisfy the mandatory continuing education
requirement shall not practice until they have met such requirements,
and have been issued a registration certificate, except that a
respiratory therapist may practice without having met such requirements
if he or she is issued a conditional registration certificate pursuant
to subdivision three of this section.
 (b) Respiratory therapists shall be exempt from the mandatory
continuing education requirement for the triennial registration period
during which they are first licensed. In accord with the intent of this
section, adjustment to the mandatory continuing education requirement
may be granted by the department for reasons of health, certified by an
appropriate health care professional, for extended active duty with the
armed forces of the United States, or for other good cause acceptable to
the department which may prevent compliance.
 (c) A licensed respiratory therapist not engaged in practice as
determined by the department, shall be exempt from the mandatory
continuing education requirement upon the filing of a statement with the
department declaring such status. Any licensee who returns to their
respective practice as a respiratory therapist during the triennial
registration period shall notify the department prior to reentering the
profession and shall meet such mandatory education requirements as shall
be prescribed by regulations of the commissioner.
 2. During each triennial registration period an applicant for
registration as a respiratory therapist shall complete a minimum of
thirty hours of acceptable formal continuing education, as specified in
subdivision four of this section, provided that no more than fifteen
hours of such continuing education shall consist of self-study courses.
Any respiratory therapist whose first registration date following the
effective date of this section occurs less than three years from such
effective date, but on or after January first, two thousand one, shall
complete continuing education hours on a prorated basis at the rate of
five-sixths of one hour per month for the period beginning January
first, two thousand up to the first registration date thereafter. A
licensee who has not satisfied the mandatory continuing education
requirements shall not be issued a triennial registration certificate by
the department and shall not practice unless and until a conditional
registration certificate is issued as provided for in subdivision three
of this section. With the exception of continuing education hours
completed during the registration period immediately preceding the
effective date of this section, continuing education hours completed
during one triennium may not be transferred to a subsequent triennium.
 3. The department, in its discretion, may issue a conditional
registration to a licensee who fails to meet the continuing education
requirements established in subdivision two of this section but who
agrees to make up any deficiencies and complete any additional education
which the department may require. The fee for such a conditional
registration shall be the same as, and in addition to, the fee for the
triennial registration. The duration of such conditional registration
shall be determined by the department but shall not exceed one year. Any
licensee who is notified of the denial of registration for failure to
submit evidence, satisfactory to the department, of required continuing
education and who practices as a respiratory therapist without such
registration, may be subject to disciplinary proceedings pursuant to
section sixty-five hundred ten of this title.
 4. As used in subdivision two of this section, "acceptable formal
continuing education" for respiratory therapy shall mean formal courses
of learning which contribute to professional practice in respiratory
therapy and which meet the standards prescribed by regulations of the
commissioner. The department may, in its discretion and as needed to
contribute to the health and welfare of the public, require the
completion of continuing education courses in specific subjects.
 5. Respiratory therapists shall maintain adequate documentation of
completion of acceptable formal continuing education and shall provide
such documentation at the request of the department.
 6. The mandatory continuing education fee for respiratory therapists
shall be thirty dollars, shall be payable on or before the first day of
each triennial registration period, and shall be paid in addition to the
triennial registration fee required by section eighty-five hundred four
of this article.
 § 8505. Exempt persons. This article shall not prohibit:
 1. The practice of respiratory therapy as an integral part of a
program of study by students enrolled in approved respiratory therapy
education programs;
 2. The performance of any of the modalities included in the definition
of respiratory therapy by any other duly licensed, certified or
registered health care provider, provided that such modalities are
within the scope of his or her practice;
 3. Unlicensed assistants from being employed in a hospital, as defined
in article twenty-eight of the public health law, for purposes other
than the practice of respiratory therapy;
 4. The practice of respiratory therapy by any legally qualified
respiratory therapy practitioner of any other state or territory who is
serving in the armed forces or the public health service of the United
States or who is employed by the veterans administration, while engaged
in the performance of his or her duties.
 5. The provision of polysomnographic technology services, as defined
by the commissioner, by an individual, under the direction and
supervision of a licensed physician, who has obtained authorization
issued by the department. Such authorization shall be issued to
individuals who have met standards, including those relating to
education, experience, examination and character, as promulgated in
regulations of the commissioner. Such authorization shall be subject to
the full disciplinary and regulatory authority of the board of regents
and the department, pursuant to this title, as if such authorization
were a professional license issued under this article. The application
fee for such authorization shall be three hundred dollars. Each
authorization holder shall register with the department every three
years and shall pay a registration fee of three hundred dollars.
 § 8506. Limited permits. Permits limited as to eligibility, practice
and duration shall be issued by the department to eligible applicants as
follows:
 1. Eligibility. A person who fulfills all requirements for
registration as a respiratory therapist except that relating to the
examination shall be eligible for a limited permit.
 2. Limit of practice. All practice under a limited permit shall be
under the direct supervision of a licensed respiratory therapist
physician specializing in pulmonary medicine, an anesthesiologist or an
otherwise legally authorized physician.
 3. Duration. A limited permit shall expire one year from the date of
issuance or upon notice to the permittee by the department that the
application for licensure has been denied, or ten days after
notification to the permittee of failure on the professional licensing
examination, whichever first occurs; provided, however, that if the
permittee is awaiting the results of a licensing examination at the time
such limited permit expires, such permit shall continue to be valid
until ten days after notification to the permittee of the result of such
examination.
 4. Fees. The fee for each limited permit shall be seventy dollars.
 § 8507. Special provisions. A person shall be licensed without
examination provided that, within one year of the effective date of this
article, the individuals:
 1. files an application and pays the appropriate fees to the
department; and
 2. (a) is registered by a national certifying or accrediting board for
respiratory therapy acceptable to the department, or
 (b) has practiced respiratory therapy in a hospital, as defined in
article twenty-eight of the public health law, in the state for not less
than three years within the last five years prior to the effective date
of this article, or
 (c) has met the educational standards of a hospital, as defined in
article twenty-eight of the public health law, or, in the case of a
hospital operated by a public benefit corporation, has met the
educational standards of such corporation, and has practiced as a
respiratory therapist for at least one year in such hospital.
 § 8508. Definition of the practice of respiratory therapy technician.
A respiratory therapy technician means a person licensed in accordance
with this article who works under the supervision of a licensed
respiratory therapist or a licensed or otherwise legally authorized
physician performing tasks and responsibilities within the framework of
the practice of respiratory therapy.
 § 8509. Duties of respiratory therapy technicians and use of the title
"respiratory therapy technician". Only a person licensed or otherwise
authorized under this article shall participate in the practice of
respiratory therapy as a respiratory therapy technician and only a
person licensed under this article shall use the title "respiratory
therapy technician".
 § 8510. Requirements for licensure as a respiratory therapy
technician. To qualify for a license as a respiratory therapy
technician an applicant shall fulfill the following requirements:
 1. Application: file an application with the department;
 2. Education: have received an education including completion of high
school or its equivalent and have completed an approved one-year
certificate respiratory therapy education program, or a program
determined equivalent, in accordance with the commissioner's
regulations;
 3. Experience: have experience satisfactory to the board and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 4. Examination: pass an examination satisfactory to the board and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 5. Age: be at least eighteen years of age;
 6. Character: be of good moral character as determined by the
department; and
 7. Fees: pay a fee of ninety dollars to the department for admission
to a department conducted examination and for an initial license; a fee
of sixty dollars for each re-examination; a fee of fifty dollars for an
initial license for persons not requiring admission to a department
conducted examination and a fee of ninety dollars for each triennial
registration period commencing on and after June first, nineteen hundred
ninety-three.
 § 8510-a. Mandatory continuing education for respiratory therapy
technicians. 1. (a) Each licensed respiratory therapy technician
required under this article to register triennially with the department
to practice in the state shall comply with provisions of the mandatory
continuing education requirements prescribed in subdivision two of this
section except as set forth in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this
subdivision. Respiratory therapy technicians who do not satisfy the
mandatory continuing education requirement shall not practice until they
have met such requirements, and have been issued a registration
certificate, except that a respiratory therapy technician may practice
without having met such requirements if he or she is issued a
conditional registration certificate pursuant to subdivision three of
this section.
 (b) Respiratory therapy technicians shall be exempt from the mandatory
continuing education requirement for the triennial registration period
during which they are first licensed. In accord with the intent of this
section, adjustment to the mandatory continuing education requirement
may be granted by the department for reasons of health, certified by an
appropriate health care professional, for extended active duty with the
armed forces of the United States, or for other good cause acceptable to
the department which may prevent compliance.
 (c) A licensed respiratory therapy technician not engaged in practice
as determined by the department, shall be exempt from the mandatory
continuing education requirement upon the filing of a statement with the
department declaring such status. Any licensee who returns to their
respective practice as a respiratory therapy technician during the
triennial registration period shall notify the department prior to
reentering the profession and shall meet such mandatory education
requirements as shall be prescribed by regulations of the commissioner.
 2. During each triennial registration period an applicant for
registration as a respiratory therapy technician shall complete a
minimum of twenty-four hours of acceptable formal continuing education,
as specified in subdivision four of this section, provided that no more
than twelve hours of such continuing education shall consist of
self-study courses. Any respiratory therapy technician whose first
registration date following the effective date of this section occurs
less than three years from such effective date, but on or after January
first, two thousand one, shall complete continuing education hours on a
prorated basis at the rate of two-thirds of one hour per month for the
period beginning January first, two thousand up to the first
registration date thereafter. A licensee who has not satisfied the
mandatory continuing education requirements shall not be issued a
triennial registration certificate by the department and shall not
practice unless and until a conditional registration certificate is
issued as provided for in subdivision three of this section. With the
exception of continuing education hours taken during the registration
period immediately preceding the effective date of this section,
continuing education hours completed during one triennium may not be
transferred to a subsequent triennium.
 3. The department, in its discretion, may issue a conditional
registration to a licensee who fails to meet the continuing education
requirements established in subdivision two of this section but who
agrees to make up any deficiencies and complete any additional education
which the department may require. The fee for such a conditional
registration shall be the same as, and in addition to, the fee for the
triennial registration. The duration of such conditional registration
shall be determined by the department but shall not exceed one year. Any
licensee who is notified of the denial of registration for failure to
submit evidence, satisfactory to the department, of required continuing
education and who practices as a respiratory therapy technician without
such registration, may be subject to the disciplinary proceedings
pursuant to section sixty-five hundred ten of this title.
 4. As used in subdivision two of this section, "acceptable formal
continuing education" for respiratory therapy technicians shall mean
formal courses of learning which contribute to professional practice as
a respiratory therapy technician and which meet the standards prescribed
by regulations of the commissioner. The department may, in its
discretion and as needed to contribute to the health and welfare of the
public, require the completion of continuing education courses in
specific subjects.
 5. Respiratory therapy technicians shall maintain adequate
documentation of completion of acceptable formal continuing education
and shall provide such documentation at the request of the department.
 6. The mandatory continuing education fee for respiratory therapy
technicians shall be twenty-five dollars, shall be payable on or before
the first day of each triennial registration period, and shall be paid
in addition to the triennial registration fee required by section
eighty-five hundred ten of this article.
 § 8511. Limited permits. 1. Eligibility. The department may issue a
limited permit to an applicant who meets all requirements for admission
to the licensing examination.
 2. Limit of practice. All practice under a limited permit shall be
under the direct supervision of a licensed respiratory therapist or a
licensed or otherwise legally authorized physician.
 3. Duration. A limited permit shall expire one year from the date of
issuance or upon notice to the permittee by the department that the
application for registration has been denied, or ten days after
notification to the permittee of failure on the professional licensing
examination, whichever first occurs; provided, however, that if the
permittee is awaiting the results of a licensing examination at the time
such limited permit expires, such permit shall continue to be valid
until ten days after notification to the permittee of the result of such
examination.
 4. Fees. The fee for each limited permit shall be fifty dollars.
 § 8512. Exempt persons. This article shall not prohibit:
 1. a respiratory therapy student or a respiratory therapy technician
student from engaging in clinical assistance under the supervision of a
licensed respiratory therapist or a licensed or otherwise legally
authorized physician as an integral part of a program of study by
students enrolled in an approved respiratory therapy technician program
or in a clinical facility or health care agency affiliated with the
program for respiratory therapy technicians; or
 2. the performance of any of the tasks or responsibilities included in
the definition of respiratory therapy technician by any other duly
licensed, certified or registered health care provider, provided that
such tasks or responsibilities are within the scope of his or her
practice; or
 3. unlicensed assistants from being employed in a hospital, as defined
in article twenty-eight of the public health law, for purposes other
than the practice of respiratory therapy technician; or
 4. the practice of respiratory therapy by any legally qualified
respiratory therapy practitioner of any other state or territory who is
serving in the armed forces or the public health service of the United
States or who is employed by the veterans administration, while engaged
in the performance of his or her duties.
 § 8513. Special provisions. A person shall be licensed without
examination provided that, within one year of the effective date of this
article, the individual:
 1. files an application and pays the appropriate fees to the
department; and
 2. (a) is certified by a national certifying or accrediting board for
respiratory therapy technicians acceptable to the department, or
 (b) has practiced as a respiratory therapy technician in a hospital,
as defined in article twenty-eight of the public health law, in the
state for not less than two years within the last five years, or
 (c) has met the educational standards of a hospital, as defined in
article twenty-eight of the public health law, or, in the case of a
hospital operated by a public benefit corporation, has met the
educational standards of such corporation, and has practiced as a
respiratory therapy technician for at least one year in such hospital.
 ARTICLE 165
 CLINICAL LABORATORY TECHNOLOGY PRACTICE ACT
Section 8600. Introduction.
 8601. Definition of the practice of clinical laboratory
 technology and clinical laboratory technology
 practitioner.
 8602. Practice of clinical laboratory technology,
 cytotechnology and histotechnology and use of the
 titles "licensed clinical laboratory technologist",
 "licensed cytotechnologist" and "licensed
 histotechnologist".
 8603. Practice as a clinical laboratory technician and
 histotechnician and the use of the titles "clinical
 laboratory technician" and "histotechnician".
 8604. State board for clinical laboratory technology.
 8605. Requirements for a license as a clinical laboratory
 technologist or cytotechnologist.
 8606. Requirements for certification as a clinical laboratory
 technician.
 8606-a. Requirements for certification as a histotechnician.
 8606-b. Requirements for licensure as a histotechnologist.
 8607. Special provisions.
 8608. Limited and provisional permits.
 8609. Exempt persons.
 8610. Restricted clinical laboratory licenses.
 § 8600. Introduction. This article defines the practice of clinical
laboratory technology and provides for the licensing of clinical
laboratory technologists, cytotechnologists, and histotechnologists and
for the certification of clinical laboratory technicians and
histotechnicians. The general provisions for all professions contained
in article one hundred thirty of this title shall apply to this article.
 § 8601. Definition of the practice of clinical laboratory technology
and clinical laboratory technology practitioner. 1. "Clinical laboratory
technology" means the performance of microbiological, virological,
serological, chemical, immunohematological, hematological, biophysical,
cytogenetical, cytological or histological procedures and examinations
and any other test or procedure conducted by a laboratory as defined by
title five of article five of the public health law, on material derived
from the human body which provides information for the diagnosis,
prevention or treatment of a disease or assessment of a human medical
condition.
 2. A "clinical laboratory practitioner" means clinical laboratory
technologists, cytotechnologists, histotechnologists, clinical
laboratory technicians, and histotechnicians as such terms are defined
in this subdivision, who practice clinical laboratory technology in a
licensed clinical laboratory. For the purposes of this article, a
licensed clinical laboratory does not include a laboratory operated by
any licensed physician, dentist, podiatrist, midwife or certified nurse
practitioner who performs laboratory tests or procedures, personally or
through his or her employees, solely as an adjunct to the treatment of
his or her own patients.
 (a) "Clinical laboratory technologist" means a clinical laboratory
practitioner who, pursuant to established and approved protocols of the
department of health, performs clinical laboratory procedures and
examinations and any other tests or procedures conducted by a clinical
laboratory, including maintaining equipment and records, and performing
quality assurance activities related to examination performance, and
which require the exercise of independent judgment and responsibility,
as determined by the department.
 (b) "Cytotechnologist" means a clinical laboratory practitioner who,
pursuant to established and approved protocols of the department of
health, performs cytological procedures and examinations and any other
such tests including maintaining equipment and records and performing
quality assurance activities related to examination performance, and
which require the exercise of independent judgment and responsibility,
as determined by the department.
 (c) "Histotechnologist" means a clinical laboratory practitioner who
pursuant to established and approved protocols of the department of
health performs slide based histological assays, tests, and procedures
and any other such tests conducted by a clinical histology laboratory,
including maintaining equipment and records and performing quality
assurance activities relating to procedure performance on histological
testing of human tissues, and which requires the exercise of independent
judgment and responsibility as determined by the department.
 (d) "Clinical laboratory technician" means a clinical laboratory
practitioner who performs clinical laboratory procedures and
examinations pursuant to established and approved protocols of the
department of health, which require limited exercise of independent
judgment and which are performed under the supervision of a clinical
laboratory technologist, laboratory supervisor, or director of a
clinical laboratory.
 (e) "Histotechnician" means a clinical laboratory practitioner who
pursuant to established and approved protocols of the department of
health performs slide based histological assays, tests, and procedures
and any other such tests conducted by a clinical histology laboratory,
including maintaining equipment and records and performing quality
assurance activities relating to procedure performance on histological
testing of human tissues and which requires limited exercise of
independent judgment and is performed under the supervision of a
laboratory supervisor, designated by the director of a clinical
laboratory or under the supervision of the director of the clinical
laboratory.
 (f) "Director of a clinical laboratory" means a director as that term
is defined in section five hundred seventy-one of the public health law.
 (g) "Laboratory supervisor" means an individual who, under the general
direction of the laboratory director, supervises technical personnel and
reporting of findings, performs tests requiring special scientific
skills, and, in the absence of the director, is responsible for the
proper performance of all laboratory procedures.
 § 8602. Practice of clinical laboratory technology, cytotechnology and
histotechnology and use of the titles "licensed clinical laboratory
technologist", "licensed cytotechnologist" and "licensed
histotechnologist". No person shall practice as a clinical laboratory
technologist, cytotechnologist or histotechnologist, or hold himself or
herself out as a clinical laboratory technologist, or a
cytotechnologist, or a histotechnologist in this state unless he or she
is licensed or exempt pursuant to this article.
 § 8603. Practice as a clinical laboratory technician and
histotechnician and the use of the titles "clinical laboratory
technician" and "histotechnician". No person shall practice as a
clinical laboratory technician or as a histotechnician or hold himself
or herself out as a clinical laboratory technician or a histotechnician
in this state unless he or she is certified or exempt pursuant to this
article, provided that an individual licensed as a clinical laboratory
technologist, cytotechnologist, histotechnologist, or clinical
laboratory technician may practice the profession of histotechnician.
 § 8604. State board for clinical laboratory technology. A state board
for clinical laboratory technology shall be appointed by the board of
regents upon the recommendation of the commissioner for the purpose of
assisting the board of regents and the department on matters of
professional licensing and professional conduct in accordance with
section sixty-five hundred eight of this title. The board shall be
composed of twelve members, four of whom shall be licensed clinical
laboratory technologists, two of whom shall be licensed
cytotechnologists, one of whom shall be a certified clinical laboratory
technician, one of whom shall be a licensed histotechnologist or
certified histotechnician, two members of the public, one representative
of the diagnostic/manufacturing industry, and one director of a clinical
laboratory who shall be a physician. An executive secretary to the board
shall be appointed by the board of regents upon the recommendation of
the commissioner. The clinical laboratory practitioner members of the
initial board need not be licensed prior to their appointment but shall
have met all other requirements of licensing except the filing of an
application, the passing of a satisfactory exam and paying a fee.
 § 8605. Requirements for a license as a clinical laboratory
technologist or cytotechnologist. To qualify for a license as a clinical
laboratory technology practitioner under one of the titles defined in
subdivision two of section eighty-six hundred one of this article, an
applicant shall fulfill the particular requirements of a subdivision of
this section applicable to the license and title sought by the
applicant:
 1. Licensure as a clinical laboratory technologist.
 (a) Application: file an application with the department;
 (b) Education: have received an education, including a bachelor's
degree in clinical laboratory technology from a program registered by
the department or determined by the department to be the substantial
equivalent or a clinical laboratory technology program accredited by a
national accrediting organization acceptable to the department, or have
received a bachelor's degree that includes a minimum number of credit
hours in the sciences and received appropriate clinical education in an
accredited clinical laboratory technology program or a program to be
determined by the department to be the substantial equivalent;
 (b-1) Alternatives to education:
 (i) In lieu of requirements specified in paragraph (b) of this
subdivision the department may accept:
 (1) current clinical laboratory technology certification by a national
certification organization acceptable to the department; or
 (2) clinical laboratory technology licensure in a jurisdiction
acceptable to the department;
 (ii) In lieu of requirements specified in paragraph (b) of this
subdivision the department may accept, a bachelor's degree in a natural
science or a clinical laboratory science and coursework acceptable to
the department and:
 (1) two years' experience in a clinical laboratory while licensed as a
clinical laboratory technician in New York or another jurisdiction
acceptable to the department; or
 (2) two years' experience in a clinical laboratory while certified as
a clinical laboratory technician by a national certification
organization acceptable to the department.
 (c) Examination: pass an examination satisfactory to the board and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 (d) Age: be at least eighteen years of age;
 (e) Character: be of good moral character as determined by the
department; and
 (f) Fees: pay a fee of one hundred seventy-five dollars for an initial
license and a fee of one hundred seventy dollars for each triennial
registration period.
 2. Licensure as a cytotechnologist.
 (a) Application: file an application with the department;
 (b) Education: have received an education, including a bachelor's
degree in cytotechnology from a program registered by the department or
determined by the department to be the substantial equivalent, or have
received a bachelor's degree that includes a minimum number of credit
hours in the sciences and received appropriate clinical education in an
accredited cytotechnology program or a program determined by the
department to be the substantial equivalent;
 (b-1) Alternatives to education: in lieu of requirements specified in
paragraph (b) of this subdivision the department may accept:
 (i) current cytotechnology certification by a national certification
organization acceptable to the department; or
 (ii) cytotechnology licensure in a jurisdiction acceptable to the
department.
 (c) Examination: pass an examination acceptable to the board and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 (d) Age: be at least eighteen years of age;
 (e) Character: be of good moral character as determined by the
department; and
 (f) Fees: pay a fee of one hundred seventy-five dollars for an initial
license and a fee of one hundred seventy dollars for each triennial
registration period.
 § 8606. Requirements for certification as a clinical laboratory
technician. For certification as a clinical laboratory technician under
this article, an applicant shall fulfill the following requirements:
 1. Application: file an application with the department;
 2. Education: have received an education, including an associate's
degree from an approved clinical laboratory technician program
registered by the department or determined by the department to be the
substantial equivalent, or an associate's degree clinical laboratory
technician program accredited by a national accrediting organization
acceptable to the department, or an associate's degree program in a
natural science or a clinical laboratory science and coursework
acceptable to the department and a clinical laboratory technician
program accredited by a national accrediting organization acceptable to
the department;
 2-a. Alternatives to education: in lieu of requirements specified in
subdivision two of this section the department may accept:
 (a) current clinical laboratory technician certification by a national
certification organization acceptable to the department; or
 (b) clinical laboratory technician licensure in a jurisdiction
acceptable to the department.
 3. Examination: pass an examination satisfactory to the board and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 4. Age: be at least eighteen years of age;
 5. Character: be of good moral character as determined by the
department; and
 6. Fees: pay a fee of one hundred twenty-five dollars for an initial
certification and a fee of one hundred twenty dollars for each triennial
registration period.
 § 8606-a. Requirements for certification as a histotechnician. For
certification as a histotechnician under this article, an applicant
shall fulfill the following requirements:
 1. Application: file an application with the department;
 2. Education: have received an education, including an associate's
degree from an approved histotechnician program registered by the
department or determined by the department to be the substantial
equivalent, or have received an associate's degree that includes a
minimum number of credit hours in the sciences and received appropriate
clinical education in a histotechnician program approved by the
department or a program to be determined by the department to be the
substantial equivalent or a histotechnician program accredited by a
national accrediting organization acceptable to the department;
 2-a. Alternatives to education: in lieu of requirements specified in
subdivision two of this section the department may accept:
 (a) current histotechnician certification by a national certification
organization acceptable to the department; or
 (b) histotechnician licensure in a jurisdiction acceptable to the
department.
 3. Examination: pass an examination satisfactory to the board and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 4. Age: be at least eighteen years of age;
 5. Character: be of good moral character as determined by the
department; and
 6. Fees: pay a fee of one hundred twenty-five dollars for an initial
certification and a fee of one hundred twenty dollars for each triennial
registration period.
 § 8606-b. Requirements for licensure as a histotechnologist. For
certification as a histotechnologist under this article, an applicant
shall fulfill the following requirements:
 1. Application: file an application with the department;
 2. Education: have completed one of following requirements:
 (a) a bachelor's degree program in histotechnology registered by the
department or determined by the department to be the substantial
equivalent, or a histotechnology program accredited by a national
accrediting organization acceptable to the department; or
 (b) a bachelor's degree program in a natural science or a laboratory
science and a minimum number of credit hours acceptable to the
department, and appropriate clinical education in a histotechnologist
program accredited by a national accrediting organization acceptable to
the department or a program registered by the department or determined
by the department to be the substantial equivalent; or
 (c) current histotechnologist certification by a national
certification organization acceptable to the department; or
 (d) histotechnologist licensure in a jurisdiction acceptable to the
department;
 3. Alternatives to education: in lieu of requirements specified in
subdivision two of this section the department may accept, a bachelor's
degree in a natural science or a clinical laboratory science and
coursework acceptable to the department and:
 (a) two years' experience in a clinical laboratory while licensed as a
histotechnician in New York or another jurisdiction acceptable to the
department; or
 (b) two years' experience in a clinical laboratory while certified as
a histotechnician by a national certification organization acceptable to
the department.
 4. Examination: pass an examination satisfactory to the board and in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations;
 5. Age: be at least eighteen years of age;
 6. Character: be of good moral character as determined by the
department; and
 7. Fees: pay a fee of one hundred seventy-five dollars for an initial
license and a fee of one hundred seventy dollars for each triennial
registration period.
 § 8607. Special provisions. 1. Notwithstanding the requirements of
section eighty-six hundred five and eighty-six hundred six of this
article, and until July first, two thousand nine, an individual may be
licensed as a clinical laboratory technology practitioner, as defined in
section eighty-six hundred one of this article, provided that an
individual may be licensed pursuant to subparagraph (vi) of paragraph
(a) or subparagraph (iii) of paragraph (b) of this subdivision until
December thirty-first, two thousand thirteen provided such person:
 (a) In the case of clinical laboratory technologist, has either:
 (i) met the educational requirements for clinical laboratory
technologist as defined in section eighty-six hundred five of this
article and has been performing the duties of a clinical laboratory
technologist for two of the past five years prior to December
thirty-first, two thousand seven; or completed an approved baccalaureate
degree program in biological, chemical or physical sciences from an
accredited college or university and has been performing the duties of a
clinical laboratory technologist for two of the past five years prior to
December thirty-first, two thousand seven;
 (ii) been engaged full-time in the education of clinical laboratory
practitioners for the equivalent of two of the past five years prior to
December thirty-first, two thousand seven;
 (iii) performed the duties of a clinical laboratory technologist for
at least five years prior to December thirty-first, two thousand seven
as verified by a director of a clinical laboratory;
 (iv) become previously qualified under other regulatory requirements
for that license or its equivalent;
 (v) become a currently certified clinical laboratory technician with a
bachelor's degree from an accredited college that includes a minimum
number of credit hours in the sciences and four years of documented work
experience as a clinical laboratory technician, acceptable to the
department; or
 (vi) become qualified to perform the duties of a clinical laboratory
technologist in a clinical laboratory operated in accordance with title
five of article five of the public health law and the regulations
promulgated thereunder, and competently performed the duties of a
clinical laboratory technologist in a clinical laboratory for a period
of not less than six months in the three years immediately preceding
December thirty-first, two thousand seven as verified by a director of
the clinical laboratory.
 (b) In the case of a clinical laboratory technician, has either:
 (i) met the educational requirements of a clinical laboratory
technician as defined in section eighty-six hundred six of this article
and performed the duties of a clinical laboratory technician for two of
the past five years prior to December thirty-first, two thousand seven;
 (ii) performed the duties of a clinical laboratory technician for at
least five years prior to December thirty-first, two thousand seven or
has previously qualified under other regulatory requirements for such a
certification or such certification's equivalent; or
 (iii) become qualified to perform the duties of a clinical laboratory
technician in a clinical laboratory operated in accordance with title
five of article five of the public health law and the regulations
promulgated thereunder, and competently performed the duties of a
clinical laboratory technician in a clinical laboratory for a period of
not less than six months in the three years immediately preceding
December thirty-first, two thousand seven as verified by a director of
the clinical laboratory.
 (c) In the case of cytotechnologist, has either:
 (i) met the educational requirements of a cytotechnologist as defined
in section eighty-six hundred five of this article and performed the
duties of a cytotechnologist for two of the previous five years prior to
December thirty-first, two thousand seven;
 (ii) performed the duties of a cytotechnologist for at least five
years prior to December thirty-first, two thousand seven as verified by
a director of a clinical laboratory; or
 (iii) has previously qualified under other regulatory requirements for
such a license or such license's equivalent.
 (d) In the case of a histological technician, has either:
 (i) met the educational requirements of a histological technician as
defined in section eighty-six hundred six-a of this article and
performed the duties of a histological technician for two of the past
five years prior to December thirty-first, two thousand seven;
 (ii) performed the duties of a histological technician for at least
five years prior to December thirty-first, two thousand seven or has
previously qualified under other regulatory requirements for such a
certification or such certification's equivalent; or
 (iii) become qualified to perform the duties of a histological
technician in a clinical laboratory operated in accordance with title
five of article five of the public health law and the regulations
promulgated thereunder, and competently performed the duties of a
histological technician in a clinical laboratory for a period of not
less than six months in the three years immediately preceding December
thirty-first, two thousand seven as verified by a director of the
clinical laboratory.
 2. For the purposes of subdivision one of this section, it shall be
determined that the filing of an application with the department on or
before January first, two thousand nine shall qualify for purposes of
such subdivision, regardless of the time period required for processing
such application, provided that an application for licensure pursuant to
subparagraph (vi) of paragraph (a), subparagraph (iii) of paragraph (b),
or subparagraph (iii) or paragraph (d) of subdivision one of this
section shall be submitted on or before September first, two thousand
thirteen.
 3. The commissioner may adopt such regulations as appropriate to
license or certify individuals who hold valid licenses, certifications
or their equivalent in another state or country, provided the standards
for granting licenses or certifications to such individuals are not less
than the standards required of persons otherwise licensed or certified
pursuant to this article.
 § 8608. Limited and provisional permits. 1. Limited permit. On the
recommendation of the board, the department may issue a limited permit
to practice as a clinical laboratory practitioner to an applicant who
has met all requirements for licensure as a clinical laboratory
technologist or cytotechnologist, histotechnologist, or certification as
a clinical laboratory technician or histotechnician, except those
relating to the examination and provided that the individual is under
the general supervision of the director of a clinical laboratory, as
determined by the department. This limited permit shall be valid for a
period of not more than two years and shall not be renewable.
 2. Provisional permit. (a) On the recommendation of the board, the
department may issue a provisional permit to practice as a clinical
laboratory practitioner to an applicant who is employed in a clinical
laboratory for the purpose of enabling the applicant to complete the
education requirements and/or to pass the exam required for licensure as
a clinical laboratory technologist or histotechnician and provided that
the individual is under the general supervision of the director of a
clinical laboratory, as determined by the department, and provided
further that the applicant meets the requirements outlined in paragraph
(b) of this subdivision. This provisional permit shall be valid for a
period of not more than two years and shall not be renewable.
 (b) To qualify for a provisional permit, the applicant shall:
 (i) file a provisional permit application with the department;
 (ii) have at least one of the following enumerated qualifications:
 (A) be licensed as a clinical laboratory technologist, or the
equivalent as determined by the department, in another jurisdiction or
possess a current certification in clinical laboratory technology from a
national certification organization acceptable to the department; or
 (B) have received both an education, including a bachelor's degree in
the biological, chemical, or physical sciences, and training in a
clinical laboratory, provided that such education and training are
acceptable to the department; or
 (C) have received a bachelor's degree in the biological, chemical, or
physical sciences or in mathematics, and have served as a research
assistant in a research laboratory, under the direction of the director
or the principal researcher of such research laboratory, working on the
research and development of any procedures and examinations to be
conducted by a laboratory, as defined in title five of article five of
the public health law, on material derived from the human body which
provides information for the diagnosis, prevention or treatment of a
disease or assessment of a human medical condition; or
 (D) for those seeking a provisional permit as a histotechnician, have
received an education, including an associate's degree that includes a
minimum number of credit hours in the sciences, provided that such
education is acceptable to the department;
 (iii) be at least eighteen years of age;
 (iv) be of good moral character as determined by the department;
 (v) pay a fee of fifty dollars for a provisional permit;
 (vi) file a licensure application with the department; and
 (vii) pay the licensure fee as outlined in section eighty-six hundred
six of this article.
 (c) Each provisional permit shall be subject to the disciplinary
provisions applicable to licensees pursuant to subarticle three of
article one hundred thirty of this title.
 3. The board of regents and the department are authorized to adopt
such rules and regulations as may be necessary to implement the
provisions of this section.
 § 8609. Exempt persons. This article shall not be construed to apply
to:
 1. the practice, conduct, activities, or services by any person
licensed or otherwise authorized to practice medicine within the state
pursuant to article one hundred thirty-one-B of this title, or by any
person registered to perform services as a physician assistant or
specialist assistant within the state pursuant to article one hundred
thirty-one-B of this title, or by any person licensed to practice
dentistry within the state pursuant to article one hundred thirty-three
of this title, or by any person licensed to practice podiatry within the
state pursuant to article one hundred forty-one of this title, or by any
person certified as a nurse practitioner within the state pursuant to
article one hundred thirty-nine of this title, or by any person licensed
to perform services as a respiratory therapist or respiratory therapy
technician under article one hundred sixty-four of this title, or any
person licensed to practice midwifery within the state pursuant to
article one hundred forty of this title, or a person licensed to
practice nursing pursuant to article one hundred thirty-nine of this
title, or a person licensed to practice pursuant to article thirty-five
of the public health law; provided, however, that no such person shall
use the titles licensed clinical laboratory technologist, licensed
cytotechnologist, licensed histotechnologist, certified clinical
laboratory technician, or certified histotechnician, unless licensed or
certified under this article; or
 2. clinical laboratory technology practitioners employed by the United
States government or any bureau, division, or agency thereof, while in
the discharge of the employee's official duties; or
 3. clinical laboratory technology practitioners employed by the New
York State Department of Health Wadsworth Center Laboratory or the New
York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene Public Health
Laboratory, while in the discharge of the employee's official duties; or
 4. clinical laboratory technology practitioners engaged in teaching or
research, provided that the results of any examination performed are not
used in health maintenance, diagnosis or treatment of disease and are
not added to the patient's permanent record; or
 5. students or trainees enrolled in approved clinical laboratory
science or technology education programs or training programs described
in subparagraph (iii) of paragraph (c) of subdivision one of section
eighty-six hundred ten of this article provided that these activities
constitute a part of a planned course in the program, that the persons
are designated by a title such as intern, trainee, fellow or student,
and the persons work directly under the supervision of an individual
licensed or exempt pursuant to subdivision one, two, four or eight of
this section; or
 6. persons employed by a clinical laboratory to perform supportive
functions not related to the direct performance of laboratory procedures
or examinations; or
 7. persons who are working in facilities registered pursuant to
section five hundred seventy-nine of the public health law and only
perform waived tests as defined in section five hundred seventy-one of
the public health law pursuant to such registration; or
 8. a director of a clinical laboratory holding a valid certificate of
qualification pursuant to section five hundred seventy-three of the
public health law.
 § 8610. Restricted clinical laboratory licenses. 1. Restricted
clinical laboratory license.
 (a) The department may issue a restricted license pursuant to which
the restricted licensee may receive a certificate to perform certain
examinations and procedures within the definition of clinical laboratory
technology set forth in subdivision one of section eighty-six hundred
one of this article, provided that such a restricted licensee may
perform examinations and procedures only in those of the following areas
which are specifically listed in his or her certificate:
histocompatibility, cytogenetics, stem cell process, flow
cytometry/cellular immunology, molecular testing, and toxicology (under
paragraph (b-1) of this subdivision).
 (b) Notwithstanding paragraph (a) of this subdivision, restricted
licensees employed at National Cancer Institute designated cancer
centers or at teaching hospitals that are eligible for distributions
pursuant to paragraph (c) of subdivision three of section twenty-eight
hundred seven-m of the public health law may receive a certificate that
also includes the practice of molecular testing including but not
limited to genetic testing-molecular and molecular oncology, and
restricted licensees employed at national cancer institute designated
cancer centers may receive a certificate that includes the use of mass
spectrometry or any tests and procedures acceptable to the commissioner
of health, in consultation with the commissioner, in the field of
proteomics, provided that such certificate holders may practice in such
additional areas only at such centers, teaching hospitals or other sites
as may be designated by the commissioner.
 (b-1) Only individuals employed in a New York state department of
health authorized toxicology laboratory, operating under the direction
of a clinical laboratory director, may obtain a certificate in
toxicology.
 (c) To qualify for a restricted license, an applicant shall:
 (i) file an application with the department;
 (ii) have received an education, including a bachelor's degree in the
biological, chemical, or physical sciences or in mathematics from a
program registered by the department or determined by the department to
be the substantial equivalent;
 (iii) have completed a training program with a planned sequence of
supervised employment or engagement in activities appropriate for the
area of certification, which training program is satisfactory to the
department in quality, breadth, scope and nature and is provided by an
entity that shall be responsible for the services provided. The training
program shall be described and attested to by the clinical director of
the laboratory in which it is located prior to the beginning of the
program. The duration of the training program shall be one year of
full-time training in the specific areas in which the applicant is
seeking certification or the part-time equivalent thereof, as determined
by the department, and the successful completion of such program shall
be certified by a laboratory director who is responsible for overseeing
such program;
 (iv) be at least eighteen years of age;
 (v) be of good moral character as determined by the department; and
 (vi) pay a fee of one hundred seventy-five dollars for an initial
restricted license and a fee of one hundred seventy dollars for each
triennial registration period.
 (d) Each restricted licensee shall register with the department as
required of licensees pursuant to section sixty-five hundred two of this
title and shall be subject to the disciplinary provisions applicable to
licensees pursuant to subarticle three of article one hundred thirty of
this title.
 2. The board of regents and the department are authorized to adopt
such rules and regulations as may be necessary to implement the
provisions of this section.
 3. Nothing in this section shall restrict a clinical laboratory
practitioner, as defined in subdivision two of section eighty-six
hundred one of this article, from performing any of the examinations or
procedures which restricted clinical laboratory licensees are permitted
to perform under this section and which such clinical laboratory
practitioner is otherwise authorized to perform.
 ARTICLE 166
 MEDICAL PHYSICS PRACTICE
Section 8700. Introduction.
 8701. Definitions.
 8702. Definition of "practice of medical physics".
 8703. Use of the title "professional medical physicist".
 8704. State committee for medical physics.
 8705. Requirements and procedures for professional licensure.
 8706. Limited permits.
 8707. Exemptions.
 8708. Licensure without examination.
 8709. Separability.
 § 8700. Introduction. This article applies to the profession of
medical physics. The general provisions for all professions contained in
article one hundred thirty of this title apply to this article.
 § 8701. Definitions. As used in this article:
 1. "Clinical" shall mean activities directly relating to the treatment
or diagnosis of human ailments.
 2. "Specialty" or "specialty area" shall mean the following branch or
branches of special competence within medical physics:
 (a) "Diagnostic radiological physics" shall mean the branch of medical
physics relating to the diagnostic application of radiation, the
analysis and interpretation of image quality, performance measurements
and the calibration of equipment associated with the production and use
of such radiation, the analysis and interpretation of measurements
associated with patient doses and exposures, and the radiation safety
aspects associated with the production and use of such radiation;
 (b) "Medical health physics" shall mean the branch of medical physics
pertaining to the radiation safety aspects of the use of radiation for
both diagnostic and therapeutic purposes, and the use of equipment to
perform appropriate radiation measurements;
 (c) "Medical nuclear physics" shall mean the branch of medical physics
pertaining to the therapeutic and diagnostic application of
radionuclides, excluding those used in sealed sources for therapeutic
purposes, the analysis and interpretation of performance measurements
associated with radiation imaging equipment and performance oversight of
radionuclide calibration equipment associated with the use and
production of radionuclides, the analysis and interpretation of
measurements and calculations associated with patient organ doses, and
the radiation safety aspects associated with the production and use of
such radionuclides; and
 (d) "Therapeutic radiological physics" or "radiation oncology physics"
shall mean the branch of medical physics relating to the therapeutic
application of radiation, the analysis and interpretation of radiation
equipment performance measurements and the calibration of equipment
associated with the production and use of such radiation, the analysis
and interpretation of measurements associated with patient doses, and
the radiation safety aspects associated with the production and use of
such radiation.
 3. "Medical physics" shall mean the branch of physics limited to the
field of radiological physics.
 4. "Radiation" shall mean all ionizing radiation above background
levels or any non-ionizing radiation used in diagnostic imaging or in
radiation oncology.
 5. "Radiological physics" shall mean diagnostic radiological physics,
therapeutic radiological physics or radiation oncology physics, medical
nuclear physics and medical health physics.
 6. "Radiological procedure" shall mean any test, measurement,
calculation or radiation exposure for the purpose of diagnosis or
treatment of any medical condition of a human, including therapeutic
radiation, diagnostic imaging and measurements, and nuclear medicine
procedures.
 § 8702. Definition of "practice of medical physics". 1. The "practice
of the profession of medical physics" shall mean the use and application
of accepted principles and protocols of physics in a clinical setting to
assure the correct quality, quantity and placement of radiation during
the performance of a radiological procedure, so as to protect the
patient and other persons from harmful, excessive or misapplied
radiation. Such practice shall include, but not necessarily be limited
to: radiation beam calibration and characterization; oversight and
responsibility for patient radiation dose measurement, calculation and
reporting; oversight and responsibility for quality control; instrument
specification; optimization of image quality; acceptance testing;
shielding design; protection analysis on radiation emitting equipment
and radio-pharmaceuticals; and consultation with a physician to assure
accurate radiation dosage and application to a specific patient.
 2. A license to practice medical physics shall be issued with special
competency in one or more specialty areas in which the licensee has
satisfied the requirements of section eighty-seven hundred five of this
article.
 3. The practice in any specialty by a person whose license is not
issued with special competency for such specialty shall be deemed the
unauthorized practice of the profession of medical physics.
 4. Only a person licensed under this article shall practice the
profession of medical physics.
 § 8703. Use of the title "professional medical physicist". Only a
person licensed under this article shall use the title "professional
medical physicist".
 § 8704. State committee for medical physics. 1. A state committee for
medical physics shall be appointed by the board of regents upon the
recommendation of the commissioner and shall assist on matters of
licensure and professional conduct in accordance with section sixty-five
hundred eight of this title. Notwithstanding the provisions of section
sixty-five hundred eight of this title, the committee shall assist the
board for medicine solely in medical physics matters, which board shall
also function as the state board for medical physics. The licensure
requirements for professional medical physicists shall be waived for the
initial committee appointees, provided that such appointees shall have
received national certification in their specialty.
 2. The committee shall consist of eight individuals, to be composed of
the following:
 (a) Four licensed medical physicists represented by each of the
following specialties:
 (i) diagnostic radiological physics,
 (ii) therapeutic radiological or radiation oncology physics,
 (iii) medical nuclear physics, and
 (iv) medical health physics;
 (b) Three licensed physicians represented by each of the following
specialties:
 (i) diagnostic radiology,
 (ii) radiation therapy or radiation oncology, and
 (iii) nuclear medicine; and
 (c) A representative of the public at large.
 § 8705. Requirements and procedures for professional licensure. To
qualify for a license as a professional medical physicist, an applicant
shall fulfill the following requirements:
 1. Application: file an application with the department;
 2. Education: have received an education including a master's or
doctoral degree from an accredited college or university in accordance
with the commissioner's regulations. Such person shall have completed
such courses of instruction as are deemed necessary by the commissioner
to practice in the medical physics specialty in which the applicant has
applied for a license;
 3. Experience: have experience in his or her medical physics specialty
satisfactory to the board and in accordance with the commissioner's
regulations;
 4. Examination: pass an examination in his or her medical specialty
satisfactory to the board and in accordance with the commissioner's
regulations. The examination requirement may be waived by the board on
recommendation of the commissioner for certain applicants with extensive
experience as a medical physicist;
 5. Age: be at least twenty-one years of age;
 6. Fee: pay a fee of three hundred dollars to the department for
admission to a department conducted examination for licensure, a fee of
one hundred fifty dollars for licensure with special competency in the
first specialty and twenty-five dollars for each additional specialty,
and a fee of three hundred dollars for each biennial registration
period.
 § 8706. Limited permits. Permits limited as to eligibility, practice
and duration shall be issued by the department to eligible applicants,
as follows:
 1. Eligibility. The following persons shall be eligible for a limited
permit:
 (a) a person who fulfills all requirements for a license as a
professional medical physicist except those relating to examination or
experience; or
 (b) a medical physics student enrolled in a graduate or post-graduate
curriculum approved by the department;
 2. Limit of practice. A permittee shall be authorized to practice
medical physics only under the direct and immediate supervision of a
professional medical physicist and only in the specialty of such
professional medical physicist;
 3. Duration. A limited permit shall be valid for two years. It may be
renewed biennially at the discretion of the department;
 4. Fee. The fee for each limited permit and for each renewal shall be
sixty dollars.
 § 8707. Exemptions. Nothing in this article shall be construed to
affect, prevent or in any manner expand or limit the authority of any
person otherwise authorized by law or regulation to practice any
function of a medical physicist, or any department or agency authorized
by law or regulation to regulate the use of radiation, nor prohibit the
repair or calibration of any test equipment used by professional medical
physicists by any person otherwise allowed to do so under state or
federal law, nor serve to limit radiologic and/or imaging technicians or
any individual otherwise authorized by law or regulation from performing
quality control measurements or obtaining quality control data, nor
serve to limit a service engineer in the repair of radiation producing
equipment nor an installation engineer in the installation of radiation
producing equipment.
 § 8708. Licensure without examination. 1. Within eighteen months of
the effective date of regulations implementing the provisions of this
article, the department may issue a license to practice medical physics
with special competency in one or more specialties in this state,
without an examination, to a person who meets the requirements of
subdivisions one, five and six of section eighty-seven hundred five of
this article and who in addition has an earned bachelor's, master's or
doctoral degree from an accredited college or university that signifies
the completion of a course of study acceptable to the department, and
has demonstrated to the department's satisfaction, in the case of an
earned bachelor's degree, the completion of at least fifteen years of
full-time work experience in the medical physics specialty for which
application is made, or, in the case of an earned master's or doctoral
degree, the completion of at least two years of full-time work
experience in the five years preceding the date of application in the
medical physics specialty for which application is made and the
equivalent of one year or more of full-time work experience in the ten
years preceding the date of application for each additional specialty
for which application is made.
 2. On receipt of an application and fee pursuant to section
eighty-seven hundred five of this article, the department may issue a
license to practice medical physics with special competency in one or
more specialties in this state to a person who holds a license to
practice medical physics in another state, territory or jurisdiction
that has requirements for licensing of medical physicists which the
department determines to be substantially the same as the requirements
of this article.
 § 8709. Separability. If any section of this article, or part thereof,
shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid,
such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of
any other section or part thereof.
 ARTICLE 167
 APPLIED BEHAVIOR ANALYSIS
Section 8800. Introduction.
 8801. Definitions.
 8802. Definition of the practice of "applied behavior analysis".
 8803. The practice of and use of the title "licensed behavior
 analyst" or "certified behavior analyst assistant".
 8804. Requirements and procedures for professional licensure.
 8805. Special provisions.
 8806. Limited permits.
 8807. Exemptions.
 8808. State board for applied behavior analysis.
 § 8800. Introduction. This article applies to the profession and
practice of applied behavior analysis and to the use of the titles
"licensed behavior analyst" and "certified behavior analyst assistant".
The general provisions for all professions contained in article one
hundred thirty of this title apply to this article.
 § 8801. Definitions. As used in this article, the following term shall
have the following meaning:
 "Applied behavior analysis" or "ABA" means the design, implementation,
and evaluation of environmental modifications, using behavioral stimuli
and consequences, to produce socially significant improvement in human
behavior, including the use of direct observation, measurement, and
functional analysis of the relationship between environment and
behavior.
 § 8802. Definition of the practice of "applied behavior analysis". 1.
The practice of applied behavior analysis by a "licensed behavior
analyst" shall mean the design, implementation and evaluation of
environmental modifications, using behavioral stimuli and consequences,
to produce socially significant improvement in human behavior, including
the use of direct observation, measurement, and functional analysis of
the relationship between environment and behavior, pursuant to a
diagnosis and prescription or order from a person who is licensed or
otherwise authorized to provide such diagnosis and prescription or
ordering services pursuant to a profession enumerated in this title, for
the purpose of providing behavioral health treatment. For purposes of
this section, prescriptions or orders for behavioral health treatment
provided by a licensed behavior analyst shall be limited to providing
treatment to individuals with behavioral health conditions that appear
in the most recent edition of the diagnostic and statistical manual of
mental disorders, published by the American Psychiatric Association, or
an equivalent classification system as determined by the department. In
addition, licensed behavior analysts providing services pursuant to a
prescription or order, as authorized by this section, shall provide a
report at least annually regarding the status of the individual served
to the licensed person prescribing or ordering such service or more
frequently, if needed, in order to report significant changes in the
condition of the individual.
 2. The practice of applied behavior analysis by a "certified behavior
analyst assistant" means the services and activities provided by a
person certified in accordance with this article who works under the
supervision of a licensed behavior analyst to perform such patient
related applied behavior analysis tasks as are assigned by the
supervising licensed behavior analyst. Supervision of a certified
behavior analyst assistant by a licensed behavior analyst shall be in
accordance with regulations of the commissioner. No licensed behavior
analyst shall supervise more than six certified behavior analyst
assistants.
 3. The practice of applied behavior analysis shall not include
diagnosis of a disorder or condition for which ABA may be appropriate,
or prescribing or ordering ABA for a particular individual.
 4. Any individual whose license or authority to practice derives from
the provisions of this article shall be prohibited from:
 (a) Prescribing or administering drugs as defined in this chapter or
as a treatment, therapy, or professional service in the practice of his
or her profession; or
 (b) Using invasive procedures as a treatment, therapy, or professional
service in the practice of his or her profession. For purposes of this
subdivision, "invasive procedure" means any procedure in which human
tissue is cut, altered, or otherwise infiltrated by mechanical or other
means. Invasive procedure includes, but is not limited to, surgery,
lasers, ionizing radiation, therapeutic ultrasound, or electroconvulsive
therapy.
 § 8803. The practice of and use of the title "licensed behavior
analyst" or "certified behavior analyst assistant". Only a person
licensed, certified or exempt under this article shall practice applied
behavior analysis. Only a person licensed or certified under this
article shall use the titles "licensed behavior analyst" or "certified
behavior analyst assistant."
 § 8804. Requirements and procedures for professional licensure. 1. To
qualify for certification as a certified behavior analyst assistant, an
applicant shall fulfill the following requirements:
 (a) Application: file an application with the department;
 (b) Education: have received an education, including a bachelor's or
higher degree from a program registered by the department or determined
by the department to be the substantial equivalent thereof, in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations.
 (c) Experience: have experience in the practice of applied behavior
analysis satisfactory to the board and the department in accordance with
the commissioner's regulations.
 (d) Examination: pass an examination acceptable to the board and the
department in accordance with the commissioner's regulations.
 (e) Age: be at least twenty-one years of age;
 (f) Character: be of good moral character as determined by the
department and submit an attestation of moral character; and
 (g) Fee: pay a fee of one hundred fifty dollars for an initial license
and a fee of seventy-five dollars for each triennial registration
period.
 2. To qualify for a license as a licensed behavior analyst, an
applicant shall fulfill the following requirements:
 (a) Application: file an application with the department;
 (b) Education: have received an education, including a master's or
higher degree from a program registered by the department or determined
by the department to be the substantial equivalent, thereof, in
accordance with the commissioner's regulations.
 (c) Experience: have experience in the practice of applied behavior
analysis satisfactory to the board and the department in accordance with
the commissioner's regulations.
 (d) Examination: pass an examination acceptable to the board and the
department in accordance with the commissioner's regulations.
 (e) Age: be at least twenty-one years of age;
 (f) Character: be of good moral character as determined by the
department and submit an attestation of moral character; and
 (g) Fee: pay a fee of two hundred dollars for an initial license and a
fee of one hundred dollars for each triennial registration period.
 § 8805. Special provisions. An individual who meets the requirements
for a license as a licensed behavior analyst, pursuant to subdivision
two of section eighty-eight hundred four of this article, or
certification as a certified behavior analyst assistant, pursuant to
subdivision one of section eighty-eight hundred four of this article,
except for examination, experience and education, and who is certified
or registered by a national certifying body having certification or
registration standards acceptable to the commissioner, may be licensed
or certified, without meeting additional requirements as to examination,
experience and education, provided that such individual submits an
application to the department.
 § 8806. Limited permits. The following requirements for a limited
permit shall apply to all professions licensed or certified pursuant to
this article:
 1. The department may issue a limited permit to an applicant who meets
all qualifications for licensure, except the examination and/or
experience requirements, in accordance with regulations promulgated
therefor.
 2. Limited permits shall be for one year; such limited permits may be
renewed, at the discretion of the department, for one additional year.
 3. The fee for each limited permit and for each renewal shall be
seventy dollars.
 4. A limited permit holder shall practice only under supervision as
determined in accordance with the commissioner's regulations.
 § 8807. Exemptions. 1. Nothing contained in this article shall be
construed to limit the scopes of practice of any other profession
licensed under this title.
 2. Nothing in this article shall be construed as prohibiting a person
from performing the duties of a licensed behavior analyst or a certified
behavior analyst assistant, in the course of such employment, if such
person is employed:
 a. by a federal, state, county or municipal agency, or other political
subdivision;
 b. by a chartered elementary or secondary school or degree-granting
institution;
 c. as a certified teacher or teaching assistant, other than a pupil
personnel services professional, in an approved program as defined in
paragraph b of subdivision one of section forty-four hundred ten of this
chapter; or
 d. in a setting to the extent that the exemption in paragraph d of
subdivision six of section forty-four hundred ten of this chapter
applies.
 3. Nothing in this article shall be construed as prohibiting a
certified teacher or teaching assistant, other than a pupil personnel
services professional, from performing the duties of a licensed behavior
analyst or certified behavior analyst assistant, in the course of such
employment or contractual agreement, if such person is employed or
contracted with an agency approved by the department of health to
provide early intervention services or has an agreement with the
department of health to provide early intervention services pursuant to
title two-A of article twenty-five of the public health law.
 4. Nothing in this article shall be construed as prohibiting the
activities and services required of a student, intern, or resident in an
educational program acceptable to the department pursuant to the
commissioner's regulations, pursuing a course of study leading to a
bachelor's or higher degree in an educational program acceptable to the
department pursuant to the commissioner's regulations in an institution
approved by the department, provided that such activities and services
constitute a part of his or her supervised course of study in an
educational program acceptable to the department pursuant to the
commissioner's regulations. Such person shall be designated by title
which clearly indicates his or her training status.
 5. Nothing in this article shall be construed to affect or prevent a
person without a license or other authorization pursuant to this title
from performing assessments, including collecting basic information,
gathering demographic data, and making informal observations, for the
purpose of determining need for services unrelated to an ABA plan.
Further, licensure or authorization pursuant to this article shall not
be required to create, develop or implement a service plan unrelated to
an ABA plan. This article shall not apply to behavioral health
treatments other than ABA that may be provided to persons with autism
spectrum disorder. A license under this article shall not be required
for persons to participate as a member of a multi-disciplinary team to
implement an ABA plan; provided, however, that such team shall include
one or more professionals licensed under this article or articles one
hundred thirty-one, one hundred fifty-three, one hundred fifty-four or
one hundred sixty-three of this chapter; and provided further that the
activities performed by members of the team shall be consistent with the
scope of practice for each team member licensed or authorized under this
title, and those who are not so authorized may not engage in the
following restricted practices: creation, modification or termination of
an ABA plan; diagnosis of mental, emotional, behavioral, addictive and
developmental disorders and disabilities; patient assessment and
evaluating; provision of psychotherapeutic treatment; provision of
treatment other than psychotherapeutic treatment; and development and
implementation of assessment-based treatment plans, as defined in
section seventy-seven hundred one of this title. Provided further,
however, that nothing in this subdivision shall be construed as
requiring a license or authorization for any particular activity or
function based solely on the fact that the activity or function is not
listed in this subdivision. Provided further, however, that nothing in
this subdivision shall authorize the delegation of restricted activities
to an individual who is not appropriately licensed or authorized under
this title.
 6. Nothing in this article shall be construed as prohibiting an early
intervention ABA aide, pursuant to regulations promulgated by the
commissioner of health, and acting under the supervision and direction
of a qualified supervisor who is licensed or otherwise authorized
pursuant to title eight of this chapter from:
 (a) assisting the supervisor and qualified personnel with the
implementation of individual ABA plans;
 (b) assisting in the recording and collection of data needed to
monitor progress;
 (c) participating in required team meetings; and
 (d) completing any other activities as directed by his or her
supervisor and as necessary to assist in the implementation of
individual ABA plans.
 Provided however, that nothing in this subdivision shall authorize the
delegation of restricted activities to an individual who is not
appropriately licensed or otherwise authorized under this title;
provided further however, that in regard to the early intervention
program established pursuant to title two-A of article twenty-five of
the public health law, an early intervention ABA aide under the
supervision and direction of a qualified supervisor may complete
activities necessary to assist in the implementation of an individual
ABA plan, provided that such activities do not require professional
skill or judgment.
 7. This article shall not be construed to prohibit care delivered by
any family member, household member or friend, or person employed
primarily in a domestic capacity who does not hold himself or herself
out, or accept employment, as a person licensed to practice applied
behavior analysis under the provisions of this article; provided that,
if such person is remunerated, the person does not hold himself or
herself out as one who accepts employment for performing such care.
 8. Nothing in this article shall be construed as prohibiting programs
certified by the office of alcoholism and substance abuse services from
providing substance use disorder services for persons with autism and
autism spectrum disorders and related disorders.
 9. Nothing in this article shall be construed as prohibiting the
activities and services required of a graduate of an educational program
acceptable to the department, seeking to complete supervised experience
and/or examination requirements for certification or registration by a
national certifying body having certification or registration standards
acceptable to the commissioner; provided, however, that the graduate
shall be under the supervision of a licensed behavior analyst who is
licensed and registered in New York and employed by a setting authorized
to provide applied behavior analysis services in New York, acceptable to
the department. The supervising licensed behavior analyst shall submit,
upon commencing the supervision of any graduate or no later than ninety
days after the effective date of this subdivision, on a form prescribed
by the department, a sworn statement attesting to compliance with the
requirements of this subdivision. Such use of a graduate shall subject
the supervising licensed behavior analyst to the full disciplinary and
regulatory authority of the board of regents and the department pursuant
to this title. The supervising licensed behavior analyst shall notify
the patient or the person legally responsible for the patient if the
patient is a minor, or other individual incapable of consenting, when
services will be provided by a graduate under supervision. The
supervising licensed behavior analyst shall remain responsible for
services provided to the patient by the graduate and shall provide the
patient or person legally responsible for the patient an opportunity to
object to the use of a graduate to provide applied behavior analysis
services under supervision.
 § 8808. State board for applied behavior analysis. 1. A state board
for applied behavior analysis shall be appointed by the board of regents
upon the recommendation of the commissioner and shall assist on matters
of licensing and professional conduct in accordance with section
sixty-five hundred eight of this title. An executive secretary of the
board shall be appointed by the board of regents upon the recommendation
of the commissioner.
 2. The board shall consist of seven individuals, to be composed of the
following:
 (a) Three licensed behavior analysts;
 (b) One certified behavior analyst assistant;
 (c) One licensed psychologist, who may currently prescribe treatment
involving applied behavior analysis in his or her professional practice;
and
 (d) Two public representatives, as defined in paragraph b of
subdivision one of section sixty-five hundred eight of this title.
 ARTICLE 168
 LICENSED PATHOLOGISTS' ASSISTANTS
Section 8850. Definitions.
 8851. Practice as pathologists' assistant and use of the title
 "pathologists' assistant".
 8852. Requirements for licensure as a pathologists' assistant.
 8853. Special provisions; eligibility.
 8854. State committee for pathologists' assistants.
 8855. Limited permits.
 8856. Exemptions and exempt persons.
 § 8850. Definitions. As used in this article: 1. The term
"pathologists' assistant" means a person licensed to assist physicians
who practice pathology by providing services within the permitted scope
of practice for pathologists' assistants as defined in subdivision four
of this section. All such services shall be performed under the
direction and supervision of a licensed physician who practices anatomic
pathology.
 2. The term "direction and supervision" means continuous direction and
supervision, but shall not be construed as necessarily requiring the
physical presence of the supervising physician at the time and place
where such services are performed.
 3. The term "physician" means a practitioner of medicine licensed to
practice medicine pursuant to article one hundred thirty-one of this
title.
 4. The term "scope of practice for pathologists' assistants" means the
provision of the following services under the direction and supervision
of a licensed physician who practices anatomic pathology: (a) preparing
gross tissue sections for pathology analysis, including but not limited
to, cutting, staining as required, describing gross anatomic features,
dissecting surgical specimens, and submitting tissues for bio-banking,
histologic processing, or other analyses; (b) performing human
postmortem examinations, including but not limited to, selection of
tissues and fluids for further examination, external examination,
dissection, and gathering and recording information for autopsy reports;
and (c) other functions and responsibilities in furtherance of and
consistent with the foregoing as determined by the department. The term
does not include the authority to diagnose or provide a medical opinion.
Services of a pathologists' assistant must be performed in a laboratory
or other site authorized under law to perform such services.
 5. The term "committee" means the state committee for pathologists'
assistants created by this article.
 § 8851. Practice as pathologists' assistant and use of the title
"pathologists' assistant". Only persons licensed or otherwise authorized
to practice as a pathologists' assistant under this article shall
practice pathologist assisting or use the title "pathologists'
assistant" or the term "pathologists' assistant" alone or in combination
with other terms and phrases in describing their services and activities
or the designation "Path A".
 § 8852. Requirements for licensure as a pathologists' assistant. To
qualify for licensure as a "licensed pathologists' assistant", an
applicant shall fulfill the following requirements:
 1. Application: file an application with the department;
 2. Education: receive an education, including a bachelor's or higher
degree in pathologists' assistant, granted on the basis of completion of
a program of pathologists' assistant registered with the department or
the substantial equivalent thereof, in accordance with the
commissioner's regulations;
 3. Examination: obtain a passing score on an examination acceptable to
the department;
 4. Age: at the time of application be at least twenty-one years of
age;
 5. Character: be of good moral character as determined by the
department; and
 6. Fee: pay a fee determined by the department for an initial license
and for each triennial registration period.
 § 8853. Special provisions; eligibility. An individual who meets the
requirements for a license as a licensed pathologists' assistant except
for examination and education and who has been performing the duties of
a pathologists' assistant for two of the five years prior to the
effective date of this article may be licensed without meeting
additional requirements, provided that such individual submits an
application to the department within two years of the effective date of
this article. For this purpose, the applicant's supervising physicians
must attest to the applicant's experience and competence.
 § 8854. State committee for pathologists' assistants. 1. A state
committee for pathologists' assistants shall be appointed by the board
of regents upon the recommendation of the commissioner as a committee of
the board of medicine to advise solely on matters relating to
pathologists' assistants and shall assist on matters of licensure and
professional conduct. The pathologists' assistant members of the initial
committee need not be licensed prior to their appointment but shall have
met all other requirements of licensing pursuant to section eighty-eight
hundred fifty-three of this article except the filing of an application
and paying a fee.
 2. The committee shall consist of no fewer than five individuals, to
be composed of a minimum of the following:
 (a) one licensed physician who practices pathology;
 (b) three licensed pathologists' assistants; and
 (c) one public representative.
 § 8855. Limited permits. 1. Eligibility. A person who fulfills all
requirements for licensure as a pathologists' assistant except that
relating to the examination shall be eligible for a limited permit.
 2. Limit of practice. A permittee shall be authorized to practice as a
pathologists' assistant only under the direction and supervision of a
licensed physician who practices anatomic pathology and pursuant to the
order and direction of that licensed physician.
 3. Duration. A limited permit shall expire one year from the date of
issuance. A limited permit may be extended for one additional year for
good cause as determined by the department.
 4. Fees. The fee for each limited permit shall be determined by the
department.
 § 8856. Exemptions and exempt persons. This article shall not
prohibit:
 1. The performance of any tasks or responsibilities by any student
engaged in clinical training in a general hospital licensed pursuant to
article twenty-eight of the public health law, provided such practice is
limited to clinical training that shall be carried out under the direct
supervision of a licensed physician who practices anatomic pathology; or
 2. The performance of any tasks or responsibilities by any person
licensed under this title, provided such tasks or responsibilities are
permitted by the article governing the profession pursuant to which such
person is licensed; or
 3. The performance of any tasks or responsibilities by any legally
qualified pathologists' assistants of any other state or territory who
is serving in the armed forces or the public health service of the
United States or who is employed by the veterans administration, while
engaged in the performance of his or her duties; or
 4. The performance of any tasks and responsibilities by any individual
legally carrying out the examinations and tests enumerated in
subdivision two of section five hundred seventy-nine of the public
health law.