 TITLE II
 SCHOOL DISTRICT ORGANIZATION
Article 31. School districts (§§ 1501--1527-c).
 32. Filing of expenditure statements by candidates for
 membership on board of education (§§ 1528-1531).
 33. Common school districts (§§ 1601-1619).
 35. Union free school districts (§§ 1701-1726).
 37. Central school districts (§§ 1801-1809).
 39. Central high school districts (§§ 1901--1917-a).
 40. Boards of cooperative educational services (§§ 1950-1952).
 40-A. Shared personnel (§§ 1980-1981).
 41. District meetings (§§ 2001-2045).
 Part I-General provisions (§§ 2001-2038).
 Part II-Contract system (§§ 2040-2045).
 Part III-Professional services providers (§§ 2050-2054).
 43. School district officers-town and county officials
 (§§ 2101-2143).
 Part I-General provisions (§§ 2101-2119).
 Part II-District clerk; treasurer; collector
 (§§ 2121-2130).
 Part III-Town and county officials (§§ 2140-2143).
 45. Supervisory districts (§§ 2201-2218).
 51. City school districts of cities with less than one hundred
 twenty-five thousand inhabitants (§§ 2501-2530).
 52. City school districts of cities with one hundred
 twenty-five thousand inhabitants or more (§§ 2550-2588).
 52-A. New York city community school district system
 (§§ 2590--2590-s).
 53. School elections in city school districts of cities with
 less than one hundred twenty-five thousand inhabitants
 (§§ 2601-2613).
 55. Regulation by boards of education of conduct on school
 district property (§§ 2801-2814).
 56. Charter schools (§§ 2850-2857).
 ARTICLE 31
 SCHOOL DISTRICTS
Section 1501. Existing school districts continued.
 1501-a. Publication of minutes.
 1501-b. Additional power of boards of education.
 1501-c. Voting by residents of certain facilities.
 1502. Passengers on school buses.
 1502-a. Power to provide for observance of Memorial day; certain
 cases.
 1503. Application of funds obtained from sale of school
 property.
 1504. Formation of new district.
 1505. Dissolution, reformation and construction of districts.
 1505-a. Teachers' rights as a result of the dissolution of a
 school district.
 1506. Filing of certain orders of district superintendent.
 1507. Alteration by consent.
 1508. Alteration without consent.
 1509. Hearing of objections to order for alteration without
 consent.
 1510. Consolidation of districts by vote of qualified
 electors.
 1511. Request for meeting to consolidate districts; notices of
 meeting.
 1512. Proceedings at meeting for consolidation; adoption of
 resolution; proceedings to be filed.
 1513. Order creating consolidated district; effect.
 1514. Property of districts consolidated.
 1515. Dissolution or alteration of joint district.
 1516. Special meeting of joint district to act regarding
 alteration or dissolution.
 1517. Indebtedness of certain dissolved districts.
 1518. Continuance of dissolved districts for payment of debts.
 1519. Deposit of records of dissolved district.
 1520. Sale of property of dissolved district and disposition
 of proceeds.
 1521. Collection and distribution of moneys due dissolved
 district.
 1522. Notice of meeting for establishment of union free school
 district.
 1523. Proceedings at meeting and effect of affirmative vote.
 1524. Consolidation with city school district.
 1525. Alteration of boundaries of city school district.
 1526. Enlarged city school districts.
 1527. Payroll deductions for deposit to employee bank
 accounts.
 1527-a. Prohibit symbols of hate.
 1527-c. Shared superintendent program.
 § 1501. Existing school districts continued. 1. All school districts
organized either by special laws or pursuant to the provisions of a
general law are hereby continued.
 2. a. Common school districts and union free school districts so
organized may be altered or dissolved as provided in this article.
 b. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter or of any other
general or special law to the contrary, all school districts which do
not maintain a home school on March first, nineteen hundred sixty-six,
and had not prior to October first, nineteen hundred sixty-five voted to
reopen such home school and expended monies for construction or
rehabilitation of such home school, provided that they are contiguous,
either directly, or through other such districts, to a union free,
central or city school district maintaining a twelve grade school system
(not counting kindergarten) and with which such school districts are
scheduled to be reorganized pursuant to the state plan for school
district reorganization under section three hundred fourteen of this
chapter, are hereby abolished as of July first, nineteen hundred
sixty-nine, and are hereby made a part of such contiguous union free,
central or city school district. The provisions of section fifteen
hundred fourteen, fifteen hundred seventeen and fifteen hundred eighteen
of this chapter shall apply in all such cases.
 c. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph b of this subdivision,
any such district desiring a change in such state plan may petition the
commissioner for such change as provided in section three hundred
fourteen of this chapter. The status of such district shall be
maintained pending such proceeding, and if any other such district or
districts is or are contiguous to a union free, central or city school
district only through such petitioning district, then and in that event,
the status of such other district or districts shall also be maintained
pending such proceeding. The petitioning district and such other
district or districts contiguous with a union free, central or city
school district only through such petitioning district shall become a
part of such other union free, central or city school district as the
commissioner or the court may order; in such case the provisions of
paragraph b of this subdivision shall become applicable, and the
abolition of such school districts shall become effective as of July
first next following the final determination of the petition; if, in
such case, any other school district or districts indirectly contiguous
to such union free, central or city school district loses its contiguity
therewith, the commissioner or the court, as the case may be, in the
order, shall make an appropriate disposition of such district or
districts.
 3. Central school districts may be organized under and are subject to
the provisions of article thirty-seven.
 4. Central high school districts may be altered under and are subject
to the provisions of article thirty-nine.
 § 1501-a. Publication of minutes. Any school district board of
trustees, board of education or other corporate body may publish the
minutes of its proceedings in the official newspaper or if no official
newspaper has been designated, in any newspaper having general
circulation in the school district.
 § 1501-b. Additional power of boards of education. 1. The board of
education of any school district is hereby authorized and empowered to
rent or lease for such consideration as may be determined by such board,
a motor vehicle or vehicles owned by the respective school district
during any time when such vehicle or vehicles are not needed for the
transportation of such children, which are otherwise used for the
transportation of the school children of such district to:
 (a) any senior citizens center or organization that is recognized and
funded by the office for the aging;
 (b) any non-profit incorporated organization serving senior citizens;
 (c) any non-profit incorporated organization serving the physically or
mentally handicapped;
 (d) any not-for-profit organization that provides recreation, youth
services, or the operation of playgrounds or neighborhood recreation
centers;
 (e) any municipal corporation, as defined in the general construction
law;
 (f) any not-for-profit organization providing transportation services
in rural counties as defined in section seventy-three-c of the
transportation law for children participating in the agricultural child
care program authorized by the agriculture and markets law; and
 (g) an operator of a coordinated public transportation service, as
defined by section seventy-three-c of the transportation law, for the
purpose of providing a portion of a coordinated public transportation
service plan as authorized by article two-F of the transportation law.
 (h) any not-for-profit organization, community based organization, or
educational or employment and training agency which provides education
or employment and training services for youths and adults in a rural
county, as defined by section seventy-three-c of the transportation law.
 (i) any fire company as defined in subdivision two of section three of
the volunteer firefighters' benefit law, or an ambulance company as
defined in subdivision two of section three of the volunteer ambulance
workers' benefit law.
 2. In the event a school district is wholly or partially located in a
county which has appointed a services coordinator as defined in section
seventy-three-c of the transportation law, the board of education of
such school district is authorized and empowered to contract, for such
consideration as it shall determine, to store, maintain and repair any
motor vehicle of and provide driver training for the operator of any
motor vehicle used to provide a portion of a coordinated public
transportation service as authorized by article two-F of the
transportation law and owned by any municipal corporation as defined by
the general construction law or any not-for-profit incorporated
organization providing a portion of a coordinated public transportation
services plan as authorized by article two-F of the transportation law.
The board of education of such school district shall not enter into such
contract until it is determined that it presently has the capability and
facilities necessary for provision of such services and that provision
of such services will not adversely affect the ability of the district
to provide educational services to the children of such school district.
 3. The board of education of any school district is also authorized
and empowered to contract with an operator of a coordinated public
transportation service for the purpose of providing any other portion of
a coordinated public transportation services plan as authorized by
article two-F of the transportation law, provided that such board of
education of such school district has determined that it presently has
the capability and facilities necessary for provision of such services
and that provision of such services will not adversely affect the
ability of the district to provide educational services to the school
children of such district.
 4. In any case where such motor vehicle is leased pursuant to
subdivision one of this section or where any services are contracted for
pursuant to subdivision two or three of this section, the consideration
to be received for such lease or contract shall not be less than the
full amount of the costs and expenses resulting from such lease or
contract.
 (a) For the purposes of this section, the full amount of the costs and
expenses resulting from any lease of any vehicle pursuant to subdivision
one of this section shall include but not be limited to the costs of
operation, maintenance and repair of such vehicle, the current fair
market value of the purchase price of the vehicle annualized for the
vehicle's remaining useful life, the cost of public liability and
property damage insurance, fire insurance and compensation insurance of
drivers and the cost of collision insurance in the amount of the value
of the vehicle to protect the lessor.
 (b) For the purposes of this section, the full amount of the costs and
expenses resulting from any contract for services pursuant to
subdivision two or three of this section shall include but not be
limited to that portion of the costs of any employees, equipment or
facilities which can be attributed to the provision of such services.
 § 1501-c. Voting by residents of certain facilities. Notwithstanding
any provision of this title to the contrary, the provisions of section
8-407 of the election law shall apply to all elections conducted
pursuant to this title by a school district. The board of elections of
the city or county in which a school district is located shall provide
for the implementation of the provisions of this section.
 § 1502. Passengers on school buses. 1. Boards of education of school
districts located entirely or partially in any county with less than two
hundred thousand population or any town which has a population of less
than one hundred fifty persons per square mile are hereby authorized to
permit the following persons to ride as passengers on school buses with
pupils: residents who are enrolled in education or training programs,
including, but not limited to, alternative education programs,
vocational, apprenticeship and job training programs, and on-the-job
training; children under the age of five traveling between home and day
care or preschool programs; and employees of school districts or other
educational or training institutions.
 2. Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, the
board of education of any school district located entirely or partially
in any county with less than two hundred thousand population or any town
which has a population of less than one hundred fifty persons per square
mile is hereby authorized and empowered, in order to protect the
interests of pupils, to adopt rules and regulations under which any
person would be permitted to ride as a passenger on any school bus that
provides pupil transportation for such district during the hours such
bus is transporting pupils to and from classes providing:
 a. such person makes application to the school district, in accordance
with the rules and regulations of the district, and such application is
approved by the board of education;
 b. there is regularly sufficient space on such school bus to permit
all pupils to be seated while such bus is in operation;
 c. any amount charged such person does not exceed the cost to the
district for transporting a pupil the same distance.
 3. Any rules and regulations adopted pursuant to the provisions of
this section may, among other things, establish the maximum number of
persons other than pupils that may ride any bus.
 4. Any person authorized in subdivision one of this section to ride as
a passenger on school buses with pupils, may also ride on buses not
owned by the school district but used for transportation of pupils
pursuant to contract, provided the school district and the owner of the
bus agree upon any amount to be charged such person. Such agreement may
include an amount to be paid to the bus owner or school district.
 5. In the event any person is authorized to ride on school buses
pursuant to the provisions of this section, the school district shall
maintain records indicating the number of such trips and any revenues
collected therefrom. Any funds collected for such non-pupil
transportation as authorized by this section shall be credited to an
account so designated.
 § 1502-a. Power to provide for observance of Memorial day; certain
cases. 1. In any year in which the celebration of the holiday known as
"Memorial day" is to be otherwise observed as a public holiday pursuant
to any other provision of the laws of this state on a day which is other
than the day provided by federal law for such observance, the trustees
or board of education may by resolution provide that in and for such
school district, such observance shall be had on the day designated for
federal purposes.
 2. Upon the adoption of such resolution the day so designated for
federal purposes shall for the purposes of such school district, its
facilities, employees and students be a public holiday and subject to
all other provisions of law relating to public holidays and the date
otherwise provided by state law for the observance of Memorial day shall
not be a public holiday for that year in or for such school district.
 § 1503. Application of funds obtained from sale of school property.
All moneys obtained from the sale of any school property authorized
under the provisions of this chapter shall be applied for the benefit of
the district as directed by the voters thereof in any annual or special
meeting.
 § 1504. Formation of new district. 1. A district superintendent may
organize a new school district out of the territory of one or more
school districts which are wholly within the geographic area served by
his board of cooperative educational services, whenever the educational
interests of the community require it. If there is an outstanding bonded
indebtedness chargeable against the district or districts out of the
territory of which such new district is organized, the district
superintendent shall apportion said indebtedness between such new
district and the remaining portion of the district or districts out of
which such new district is organized, according to the assessed
valuation thereof, and the portion of the indebtedness so apportioned
shall become a charge for principal and interest upon the respective
districts as though the same had been incurred by said districts
separately.
 2. The district superintendents of two or more adjoining supervisory
districts, when public interests require it, may form a joint school
district out of the adjoining portions of their respective districts.
 3. Any municipality situated wholly within one central or union free
school district but whose boundaries are not coterminous with the
boundaries of such school district may organize, pursuant to the
provisions of this subdivision, a new union free school district
consisting of the entire territory of such municipality whenever
required by the educational interests of the community.
 a. No such new school district may be organized unless: (i) the
enrollment of the municipality seeking to organize such new school
district equals at least two thousand children, and is no greater than
sixty percent of the enrollment of the existing school district from
which such new school district will be organized; (ii) such new school
district would have an actual valuation per total wealth pupil unit at
least equal to the statewide average; and (iii) the enrollment of the
existing school district from which such new school district will be
organized equals at least two thousand children, excluding the residents
of such municipality.
 b. No such new school district shall be organized unless the creation
of such new school district first shall have been approved by: (i) a
majority vote of the residents of a municipality seeking to organize
such new school district, provided that a vote of such residents shall
not be required if creation of the new school district has been approved
by a vote of at least two-thirds of the members of the local governing
body of the municipality of such municipality (ii) a majority vote of
the trustees or members of the boards of education of the existing
school district from which such new school district will be organized;
and (iii) a majority vote of the residents of such existing school
district, except that the residents of the municipality seeking to
organize the new school district shall not be entitled to participate in
such vote. Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, a vote
of the residents of an existing school district shall not be required if
the creation of the new school district has been approved by a vote of
at least two-thirds of the trustees or members of the board of education
of such existing school district.
 c. If a vote of the residents of a municipality is required, it shall
be the duty of the chief executive officer of the municipality seeking
to organize a new school district, pursuant to a resolution duly adopted
by the governing body of such municipality that the educational
interests of the community require the creation of a new school
district, to give public notice that a meeting of the qualified electors
of such municipality will be held at some convenient place within such
municipality to vote upon the question of creating such new school
district and to elect members of the board of education of such new
school district. Such notice shall specify the day, hour and place where
such meeting shall be held, which shall be not less than ten nor more
than thirty days after the posting or publication of such notice. Such
notice shall be published at least once before such meeting in a
newspaper circulated in such municipality, and in the event no newspaper
is circulated in such municipality, such notice shall be posted at least
ten days prior to such meeting in at least five conspicuous places in
such municipality.
 d. If a vote of the residents of the existing school district (other
than the residents of the municipality seeking to organize the new
school district) is required, it shall be the duty of the trustees or
board of education of such existing school district to give public
notice that a meeting of the qualified electors of such district will be
held to vote upon the question of creating such new school district.
Such notice shall specify the day, hour and place where such meeting
shall be held, which shall be not less than ten nor more than thirty
days after the posting or publication of such notice. Such notice shall
be published at least once before such meeting in a newspaper circulated
in such district, and in the event no newspaper is circulated in such
district, such notice shall be posted at least ten days prior to such
meeting in at least five conspicuous places in such district. Such
meeting shall be held in accordance with the procedures of section one
thousand five hundred twenty-three of this article.
 e. The clerk of the existing school district immediately shall file
with the district superintendent a certification of the vote of the
members of the board of education or board of trustees of the existing
school district and, if applicable, a certification of the vote of the
residents of such existing school district (other than the residents of
the municipality seeking to organize the new school district) and/or a
certification of the vote of the residents of such municipality. The
new union free school district consisting of the entire territory of
such municipality shall be deemed created immediately upon the filing of
such certifications, and the district superintendent immediately shall
issue an order altering the boundaries of the existing school district
accordingly, and shall file such order in accordance with section one
thousand five hundred six of this article.
 f. If there is an outstanding bonded indebtedness chargeable against
the existing school district out of the territory of which such new
district is organized, the district superintendent shall apportion said
indebtedness between such new district and the remaining portion of the
district out of which such new district is organized, according to the
assessed valuation thereof, and the portion of the indebtedness so
apportioned shall become a charge for principal and interest upon the
respective districts as though the same had been incurred by said
districts separately.
 g. For the purposes of this subdivision, the term "municipality" shall
mean a city, town or village, and the terms "enrollment," and "actual
valuation" and "total wealth pupil unit" shall have the same meaning as
those terms are defined in section three thousand six hundred two of
this chapter.
 § 1505. Dissolution, reformation and construction of districts. 1.
Any district superintendent by order may dissolve one or more districts
and may from such territory form a new district. He may also unite such
territory or a portion thereof, by order, to any adjoining school
district including a union free school district having a population of
forty-five hundred or more and employing a superintendent of schools but
excepting a city school district. He shall file such order with the
clerks of the school districts affected and also with the town clerks of
the towns in which the districts are located, and a copy with the
commissioner of education. Such order shall designate the date upon
which it shall take effect, which shall be not less than ninety days
after the date of filing. If such action is to affect a district or
districts within the territory of more than one superintendent, it shall
be taken by a majority of them, at a meeting duly called by one or more
of them.
 2. Within thirty days after the filing of the order any district
affected thereby may at a meeting duly called, by a majority vote of the
legally qualified voters thereof present and voting at such meeting,
present to the county judge of the county in which the district is
located, a statement in writing that such district objects to the order
and requests the appointment of a committee as provided in this section.
Such judge, within ten days after the filing of such statement and
request, shall appoint a committee of three disinterested persons,
residents of the county or counties in which the districts affected are
located but nonresidents of such school districts, at least two of whom
shall reside outside of an incorporated village or village district, and
shall designate one of such committee to act as chairman thereof, and
shall, at the time of the appointment, file with such chairman such
statement and request and a certificate of such appointments and
designation. Within thirty days after the receipt of such papers by the
chairman, such committee shall call a hearing and decide the matter, and
the decision shall be final unless duly appealed from as hereinafter
provided. Such decision shall either affirm, vacate or modify the order
of the district superintendent or superintendents, and, together with
the papers and evidence in the matter, shall be filed with the
commissioner of education by the chairman of such committee. Such
committee also shall file a copy of its decision with the clerks of the
school districts affected, and also with the town clerks of the towns in
which the districts are located and with the district superintendent or
superintendents who made the original order. In the event that such
committee does not make and file its decision as hereinbefore provided,
then the order of the district superintendent or superintendents shall
become effective in accordance with its terms, and the members of such
committee shall not be entitled to receive their fees as hereinafter
provided. The members of such committee shall each be entitled to ten
dollars for each day actually and necessarily spent in the business of
the committee, and the amount thereof shall be a charge upon the school
districts affected, in proportion to the actual valuation of such
districts. Within twenty days from the making and filing of such
decision, any district affected may at a meeting duly called, by a
majority vote of the legally qualified voters thereof present and
voting, appeal to the commissioner of education as provided in article
seven of this chapter.
 § 1505-a. Teachers' rights as a result of the dissolution of a school
district. 1. In any case in which a school district is dissolved and
portions of such former district are added to more than one school
district pursuant to the provisions of section fifteen hundred five of
this article or section seventeen hundred five of this chapter, each
teacher employed in such former school district at the time of such
dissolution shall select the particular school district to which
territory is added in which he or she shall be considered an employee,
with the same tenure status he or she maintained in such former school
district. Such selection of the particular school district to which
territory is added by such teacher shall be based upon each teacher's
seniority in such former school district, with the right of selection
passing from such teachers with the most seniority to such teachers with
least seniority.
 2. Any such teacher who is unable to obtain a teaching position in any
such school district to which territory is added, because the number of
positions needed are less than the number of teachers eligible to be
considered employees pursuant to subdivision one of this section, shall,
in all such school districts to which territory is added, be placed on a
preferred eligible list of candidates for appointment to a vacancy that
may thereafter occur in a position similar to the one such teacher
filled in such former school district. The teachers on such a preferred
eligible list shall be appointed to such vacancies in such corresponding
or similar positions under the jurisdiction of the school district to
which territory is added in the order of their length of service in such
former school district, within seven years from the date of the
dissolution of such former school district.
 3. For any such teacher as set forth in subdivision one of this
section, for salary, sick leave and any other purpose, the length of
service credited in such former school district shall be credited as
employment time with such school district to which territory is added.
 4. This section shall in no way be construed to limit the rights of
any such teachers set forth in this section granted by any other
provision of law.
 § 1506. Filing of certain orders of district superintendent. The
order of a district superintendent forming or altering the boundaries of
a school district and the written description thereof together with all
notices, orders, consents and proceedings relating to the formation or
alteration thereof shall be filed with the commissioner, with the clerk
of each school district affected, and with the town clerk of the town
in which such district is located; provided, however, that orders
altering boundaries of school districts shall be filed with the clerk of
only the town in which the property being transferred is located.
 § 1507. Alteration by consent. 1. With the written consent of the
trustees of all the districts to be affected thereby, the district
superintendent may make an order altering the boundaries of any school
district within his jurisdiction, and fix in such order a day when the
alteration shall take effect.
 2. With the written consent of the board of education of a union free
school district having a population of forty-five hundred or more, and
employing a superintendent of schools, and the written consent of the
board of education or trustees of a district in a supervisory district
adjoining such union free school district, the district superintendent
having jurisdiction may make an order altering the boundaries of such
districts, and fix in such order a day when the alteration shall take
effect.
 § 1508. Alteration without consent. If the trustees of any district
affected thereby refuse to consent, the district superintendent may make
and file with the town clerk of the town in which the property being
transferred is located his order making the alteration, but reciting the
refusal, and directing that the order shall not take effect until a day
therein to be named, and not less than three months after the date of
such order.
 § 1509. Hearing of objections to order for alteration without consent.
1. Within ten days after making and filing such order the district
superintendent shall give at least a week's notice in writing to the
trustees of all districts affected by the proposed alterations, that at
a specified time, and at a named place within the town in which one of
the districts to be affected lies, he will hear the objections to the
alteration.
 2. The trustees of any district to be affected by such order may
request the supervisor and town clerk of each of the towns, within which
such districts shall wholly or partly lie, to join with the district
superintendent as a local board.
 3. At the time and place mentioned in the notice, such superintendent,
with the supervisors and town clerks, if they shall attend and act,
shall hear and decide the matter, and the decision shall be final unless
duly appealed from. Such decision must either affirm or vacate such
order, and must be filed with and recorded by the town clerk of the town
in which the property to be transferred shall lie, and a tie vote shall
be regarded a decision for the purposes of an appeal on the merits.
Upon such appeal the commissioner of education may affirm, modify or
vacate the order of the district superintendent or the action of the
local board.
 4. A supervisor and town clerk shall be entitled each to one dollar
and fifty cents a day for each day's service in any proceeding under
this section, to be levied and paid as a charge upon their town.
 § 1510. Consolidation of districts by vote of qualified electors. Two
or more common school districts may be consolidated and created as one
common school district, or two or more union free school districts may
be consolidated and created as one union free school district, or one or
more common school districts may be consolidated with one or more union
free school districts and created as a union free school district, by a
vote of the qualified electors thereof as provided in sections fifteen
hundred eleven, fifteen hundred twelve and fifteen hundred thirteen.
 § 1511. Request for meeting to consolidate districts; notices of
meeting. 1. Whenever two-thirds of the qualified electors of each of
two or more districts in which there shall be less than fifteen
qualified electors, or if there be fifteen or more qualified electors in
any of such districts whenever ten or more of such electors, shall sign
a request for a meeting to be held for the purpose of determining
whether such districts shall be consolidated as a common school district
or as a union free school district, as the case may be, and submit the
same to the trustees or board of education of each of such districts, it
shall be the duty of such trustees or board of education to submit such
proposed consolidation to the commissioner of education for approval. If
the commissioner approve such proposed consolidation, it shall be the
duty of such trustees or board of education to give public notice that a
meeting of the qualified electors of such districts will be held at some
convenient place within such districts, as centrally located as may be,
to vote upon the question of consolidating such districts. Such notice
shall specify the day and hour when such meeting shall be held, not less
than twenty nor more than thirty days after the posting, service or
publication of such notice. If the trustees or board of education shall
refuse or neglect to give such notice within twenty days after such
request is approved by the commissioner of education, the commissioner
of education may authorize and direct any qualified elector of the
district to give such notice.
 2. If any part of any of such districts is situated wholly or partly
within an incorporated village in which one or more newspapers are
published, such notice shall be published once in each week for three
consecutive weeks before such meeting in all the newspapers published in
such village, and shall also be posted at least twenty days prior to
such meeting, in at least five conspicuous places in each district. In
all other districts such notice shall be published once in each week for
three consecutive weeks before such meeting, in a newspaper circulated
in said districts, and in the event no newspaper is circulated in said
districts, such notice may be given by publication thereof in a
newspaper circularized and generally distributed through the district or
districts involved, and it shall be also posted at least twenty days
prior to such meeting in at least five conspicuous places in each
district. In districts which by the latest census are shown to have a
population of two hundred or less, the trustees or board of education of
said districts may dispense with publication and posting as hereinabove
required, and in the event that such publication and posting are
dispensed with, said trustees or board of education of each of said
districts shall authorize and direct a qualified elector thereof to
notify each qualified elector of such district of said meeting by
delivering to him a copy of such notice, or in case of his absence from
home, by leaving a copy thereof, or so much thereof as relates to the
time, place and object of the meeting, at the place of his abode, at
least twenty days prior to the time of such meeting.
 3. The reasonable expense of the publication and service of such
notice shall be chargeable upon the districts, if the vote be in favor
of consolidation, and if not, shall be paid by the persons signing the
request for such meeting as provided by section fifteen hundred
twenty-two.
 § 1512. Proceedings at meeting for consolidation; adoption of
resolution; proceedings to be filed. 1. Such meeting shall be organized
as provided in section fifteen hundred twenty-three. Such meeting may
adopt a resolution to consolidate such districts if two-thirds of the
qualified electors of each district having less than fifteen of such
electors are present, or in case of districts having fifteen or more
qualified electors if ten or more are present. The vote upon such
resolution shall be by ballot or by taking and recording the ayes and
noes. If the vote shall be by taking and recording the ayes and noes,
the clerk and such assistants as may be provided for him by the meeting
shall keep a poll-list upon which shall be recorded the names of all
qualified electors voting upon the resolution, the districts in which
such electors reside, and how each elector voted. If the vote shall be
by ballot, one or more inspectors of election shall be appointed in such
manner as the meeting shall determine, who shall receive the votes cast,
canvass the same and announce the result of the ballot to the chairman.
If the vote shall be by ballot then voting machines may be used in the
manner prescribed by section two thousand thirty-five of this title and
provision shall be made for absentee ballots as provided in section two
thousand eighteen-a or two thousand eighteen-b of this title, whichever
shall apply, and early mail ballots as provided in section two thousand
eighteen-e or two thousand eighteen-f of this title, whichever shall
apply. If it shall appear that a majority of the qualified electors
present and voting from each district are in favor of such resolution,
it shall be declared adopted and where at least one of the districts
consolidated is a union free school district it shall be lawful for such
meeting thereafter to proceed to the election of a board of education as
provided in sections seventeen hundred two and seventeen hundred four of
this title. If a majority of the qualified electors present and voting
from each district are not in favor of such resolution, all further
proceedings at such meeting, except a motion to reconsider or adjourn,
shall be dispensed with and no such meeting shall be again called within
one year thereafter.
 2. Copies of such request, notice of meeting, order of the
commissioner of education directing a qualified elector to call such
meeting, if any, and the minutes of the meeting, including the record of
the vote upon the resolution and where at least one of the districts
consolidated is a union free school district if such resolution be
adopted a record of the declaration of the election of a board of
education, duly certified by the chairman and clerk, shall be
transmitted by either the chairman or clerk, one to the commissioner of
education, and one to the district superintendent of schools in whose
jurisdiction such districts are located.
 § 1513. Order creating consolidated district; effect. The district
superintendent shall thereupon, in case of an affirmative vote, issue an
order consolidating such districts and creating a common school
district, or union free school district, as the case may be, designating
such district by a simplified name in accordance with section three
hundred fifteen of this chapter. Such order shall take effect at some
date to be specified therein, not more than three months after the date
of the meeting. He shall file such order in the town clerk's office of
the town in which such districts are located. If such districts are
located in two or more supervisory districts, such order shall be
executed jointly by the district superintendents of such districts.
Such order shall have the same effect as an order executed by a district
superintendent dissolving two or more common school districts and
forming a new district therefrom, or dissolving one or more of such
districts and uniting the territory thereof to a union free school
district.
 § 1514. Property of districts consolidated. When two or more
districts shall be consolidated into one, the new district shall succeed
to all the rights of property possessed by the annulled districts.
 § 1515. Dissolution or alteration of joint district. The majority of
the district superintendents within whose districts any joint school
district lies may make an order at a meeting duly called by one of such
superintendents altering or dissolving such district.
 § 1516. Special meeting of joint district to act regarding alteration
or dissolution. 1. If a district superintendent, by notice in writing,
shall require the attendance of the other district superintendents, at a
joint meeting for the purpose of altering or dissolving a joint
district, and a majority of all the superintendents shall refuse or
neglect to attend, such superintendents attending, or any one of them,
may call a special meeting of such school district for the purpose of
deciding whether such district shall be altered or dissolved.
 2. If such special meeting shall vote to alter or dissolve the
district, the district superintendent or superintendents who called such
meeting may make an order altering or dissolving the district and shall
recite in such order the refusal or neglect of the other district
superintendents, his call of the special meeting and the action taken at
such meeting.
 § 1517. Indebtedness of certain dissolved districts. Whenever any
school district is dissolved pursuant to the provisions of section
fifteen hundred five of this article and annexed to an adjoining
district or adjoining districts or consolidated as provided in section
fifteen hundred twelve, the indebtedness of any such district evidenced
by bonds or notes or relating to school building construction shall
thereupon become a charge upon the enlarged district formed by such
annexation or consolidation. The board of education or trustees of such
enlarged district shall raise by tax an amount sufficient to pay any
such indebtedness of such district as the same shall become due.
 § 1518. Continuance of dissolved districts for payment of debts.
Though a district be dissolved, it shall continue to exist in law, for
the purpose of providing for and paying all its just debts, except as
provided in section fifteen hundred seventeen; and to that end the
trustees and other officers shall continue in office, and the
inhabitants may hold special meetings, elect officers to supply
vacancies and vote taxes; and all other acts necessary to raise money
and pay such debts shall be done by the inhabitants and officers of the
district.
 § 1519. Deposit of records of dissolved district. In the event that a
school district shall be dissolved, the clerk of the district, or any
person in whose possession the books, papers and records of the
district, or any of them, may be, shall deposit the same with the clerk
of the successor school district, and such records shall thereafter be
considered to be the records of the successor school district.
 § 1520. Sale of property of dissolved district and disposition of
proceeds. 1. When a district is divided into portions, which are
annexed to other districts, its property shall be sold by the supervisor
of the town or towns, within which its schoolhouse is situated, at
public auction after at least five days' notice.
 2. Such notice shall be given by posting the same in three or more
public places of the town or towns in which the schoolhouse is situated
and in one conspicuous place in the district so dissolved.
 3. The supervisor, after deducting the expenses of the sale, shall
apply its proceeds to the payment of the debts of the district, and
apportion the residue, if any, among the owners or possessors of taxable
property in the district, in the ratio of their several assessments on
the last corrected assessment-roll of the towns, and pay it over
accordingly.
 § 1521. Collection and distribution of moneys due dissolved district.
The supervisor of the town or towns within which the schoolhouse of the
dissolved district was situated may demand, sue for and collect, in the
name of his office, any money of the district outstanding in the hands
of any of its former officers, or any other person; and, after deducting
his costs and expenses, shall report the balance to the district
superintendent who shall apportion the same equitably among the
districts to which the parts of the dissolved district were annexed, to
be by them applied as their district meeting shall determine.
 § 1522. Notice of meeting for establishment of union free school
district. 1. Whenever fifteen persons entitled to vote at any meeting of
the inhabitants of any common school district in this state, shall sign
a request for a meeting, to be held for the purpose of determining
whether a union free school district shall be established therein in
conformity with the provisions of this article, it shall be the duty of
the trustees of such district, within ten days after such request shall
have been presented to them, to give public notice that a meeting of the
inhabitants of such district entitled to vote thereat will be held for
such purpose as aforesaid, at the schoolhouse, or other more suitable
place in such district, on a day and at an hour to be specified in such
notice not less than twenty nor more than thirty days after the
publication of such notice.
 2. If the trustees shall refuse to give such notice, or shall neglect
to give the same for twenty days, the commissioner of education may
authorize and direct any inhabitant of such district to give the same.
 3. Whenever such district shall correspond wholly or in part with an
incorporated village, in which there shall be published a daily or
weekly newspaper, the notice required in this section shall be given by
posting the same in five conspicuous places in said district, at least
twenty days prior to such meeting, and by causing the same to be
published once a week for three consecutive weeks before such meeting,
in all the newspapers published in said district.
 4. In other such districts the said notice shall be given by posting
the same as aforesaid, and in addition thereto, the trustees of such
district shall authorize and require any taxable inhabitant thereof to
notify every other qualified voter in such district of such meeting by
delivering to him a copy of such notice or in case of his absence from
home, by leaving a copy thereof, or so much thereof as relates to the
time, place and object of the meeting, at the place of his abode at
least twenty days prior to the time of such meeting.
 5. Whenever fifteen persons, entitled as aforesaid, from each of two
or more adjoining districts, shall unite in a request for a meeting of
the inhabitants of such districts, to determine whether such districts
shall be consolidated by the establishment of a union free school
district therein, it shall be the duty of the trustees of such
districts, or a majority of them, to submit such proposed consolidation
to the commissioner of education for approval. If the commissioner
approve such proposed consolidation, it shall be the duty of such
trustees, or a majority of them, to give public notice of such meeting,
at some convenient place within such districts, and as central as may
be, within the time and to be published and served in the manner set
forth in this section, in each of such districts and to provide for the
use of absentee ballots as provided under section two thousand
eighteen-a or two thousand eighteen-b of this title, whichever shall
apply, and early mail ballots as provided in section two thousand
eighteen-e or two thousand eighteen-f of this title, whichever shall
apply.
 6. The commissioner of education may order such meeting under the
conditions and in the manner prescribed in this section.
 7. The reasonable expense of the publication and service of such
notice shall be chargeable upon the district, in case a union free
school district is established by the meeting so convened, to be levied
and collected by the trustees, as in case of taxes levied for school
purposes; but in the event that such union free school district shall
not be established, then the said expense shall be chargeable upon the
inhabitants signing the request, jointly and severally, to be sued for,
if necessary, in any court having jurisdiction of the same.
 § 1523. Proceedings at meeting and effect of affirmative vote. 1.
Any such meeting held pursuant to section fifteen hundred twenty-two
shall be organized by the election of a chairman and clerk and may be
adjourned from time to time, by a majority vote, provided that such
adjournment shall not be for a longer period than ten days; and whenever
at any such meeting duly called and held under the provisions of
subdivisions one to four, inclusive, of section fifteen hundred
twenty-two, at least fifteen qualified voters of the districts shall be
present; or at such meeting duly called and held under the provisions of
subdivisions five and six of section fifteen hundred twenty-two, at
least fifteen qualified voters of each of the two or more adjoining
districts, joining in the request, shall be present, such meeting may,
by the affirmative vote of a majority present and voting, adopt a
resolution to establish a union free school district in said district,
or to consolidate the two or more adjoining districts by establishing a
union free school district in said districts pursuant to the notice of
said meeting. If said meeting shall determine to establish a union free
school district in said districts as aforesaid, it shall be lawful for
such meeting thereafter to proceed to the election of a board of
education as provided in sections seventeen hundred two and seventeen
hundred four of this chapter.
 2. The district superintendent in whose district the union free school
district is thus organized shall designate such district by a simplified
name in accordance with section three hundred fifteen of this chapter
and the said board shall have the name and style of the board of
education of (adding the designation aforesaid).
 3. Copies of said request, notice of meeting, order of the
commissioner of education directing some inhabitant to call said
meeting, if any, and minutes of said meeting, duly certified by the
chairman and clerk thereof, shall be transmitted and deposited,
immediately after such meeting by one of such officers, one to and with
the town clerk, one to and with the district superintendent in whose
jurisdiction said districts are located, and one to and with the
commissioner of education.
 4. If at any such meeting, the question as to the establishment of a
union free school district shall not be decided in the affirmative, as
aforesaid, then all further proceedings at such meeting, except a motion
to reconsider or adjourn, shall be dispensed with, and no such meeting
shall be again called within one year thereafter.
 5. When any such meeting shall have established a union free school
district in said districts, such union free school district shall not be
dissolved within the period of one year from the first Tuesday of August
next after such meeting.
 § 1524. Consolidation with city school district. 1. Notwithstanding
the provisions of this chapter or any other general, special, or local
law to the contrary, whenever the qualified voters of a school district
which is contiguous to the city school district of a city with less than
one hundred twenty-five thousand inhabitants, according to the latest
federal census, by a majority vote taken at an annual or special meeting
of such district shall adopt a proposition to consolidate such school
district with such city school district, and the board of education of
such city school district shall by resolution duly adopted consent
thereto, the commissioner of education may by order consolidate such
school district with such city school district; provided, however, that
where several school districts are contiguous to each other and at least
one of such school districts is contiguous to such city school district,
such vote may be taken in each of such school districts at the same
time, and if the proposition to consolidate is adopted by a majority
vote in each such district, including any votes cast by absentee ballot
as provided under section two thousand eighteen-a or two thousand
eighteen-b of this title, whichever shall apply, and any votes cast by
early mail ballots as provided in section two thousand eighteen-e or two
thousand eighteen-f of this title, whichever shall apply, and upon the
consent of the city school district board of education, the commissioner
of education may include each such district in one order of
consolidation; provided, further, however, that if the proposition to
consolidate is not adopted by a majority vote in each such district, but
is so adopted in one or more of such districts, upon the consent of the
city school district board of education, the commissioner may include in
one order of consolidation only such district or districts as, either
singly or as a group, are contiguous to such city school district. Such
order shall specify a date on which the same shall take effect, and
shall have the same effect as an order made by a district superintendent
dissolving two or more common school districts and forming a new
district therefrom, or dissolving one or more common school districts
and uniting the territory thereof to a union free school district under
the provisions of article thirty-one of this title. A copy of such order
shall be filed with the clerk of each school district affected thereby.
 2. Unless the effective date of such order of consolidation shall
coincide with the beginning of the fiscal year of the city school
district, the board of education of the city school district upon the
effective date of the order of consolidation, shall levy a tax upon the
area so consolidated with the city school district, to defray the
expenses of educating the pupils of such area from the effective date of
the consolidation to the beginning of the next ensuing fiscal year of
the city school district. For this purpose, the school tax rate used for
the fiscal year of the city school district in progress on the effective
date of such order shall be used, except that such rate shall be divided
by twelve and multiplied by the number of months intervening between the
effective date of such order and the beginning of the next ensuing
fiscal year of the city school district. The tax list for this purpose
shall be prepared and confirmed within thirty days after the effective
date of such consolidation.
 3. In any city school district with which one or more school districts
shall have been consolidated under the provisions of this section, the
proper equalization rate shall be fixed and determined annually pursuant
to the provisions of section thirty-five hundred five of this chapter.
 § 1525. Alteration of boundaries of city school district.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter or any other general,
special, or local law to the contrary, whenever the commissioner of
education shall receive an application for an alteration of the
boundaries of a city school district of a city with less than one
hundred twenty-five thousand inhabitants, and the board of education of
such city school district and the boards of education or trustees of all
other districts to be affected by such alteration shall consent thereto
in writing, the commissioner of education may make an order altering the
boundaries of such city school district, and fix in such order a day
when the alteration shall take effect.
 § 1526. Enlarged city school districts. 1. The commissioner of
education is hereby authorized and empowered to create enlarged city
school districts by consolidation of city school districts of cities of
less than one hundred twenty-five thousand inhabitants with such area or
areas contiguous to such city school districts as, in his discretion,
are suitable for the establishment of enlarged city school systems, and
to fix, determine and define the boundaries of such enlarged districts
as provided in this section.
 2. The commissioner is hereby authorized and empowered to make and
enter in his office orders laying out such area or areas contiguous to a
city school district of a city of less than one hundred twenty-five
thousand inhabitants, provided, however, that no school district which
has an outstanding bonded indebtedness shall be divided by such order in
such manner that only a part of such district is included in such an
area.
 3. Within ten days after the making and entry of an order pursuant to
this section, the commissioner shall transmit a certified copy thereof
to the board of education of the city school district and the clerk, or
in the event there is no clerk, to the trustee or trustees of each
school district wholly or partly included in such area or areas. Such
clerk, trustee or trustees, as the case may be, shall, within five days
after receipt of such order, post a copy thereof in five conspicuous
places in such district.
 4. No such area or areas laid out by order of the commissioner shall
be consolidated with such city school district until a majority of the
qualified voters of such area or areas have adopted a proposition to
consolidate such area or areas with the city school district, as
provided in this section, and until the board of education of the city
school district has consented to such consolidation by resolution duly
adopted and has transmitted a certified copy of such resolution to the
commissioner.
 5. When the order laying out such area or areas has been made and
entered as provided in this section, a petition may be presented by
persons qualified to vote at school meetings, asking for the
establishment of an enlarged city school district by the consolidation
of such area or areas with the city school district. Such petition shall
be signed by a number of qualified voters equal to at least ten per
centum of the children in the area or areas according to the latest
school census for the area or areas laid out by the commissioner. Such
petition shall be filed with the commissioner and shall request that an
election of the qualified voters within such area or areas be called for
the purpose of determining whether or not such area or areas shall be
consolidated with the city school district. If the commissioner is
satisfied that the petition has been duly signed as provided in this
section, he shall fix a time and place or places for an election of the
qualified voters within each such area, which election shall be held not
more than thirty days after the filing of such petition.
 6. The commissioner of education shall divide the area into a school
election district or districts. The area shall be so divided that if
circumstances will permit, the school election district will be
coterminous with one or more school districts, or parts or combinations
thereof, and that, if practicable, there shall be a schoolhouse in each
school election district. The commissioner shall describe each of such
election districts. If there is no public schoolhouse in a school
election district, the commissioner shall designate the place where the
election in such district shall be had.
 7. The commissioner shall cause notice of such election to be posted
at least ten days before the election in three conspicuous places in
each school district wholly or partly within such area. In addition to
the posting of such notice a copy thereof shall be published at least
seven days before the election in a daily or weekly newspaper published
within the area or in a newspaper having general circulation therein.
Such notice shall state the day of election and the hours the polls are
to be open, shall describe the school election district or districts
into which the area is divided, shall specify the schoolhouses or other
places therein where such election will be held and where the ballots
will be canvassed.
 8. The election shall take place during at least four consecutive
hours between the hours of seven o'clock in the forenoon and ten o'clock
in the evening, as determined by the commissioner of education.
 9. Any person qualified to vote in any school district wholly or
partly within the area laid out by the commissioner and who resides
within such area shall be qualified to vote at the election. Before each
person casts his ballot he shall be required to sign a statement
contained in a poll book provided for the purpose, declaring that he is
a qualified voter within the area.
 10. The commissioner of education shall appoint a board of canvass for
the entire area. Such board shall organize by naming one of its members
as chairman and shall, as soon as the ballot boxes and books containing
the names of the voters have been delivered to the board of canvass in
the place designated by the commissioner of education, count all the
ballots. Prior to ascertaining the manner in which any voter has marked
his ballot, the number of ballots from each school election district
shall be counted separately without opening them and if the number does
not correspond with the number of names contained in the poll book of
such school election district, the board before canvassing the ballots,
shall withdraw therefrom a number sufficient to make the number of
ballots correspond with the number of names in the poll book.
Thereafter, and before ascertaining the manner in which any voter has
voted, the board of canvass shall cause the ballots cast at each school
election district to be thoroughly intermingled with each other in a
single ballot box large enough to contain the aggregate number of votes
cast. A majority of the valid votes cast shall be necessary to adopt the
resolution. Such board shall certify to the commissioner of education
the total number of votes cast, the number of valid votes cast for the
proposition to consolidate the area with the city school district, the
number of valid votes cast against the proposition, the number of void
ballots and the number of blank ballots. The board of canvass shall file
a copy of such certificate with each superintendent of schools in whose
jurisdiction such area is located and shall also file a copy thereof
with the town clerk of each town in which any part of such area is
located. The board of canvass shall seal the books and ballots
immediately upon completion of the certificate setting forth the result,
and shall file such sealed books and ballots with the board of education
of the city school district, which board of education shall retain and
dispose of such books and ballots as provided by law. If an appeal is
brought from the election, the ballots shall be available for the
inspection of the commissioner of education.
 11. The commissioner of education shall designate a member or members
of the board of canvass to act as an election board for the conduct of
the election in each school election district. The election board shall
administer the challenges.
 12. The board of canvass shall furnish poll books, ballots and locked
ballot boxes for each school election district.
 13. After the polls are closed, and after all persons within the
polling place have voted, the election board shall forthwith proceed to
deliver to the board of canvass at the place designated by the
commissioner of education, the ballot box and the book containing the
names of the voters. Any wilful violation of this paragraph shall be a
misdemeanor.
 14. Upon an appeal to the commissioner of education, substantial
compliance with the procedures herein required shall be sufficient to
meet the intent of this section.
 15. If the proposition to consolidate such area with such city school
district is adopted, the commissioner may by order consolidate such area
or areas, and all school districts and parts of school districts
included therein, with such city school district. Such order shall
specify a date on which the same shall take effect, and the provisions
of sections fifteen hundred fourteen, fifteen hundred seventeen and
fifteen hundred eighteen shall be applicable to such consolidation. A
copy of such order shall be filed with the clerk of each school district
affected thereby.
 16. If at any such election the proposition to consolidate shall not
be adopted, no such election shall again be called within one year after
such original election. If no election shall be called to reconsider the
question within two years after such original election or if at any such
election called within two years after such original election the
proposition shall again fail of adoption, the order of the commissioner
laying out such area or areas shall be deemed null and void and of no
further force and effect.
 17. Unless the effective date of such order of consolidation shall
coincide with the beginning of the fiscal year of the city school
district, the board of education of the city school district upon the
effective date of the order of consolidation, shall levy a tax upon the
area so consolidated with the city school district, to defray the
expenses of educating the pupils of such area from the effective date of
the consolidation to the beginning of the next ensuing fiscal year of
the city school district. For this purpose, the school tax rate used for
the fiscal year of the city school district in progress on the effective
date of such order shall be used, except that such rate shall be divided
by twelve and multiplied by the number of months intervening between the
effective date of such order and the beginning of the next ensuing
fiscal year of the city school district. The tax list for this purpose
shall be prepared and confirmed within thirty days after the effective
date of such consolidation.
 18. In any enlarged city school district created pursuant to this
section, the proper equalization rate or rates shall be fixed and
determined annually pursuant to the provisions of section thirty-five
hundred five of this chapter.
 19. The expense of posting and publishing of the notices and of
furnishing the poll books, ballots and ballot boxes shall be borne
equally by the several school districts wholly or partly included within
such area, unless a consolidation order is made, in which event such
expense shall become a charge upon the enlarged city school district.
 § 1527. Payroll deductions for deposit to employee bank accounts. The
disbursing officer of the city school district of the city of Syracuse
is authorized to deduct from the salary of members of the teaching and
supervisory staff and other employees with their prior consent sums for
deposit to employee savings accounts.
 § 1527-a. Prohibit symbols of hate. 1. A school district shall not
sell or display any symbols of hate or any similar image, or tangible
personal property, inscribed with such an image unless the image appears
in a book, digital medium, museum, or otherwise serves an educational or
historical purpose.
 2. For the purposes of this section, the term "symbols of hate" shall
include, but not be limited to, symbols of white supremacy, neo-Nazi
ideology or the Battle Flag of the Confederacy.
 § 1527-c. Shared superintendent program. Notwithstanding any other
provision of law, rule or regulation to the contrary, the governing
board of a school district with an enrollment of less than one thousand
students in the previous year shall be authorized to enter into a school
superintendent sharing contract with no more than two additional school
districts each of which had fewer than one thousand in enrolled pupils
in the previous year. Each shared superintendent arrangement shall be
governed by the boards of education of the school districts
participating in the shared contract. Provided however, that this
section shall not be construed to alter, affect or impair any employment
contract which is in effect on or before July first, two thousand
thirteen. Any school district which has entered into a school
superintendent sharing program will continue to be eligible to complete
such contract notwithstanding that the enrollment of the school district
exceeded one thousand students after entering into a shared
superintendent contract.
 ARTICLE 32
 FILING OF EXPENDITURE STATEMENTS BY CANDIDATES
 FOR MEMBERSHIP ON BOARD OF EDUCATION
Section 1528. Expenditure and contribution statement.
 1529. Times for filing statements.
 1530. Proceedings to compel filing of statements or corrected
 statements of campaign expenditures and contributions.
 1531. Procedure.
 § 1528. Expenditure and contribution statement. 1. (a) Any candidate
for election to the board of education, except a candidate for member of
the community district education council of a New York city community
school district, shall file sworn statements with the clerk of the
school district in which he or she is a candidate and the commissioner
setting forth all moneys or other valuable things, paid, given, expended
or promised by him or her, or incurred for or on his or her behalf with
his or her approval to be filed with the aforesaid clerk and
commissioner by any person, firm, association or corporation, to aid his
or her own nomination or election, or to aid or influence the nomination
or defeat of any candidate to be voted for at the election. Any
candidate for election, if he or she expended nothing or his or her only
expenditures were for personal expenses which when taken together with
the total expenditures incurred by others on his or her behalf and with
his or her approval do not exceed five hundred dollars, and if the
aggregate amount of all contributions made to such candidate do not
exceed five hundred dollars, shall not be required to file any
statements with the commissioner; however such candidate shall file with
the clerk of the school district a sworn statement to the effect that
his or her election expenditures did not exceed five hundred dollars and
contributions received did not exceed five hundred dollars.
 (b) Any required contribution statements shall include the dollar
amount of any receipt, contribution or transfer, or the fair market
value of any receipt, contribution or transfer, which is other than of
money, the name and address of the transferor, contributor or person
from whom received, and if the transferor, contributor or person is a
political committee as defined in subdivision one of section 14-100 of
the election law; the name of and the political unit represented by the
committee, the date of its receipt, the dollar amount of every
expenditure, the name and address of the person to whom it was made or
the name of and the political unit represented by the committee to which
it was made and the date thereof.
 (c) No person or persons shall make expenditures on behalf of a
candidate without his or her approval unless such person or persons
files a sworn statement with the clerk and commissioner stating that the
candidate did not approve such expenditure. Such expenditure shall be
limited to twenty-five dollars and shall not be included in determining
the five hundred dollars as set forth in paragraph (a) of this
subdivision.
 2. For the purposes of this section, personal expenses shall include
only payments for traveling expenses and expenses incidental thereto,
for writing, printing and preparing for transmission any letter,
circular, or other publication not issued at regular intervals,
containing a statement of the position or views of the candidate or
person upon public or other questions, for stationery and postage and
for telegraph, telephone and other public messenger service; but all
such expenses shall be limited to those which are directly and
personally incurred and paid by the candidate.
 § 1529. Times for filing statements. 1. The times for filing the
statements prescribed by section fifteen hundred twenty-eight of this
article shall be as follows:
 a. A first statement shall be filed on or before the thirtieth day
next preceding the election to which it relates.
 b. A second statement shall be filed on or before the fifth day next
preceding the election to which it relates.
 c. A third statement shall be filed within twenty days next succeeding
the election to which it relates.
 2. Unless otherwise provided, each statement shall cover the period up
to and including the day next preceding the day herein specified for the
filing thereof; provided, however, that any contribution or loan in
excess of one thousand dollars, if received after the close of the
period to be covered in the last statement filed before the election but
before such election, shall be reported, in the same manner as other
contributions, within twenty-four hours after receipt.
 3. It shall not be necessary to itemize in any statement the data
previously reported in any prior statement but each statement shall
include a summary of all expenditures and contributions and other
particulars reported in any previous statements.
 4. A statement shall be deemed properly filed when deposited in an
established post-office within the prescribed time, duly stamped,
registered and directed to the clerk of the school district in which he
is a candidate and to the commissioner of education, but in the event it
is not received, a duplicate of such statement shall be promptly filed
upon notice by the school district administrative officer and/or the
commissioner of its non-receipt. Each statement shall be preserved for a
period of three years from the date of filing thereof and it shall
constitute a part of the public records and shall be open to public
inspection.
 § 1530. Proceedings to compel filing of statements or corrected
statements of campaign expenditures and contributions. 1. The supreme
court or a justice thereof, in a proceeding instituted by any candidate
voted for at the election or by any five qualified voters may compel by
order, any candidate required under the provisions of this chapter to
file a statement of expenditures or contributions for campaign purposes,
who has not filed any such statement within the time prescribed by this
chapter, to file such statement within five days after notice of the
order.
 2. The supreme court or a justice thereof, in a proceeding instituted
by any candidate voted for at the election or by any five qualified
voters, may compel by order any candidate or other person or persons
required under the provisions of this chapter to file a statement of
expenditures or contributions for campaign purposes, who has filed a
statement which does not conform to the requirements of this chapter in
respect to its truth, sufficiency in detail or otherwise, to file a new
or supplemental statement which shall make the statement or statements
true and complete within five days after notice of the order.
 3. In every proceeding instituted under this section, the court may
confer immunity in accordance with the provisions of section 50.20 of
the criminal procedure law; provided, however, that no immunity shall be
conferred except upon twenty-four hours prior written notice to both the
attorney general and the appropriate district attorney having an
official interest therein.
 § 1531. Procedure. A special proceeding under the foregoing
provisions of this article shall be heard upon a verified petition and
such oral or written proof as may be offered, and upon such notice to
such officers, persons or candidates as the court, justice or judge
shall direct and shall be summarily determined.
 ARTICLE 33
 COMMON SCHOOL DISTRICTS
Section 1601. Trustees constitute a board and body corporate.
 1602. Number of trustees; determination of change.
 1603. Property held by trustees as corporation.
 1604. Powers and duties of trustees.
 1604-a. Temporary investment of school moneys.
 1605. Powers and duties of a sole trustee.
 1606. Mode of exercise of trustees' powers.
 1607. Powers of trustees when vacancies on board exist.
 1608. Estimated expenses for ensuing year.
 1609. Annual report of trustees of certain joint districts.
 1610. Trustees' annual report to district.
 1611. Penalty for failure of trustee to account.
 1612. Payment by trustee to successor.
 1613. Trustees' right of action against predecessor.
 1614. Notice of non-payment of moneys apportioned.
 1615. Taxation for expenses incurred by trustees.
 1616. Issuing order in excess of available funds a
 misdemeanor.
 1618. New York State School Boards Association, Inc.
 1619. Advertising for bids; letting of contracts.
 § 1601. Trustees constitute a board and body corporate. The sole
trustee or the trustees of a common school district shall constitute a
board for such district and such board is hereby created a body
corporate.
 § 1602. Number of trustees; determination of change. 1. At the first
annual meeting next after the erection of a common school district the
electors shall determine, by resolution, whether the district shall have
one or three trustees; and if they resolve to have three trustees, shall
elect the three for one, two and three years, respectively, and shall
designate by their votes for which term each is elected; thereafter in
such district, one trustee shall be elected for three years at each
annual meeting to fill the office of the outgoing trustee; and if they
resolve to have one trustee, shall elect the trustee for a one-year
term; thereafter in such district a trustee shall be elected for one
year at each annual meeting to fill the office of the outgoing trustee.
 2. The electors of any common school district having three trustees
shall have power to decide at any annual meeting by a majority vote of
those present and voting, whether the district shall have a sole trustee
or three trustees. If they resolve to have a sole trustee, the trustees
in office shall continue in office until their terms of office shall
expire. No election of a trustee shall be had in the district until the
offices of such trustees shall become vacant by the expiration of their
terms of office or otherwise, and thereafter but one trustee shall be
elected for said district.
 3. The electors of a common school district having but one trustee may
determine at an annual meeting, by a two-thirds vote of the legal voters
present and voting thereat, to have three trustees; and upon the
adoption of a resolution to that effect, shall proceed to elect three
trustees or such number as may be necessary to form a board of three
trustees, in the same manner as provided in this section for the
election of three trustees at the first annual meeting after the
erection of a district; and thereafter in such district, one trustee
shall be elected for three years, at each annual meeting, to fill the
office of the outgoing trustee.
 § 1603. Property held by trustees as corporation. All property which
is now vested in, or shall hereafter be transferred to the trustees of a
common school district, for the use of schools in the district, shall be
held by them as a corporation.
 § 1604. Powers and duties of trustees. It shall be the duty of the
trustees of a common school district, and they shall have the power:
 1. To call special meetings of the inhabitants of such district
whenever they shall deem it necessary and proper.
 2. To give notice of special, annual and adjourned meetings in the
manner prescribed in this chapter, if there be no clerk of the district,
or he be absent or incapable of acting, or shall refuse to act.
 3. To make out a tax-list of every district tax voted by a district
meeting, or authorized by law, which shall contain the names of all the
taxable inhabitants residing in the district at the time of making out
the list, and the amount of tax payable by each inhabitant, as directed
in article seventy-one of this chapter.
 4. To purchase or lease such schoolhouse sites and other grounds to be
used for playgrounds, or for agriculture, athletic center and social
center purposes, and to purchase or build such schoolhouses, as a
district meeting may authorize; to hire temporarily such rooms or
buildings as may be necessary for school purposes; and to purchase such
implements, supplies and apparatus as may be necessary to provide
instruction in agriculture, or to equip and maintain play-grounds, and
to conduct athletic and social center activities in the district, when
authorized by a vote of a district meeting.
 5. To have the custody and safe-keeping of the district schoolhouses,
their sites and appurtenances.
 6. To insure the school buildings, furniture and school apparatus in
an insurance company created by or under the laws of this state, or in
an insurance company authorized by law to transact business in this
state, and to comply with the conditions of the policy, and raise by a
district tax the amount required to pay the premiums thereon.
 7. To insure the school library in such a company in a sum fixed by a
district meeting, and to raise the premium by a district tax, and comply
with the conditions of the policy.
 7-a. In their discretion to insure pupils against damage occasioned
because of accidental personal injuries sustained while participating in
physical education classes, intramural and interscholastic sports
activities, in such a company, and raise by district tax the amount
required to pay the premiums thereon.
 7-b. In their discretion, to purchase insurance against accidents to
pupils occurring in school, on school grounds, while being transported
between home and school in a school bus as defined in section thirty-six
hundred twenty-one, and during sponsored trips.
 8. To appoint and enter into contract with a superintendent of schools
as provided in, and consistent with, section seventeen hundred eleven of
this chapter, and to employ in accordance with, and subject to, the
provisions of section three thousand twelve of this chapter as many
legally qualified teachers as the schools of the district require; to
determine the rate of compensation of each teacher and to determine the
terms of school to be held during each school year, and to employ
persons to supervise, organize, conduct and maintain athletic,
playground and social center activities when they are authorized by a
vote of a district meeting as provided by law. The regular teachers of
the school may be employed at an increased compensation or otherwise,
and by separate agreement, written or oral, for one or more of such
additional duties.
 9. To establish rules for the government and discipline of the schools
of the district.
 10. To prescribe the course of studies to be pursued in such schools.
Provisions shall be made for instructing pupils in all schools supported
by public money, or under state control, in all subjects in which such
instruction is required to be given under the provisions of article
seventeen of this chapter.
 11. To pay the schools moneys apportioned to the district by giving
orders on the county treasurer, or on the collector or treasurer of such
district when duly qualified to receive and disburse the same.
 12. To collect by district tax an amount sufficient to maintain school
in the district for the current school year, including any judgment
rendered against the district, after deducting from the aggregate amount
required for this purpose the amount of school moneys in the hands of
the county treasurer, collector or treasurer of the district and to pay
the same by written orders on such district collector or treasurer.
 13. To draw upon the county treasurer, the collector or treasurer of
the district, when duly qualified to receive and disburse the same, for
the school moneys, by written orders signed by the sole trustee, or
where there are three trustees, signed by a majority of said trustees;
provided, however, that in common school districts employing ten or more
teachers and having a treasurer and a board of three trustees, by
resolution duly adopted, the board may authorize one voucher-order check
to be drawn in the total amount of a duly certified payroll for the
salaries of regularly appointed employees and officers legally entitled
to be compensated for their services; the proceeds of such voucher-order
payroll check shall be credited to a payroll account from which checks
shall be signed only by the treasurer of the district and drawn payable
to individual employees or officers legally entitled to be compensated
for services.
 14. To keep each of the schoolhouses under their charge, and its
furniture, school apparatus and appurtenances, in necessary and proper
repair, and make the same reasonably comfortable for use, but shall not
expend therefor without vote of the district an amount to exceed one
hundred dollars in any one year.
 15. To make any repairs and abate any nuisances, pursuant to the
direction of the district superintendent as herein provided, and provide
fuel, stoves or other heating apparatus, pails, brooms and other
implements necessary to keep the schoolhouses and the schoolrooms clean,
and make them reasonably comfortable for use, when no provision has been
made therefor by a vote of the district, or the sum voted by the
district for said purposes shall have proved insufficient.
 16. To provide for all janitorial work in and about the school
buildings, and pay reasonable compensation therefor.
 17. To provide bound blank-books for the entering of their accounts,
the records of the district and the proceedings of district and trustee
meetings, and a list of the movable property of the district and they
shall deliver such books to their successors in office.
 18. To expend in the purchase of a dictionary, books, reproductions of
standard works of art, maps, globes or other school apparatus, including
implements, apparatus and supplies for instruction in agriculture, or
for conducting athletic playgrounds and social center activities, a sum
not exceeding fifty dollars in any one year, without a vote of the
district.
 19. To establish temporary or branch schools in such places in the
district as shall best accommodate the children, and to hire rooms or
buildings therefor and to fit up and furnish such rooms or buildings in
a suitable manner for conducting school therein when it is shown:
 a. That any considerable number of the children residing in a portion
of the district are so remote from the schoolhouse as to render it
difficult for them to attend school in such schoolhouse in inclement
weather, or
 b. That the schoolhouse is overcrowded and proper accommodations are
not afforded all the children of the district, or
 c. That for any other sufficient reason suitable and proper school
facilities are not provided by the existing school accommodations.
 20. To provide transportation, home-teaching or special classes, as
defined under sections forty-four hundred one and forty-four hundred two
of this chapter for physically or mentally handicapped and delinquent
children. Such transportation, home-teaching or special classes, when
provided pursuant to this subdivision, shall be granted to all such
children irrespective of the school they legally attend.
 21. To purchase and maintain, when authorized by a vote of the
qualified voters of the school district, a motor vehicle or vehicles to
be used for the transportation of the school children of the district.
Such motor vehicle or vehicles may be leased to another school district
when not needed for such transportation. Likewise when not so needed
such motor vehicle or vehicles may be leased to a school district or a
municipality as defined in section two of chapter five hundred fifty-six
of the laws of nineteen hundred forty-five, for the purpose of
transporting children and instructors in connection with (a) a
recreation project or a youth service project operated by one or more
municipalities or by a school district, if such project is authorized
and approved by the state youth commission, or (b) a youth bureau or
agency or activity or project of a county, town, city or village which
is devoted to the welfare of youth therein or to providing leisure-time
activities for youth or assistance to children, as authorized in section
ninety-five of the general municipal law, or (c) one or more playgrounds
and neighborhood recreation centers operated and maintained by one or
more cities except New York, Buffalo and Rochester, counties except Erie
and the counties within the city of New York, towns or villages, whether
or not any school board or district joins in such operating and
maintaining, as authorized in section two hundred forty-four-b of the
general municipal law. In any case when such motor vehicle shall be
leased as provided in this subdivision, public liability and property
damage insurance, fire insurance and compensation insurance of drivers
shall be provided and collision insurance shall be provided in the
amount of the value of the vehicle, to protect the lessor. The
additional cost of such insurance shall be paid by the lessee. No part
of the costs and expenses resulting from operation, maintenance and
repair of such vehicles during the leasing thereof shall be included in
determining the amount of any form of state aid received by such school
district.
 21-a. To lease a motor vehicle or vehicles to be used for the
transportation of the children of the district from a school district,
board of cooperative educational services or county vocational education
and extension board or from any other source, under the conditions
specified in this subdivision. No such agreement for the lease of a
motor vehicle or vehicles shall be for a term of more than one school
year, provided that when authorized by a vote of the qualified voters of
the district such lease may have a term of up to five years, or eight
years for the lease of zero-emission school buses as defined in section
thirty-six hundred thirty-eight of this chapter. Where the trustee or
board of trustees enter into a lease of a motor vehicle or vehicles
pursuant to this subdivision for a term of one school year or less, such
trustee or board shall not be authorized to enter into another lease for
the same or an equivalent replacement vehicle or vehicles, as determined
by the commissioner, without obtaining approval of the qualified voters
of the school district.
 21-b. a. The trustees are authorized to provide regional
transportation services by rendering such services jointly with other
school districts or boards of cooperative educational services. Such
services may include pupil transportation between home and school,
transportation during the day to and from school and a special education
program or service or a program at a board of cooperative educational
services or an approved shared program at another school district,
transportation for field trips or to and from extracurricular
activities, and cooperative school bus maintenance.
 b. The trustees are authorized to enter into a contract with another
school district, a county, municipality, or the state office of children
and family services to provide transportation for children, including
contracts to provide such transportation as regional transportation
services, provided that the contract cost is appropriate. In determining
the appropriate transportation contract cost, the transportation service
provider school district shall use a calculation consistent with
regulations adopted by the commissioner for the purpose of assuring that
charges reflect the true costs that would be incurred by a prudent
person in the conduct of a competitive transportation business.
 22. To pay any judgment levied against the district and in the event
there are no moneys otherwise available, to levy a tax upon the taxable
property of the district to pay the same.
 23. To contract with any person, corporation or other school district
for the conveyance of pupils residing within the district, when
authorized to do so under subdivision nineteen of section two thousand
twenty-one, by vote of the inhabitants of the district entitled to vote,
or to contract for the operation, maintenance and garaging of motor
vehicles owned by the district, in accordance with such rules and
regulations as such trustees may establish, consistent with the
regulations of the commissioner of education. Upon authorization by a
school district meeting, every such contract of transportation may be
made for a period not exceeding five years, notwithstanding any
provision of any other law inconsistent herewith.
 24. To furnish lighting facilities, janitorial care and supervision
for highway underpasses when authorized to do so by vote of a district
meeting under the provisions of subdivision twenty of section two
thousand fifteen of this chapter.
 25. To provide school health services, as defined in subdivision two
of section nine hundred one of this chapter, to all children in
attendance upon schools under their supervision and to pay any expense
incurred therefor.
 26. To establish a petty cash fund for the use of the principal,
teacher or clerk of the school district for the payment, in advance of
authorization, of properly itemized bills for materials, supplies or
services furnished to the school district under conditions calling for
immediate payment to the vendor upon delivery of any such materials or
supplies or the rendering of any such services. The amount of such a
petty cash fund and the method of handling same shall be in accordance
with regulations established by the commissioner of education.
 27. To reimburse members of the teaching and supervising staff for
expenses actually and necessarily incurred in the performance of their
official duties and to make such rules and regulations in relation
thereto as they shall deem necessary and proper. Such rules and
regulations may include the establishment of a mileage rate for the use
of personally owned cars for such purpose in lieu of auditing and
allowing claims for actual and necessary expenses of travel.
 28. To provide, maintain and operate a cafeteria or restaurant service
for the use of pupils and teachers while in school and for the use by
the community for school related functions and activities and to furnish
meals to the elderly residents, sixty years of age or older, of the
district. Such utilization shall be subject to the approval of the board
of education. Charges shall be sufficient to meet the direct cost of
preparing and serving such meals, reducible by available reimbursements.
 29. To prescribe the text-books to be used in the schools, and to
compel a uniformity in the use of the same, pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter, and to furnish the same to pupils out of any moneys
provided for that purpose.
 29-a. To develop a plan to ensure that all instructional materials to
be used in the schools of the district are available in a usable
alternative format for each student with a disability, as defined in
section forty-four hundred one of this chapter, and for each student who
is a qualified individual with a disability as defined in the
rehabilitation act of nineteen hundred ninety-three (29 U.S.C. 701) as
amended, in accordance with his or her educational needs and course
selection, at the same time as such instructional materials are
available to non-disabled students. As part of such plan the trustee or
board of trustees shall amend its procurement policies to give a
preference in the purchase of instructional materials to vendors who
agree to provide materials in alternative formats. For purposes of this
subdivision, "alternative format" shall mean any medium or format for
the presentation of instructional materials, other than a traditional
print textbook, that is needed as an accommodation for a disabled
student enrolled in the school district, including but not limited to
Braille, large print, open and closed captioned, audio, or an electronic
file in an approved format, as defined in the regulations of the
commissioner. When an electronic file is provided, the plan shall
specify how the format will be accessed by students and/or how the
district shall convert to an accessible format. Such plan shall identify
the needs of students residing in the district for alternative format
materials. Such plan shall also specify ordering timelines to ensure
that alternative format materials are available at the same time as
regular format materials. Such plans shall include procedures to address
the need to obtain materials in alternative format without delay for
disabled students who move into the school district during the school
year.
 30. To have in all respects the superintendence, management and
control of the educational affairs of the district, and, therefore,
shall have all the powers reasonably necessary to exercise powers
granted expressly or by implication and to discharge duties imposed
expressly or by implication by this chapter or other statutes.
 31. To provide workmen's compensation coverage as provided in the
workmen's compensation law for all teachers and other employees for
injuries incurred in actual performance of duty.
 31-a. In its discretion, to provide under a group insurance policy or
policies issued by any insurance company or insurance companies
authorized to do business in this state or under a group contract issued
by one or more corporations subject to article forty-three of the
insurance law, life insurance or accident and health insurance benefits
or medical and surgical benefits or hospital service benefits or any two
or more of such kinds of benefits to teachers and other employees of the
school district who participate in a plan or plans, as hereinafter
provided. The disbursing officer of the school district is authorized to
deduct from the salary of such participant with his prior consent, in
writing, the sums representing the participant's share of the premium or
premiums which are payable by such officer to such insurance company or
corporation. Such board of education is authorized to pay from such
moneys as are available for the purpose, a share of the cost of such
benefit or benefits in such amount as is required to be paid under such
group insurance policy or policies or group contract or contracts by the
board of education, as employer. The sum to be paid by the board of
education under such policy or policies or contract or contracts, in the
discretion of such board may be any percentage of the total cost of the
benefit or benefits including the whole thereof.
 31-b. In their discretion, to purchase insurance against personal
injuries incurred by an authorized participant in a school volunteer
program, including but not limited to, those authorized participants who
assist on school buses, school sponsored transportation to and from
school, or on school sponsored field trips or any other school sponsored
activity; provided, however, that the injuries were incurred while the
authorized participant was functioning either within the scope of his or
her authorized volunteer duties or under the direction of the board of
education, trustee, or board of cooperative educational services, or
both.
 32. In its discretion, and with the written consent of any employee,
to deduct from the salary of such employee such amount as may be agreed
to by such employee for payment to any credit union doing business in
the state of New York as such employee may designate. Any such written
authorization may be withdrawn by such employee at any time.
 33. In his discretion to contract with a social services district
pursuant to subdivision three of section four hundred ten of the social
services law to furnish day care for children on behalf of the social
services district.
 34. To appoint a district clerk, and a district treasurer, where such
office is not filled by election pursuant to section two thousand
twenty-one of this chapter, to serve the district during each school
year, or until a successor is appointed.
 35. a. In their discretion, to adopt a resolution establishing the
office of claims auditor and appoint a claims auditor who shall hold his
or her position subject to the pleasure of such trustees. In its
discretion, the trustees may adopt a resolution establishing the office
of deputy claims auditor who shall act as claims auditor in the absence
of the claims auditor. Such claims auditor shall report directly to the
trustees. No person shall be eligible for appointment to the office of
claims auditor or deputy claims auditor who shall also be:
 (1) a trustee of the school district;
 (2) the clerk or treasurer of the school district;
 (3) the superintendent of schools or other official of the district
responsible for business management;
 (4) the person designated as purchasing agent; or
 (5) clerical or professional personnel directly involved in accounting
and purchasing functions of the school district.
 b. Such claims auditor or deputy claims auditor shall not be required
to be a resident of the district, and the positions of claims auditor
and deputy claims auditor shall be classified in the exempt class of the
civil service. The trustees, at any time after the establishment of the
office of claims auditor or deputy claims auditor, may adopt a
resolution abolishing such office, whereupon such office shall be
abolished. When the office of claims auditor shall have been established
and a claims auditor shall have been appointed and shall have qualified,
the powers and duties of the trustees with respect to claims auditing,
and allowing or rejecting all accounts, charges, claims or demands
against the school district, shall devolve upon and thereafter be
exercised by such claims auditor during the continuance of such office.
The trustees shall be permitted to delegate the claims audit function to
one or more independent entities by using (1) inter-municipal
cooperative agreements, (2) shared services to the extent authorized by
section nineteen hundred fifty of this title, or (3) independent
contractors, to fulfill this function.
 c. When the trustees delegate the claims audit function using an
inter-municipal cooperative agreement, shared service authorized by
section nineteen hundred fifty of this title, or an independent
contractor, the trustees shall be responsible for auditing all claims
for services from the entity providing the delegated claims auditor,
either directly or through a delegation to a different independent
entity.
 36. In its discretion to provide that the proceeds of the sale or
appropriation of school district real property shall, after being used
for any legally required purpose be used to reduce real property taxes
in such district for a period not to exceed ten school years, or such
lesser period as it may direct. Such proceeds may be invested and any
interest obtained may also be used for such purpose. Such reserve fund
shall be invested and reinvested pursuant to the provisions of
subdivision two of section sixteen hundred four-a of this article.
 37. In their discretion and in compliance with rules and regulations
of the commissioner promulgated pursuant to section one hundred one-a of
this chapter, to give written notice to the family court pursuant to
subdivision four of section seven hundred fifty-eight-a and subdivision
four of section 353.6 of the family court act of the desire of the
school district to act in the supervision of certain juveniles while
performing services for the public good.
 38. To offer monetary rewards, in sums not to exceed one thousand
dollars, to individuals for information leading to the arrest and
conviction of any person or persons for felonies or misdemeanors
directly connected to vandalism of district property. Such rewards may
be offered on any conditions such trustees may determine, subject to
whatever qualifications it may deem appropriate.
 39. a. Shall require, for purposes of a criminal history record check,
the fingerprinting of all prospective employees pursuant to section
three thousand thirty-five of this chapter, who do not hold valid
clearance pursuant to such section or pursuant to section three thousand
four-b of this chapter or section five hundred nine-cc or twelve hundred
twenty-nine-d of the vehicle and traffic law. Prior to initiating the
fingerprinting process, the prospective employer shall furnish the
applicant with the form described in paragraph (c) of subdivision thirty
of section three hundred five of this chapter and shall obtain the
applicant's consent to the criminal history records search. Every set of
fingerprints taken pursuant to this subdivision shall be promptly
submitted to the commissioner for purposes of clearance for employment.
 b. Upon the recommendation of the superintendent, the trustees may
conditionally appoint a prospective employee. A request for conditional
clearance shall be forwarded to the commissioner along with the
prospective employee's fingerprints, as required by paragraph a of this
subdivision. Such appointment shall not commence until notification by
the commissioner that the prospective employee has been conditionally
cleared for employment and shall terminate forty-five days after such
notification of conditional clearance or when the prospective employer
is notified of a determination by the commissioner to grant or deny
clearance, whichever occurs earlier, and may not be extended or renewed
unless the commissioner issues a new conditional clearance after finding
that there was good cause for failing to obtain clearance within such
period, provided that if clearance is granted, the appointment shall
continue and the conditional status shall be removed. Prior to
commencement of such conditional appointment, the prospective employer
shall obtain a signed statement for conditional appointment from the
prospective employee, indicating whether, to the best of his or her
knowledge, he or she has a pending criminal charge or criminal
conviction in any jurisdiction outside the state.
 c. Upon the recommendation of the superintendent, the trustees may
make an emergency conditional appointment when an unforeseen emergency
vacancy has occurred. When such appointment is made, the process for
conditional appointment pursuant to paragraph b of this subdivision must
also be initiated. Emergency conditional appointment may commence prior
to notification from the commissioner on conditional clearance but shall
terminate twenty business days from the date such appointment commences
or when the prospective employer is notified by the commissioner
regarding conditional clearance, whichever occurs earlier, provided that
if conditional clearance is granted, the appointment shall continue as a
conditional appointment. Prior to the commencement of such appointment,
the prospective employer must obtain a signed statement for emergency
conditional appointment from the prospective employee, indicating
whether, to the best of his or her knowledge, he or she has a pending
criminal charge or criminal conviction in any jurisdiction. An
unforeseen emergency vacancy shall be defined as: (i) a vacancy that
occurred less than ten business days before the start of any school
session, including summer school, or during any school session,
including summer school, without sufficient notice to allow for
clearance or conditional clearance; (ii) when no other qualified person
is available to fill the vacancy temporarily; and (iii) when emergency
conditional appointment is necessary to maintain services which the
district is legally required to provide or services necessary to protect
the health, education or safety of students or staff. The provisions of
subparagraph (i) of this paragraph shall not apply if the trustees find
that the district has been unable to fill the vacancy despite good faith
efforts to fill such vacancy in a manner which would have allowed
sufficient time for clearance or conditional clearance.
 d. Shall develop a policy for the safety of the children who have
contact with an employee holding conditional appointment or emergency
conditional appointment.
 40. Shall upon commencement and termination of employment of an
employee by the district, provide the commissioner with the name of and
position held by such employee.
 41. Where the district has provided transportation to students
enrolled in such district to a school sponsored field trip,
extracurricular activity or any other similar event, it shall provide
transportation back to either the point of departure or to the
appropriate school in the district, unless the parent or legal guardian
of a student participating in such event has provided the school
district with written notice, consistent with district policy,
authorizing an alternative form of return transportation for such
student or unless intervening circumstances make such transportation
impractical. In cases where intervening circumstances make
transportation of a student back to the point of departure or to the
appropriate school in the district impractical, a representative of the
school district shall remain with the student until such student's
parent or legal guardian has been (a) contacted and informed of the
intervening circumstances which make such transportation impractical and
(b) such student had been delivered to his or her parent or legal
guardian.
 42. a. To enter into a lease, sublease or other agreement with the
dormitory authority providing for the financing or refinancing of all or
a portion of the school district capital facilities or school district
capital equipment in accordance with section sixteen hundred eighty of
the public authorities law and with the approval of the commissioner.
Such lease, sublease, or other agreement may provide for the payment of
annual or other payments to the dormitory authority, and contain such
other terms and conditions as may be agreed upon by the parties thereto,
including the establishment of reserve funds and indemnities. For
purposes of this subdivision, school district capital equipment shall
have the meaning ascribed thereto in section sixteen hundred seventy-six
of the public authorities law.
 b. Notwithstanding any provisions of law to the contrary, the
dormitory authority and the trustee or board of trustees are hereby
authorized and empowered to perform any and all acts and to enter into
any and all agreements necessary or desirable to effectuate the purposes
of this subdivision.
 * 43. To pass a resolution, in the discretion of the board of such
district, authorizing the entering of an agreement with a county, city,
village or town within such district, for the installation and use of
school bus photo violation monitoring systems pursuant to section eleven
hundred seventy-four-a of the vehicle and traffic law, provided that the
purchase, lease, installation, operation and maintenance, or any other
costs associated with such cameras shall not be considered an aidable
expense pursuant to section thirty-six hundred twenty-three-a of this
chapter.
 * NB Repealed December 1, 2029
 44. To establish a charitable fund, by resolution of the trustees, to
receive unrestricted charitable monetary donations made to such fund for
use by the district for public educational purposes. The monies of such
charitable fund shall be deposited and secured in the manner provided by
section ten of the general municipal law. The monies of such charitable
fund may be invested in the manner provided by section eleven of the
general municipal law. Any interest earned or capital gain realized on
the money so invested shall accrue to and become part of such fund. At
such time and in such amounts as determined by the trustees, the monies
of such charitable fund shall be transferred to the school district's
general fund for expenditure consistent with the charitable purposes of
the fund, provided that the amount of taxes to be levied by the school
district for any school year shall be determined without regard to any
such transfer. The school district shall maintain an accounting of all
such deposits, interest or capital gain, transfers, and expenditures.
 Any expenditure made or liability incurred in pursuance of this
section shall be a charge upon the district.
 § 1604-a. Temporary investment of school moneys. The board of
trustees of any common school district may authorize the district
treasurer or other officer having custody of district moneys to invest
moneys of the district in the manner provided by section eleven of the
general municipal law.
 § 1605. Powers and duties of a sole trustee. The sole trustee of a
common school district shall possess all the powers and be subject to
all the duties, liabilities and penalties which the law imposes upon a
board of three trustees.
 § 1606. Mode of exercise of trustees' powers. 1. The powers committed
by law to the trustees of a common school district must be exercised by
them as a board. The board must meet for the transaction of business in
accordance with notice of time and place.
 2. In a board composed of three trustees, when two only meet to
deliberate upon any matter, and the third, if notified, does not attend,
or the three meet and deliberate thereon, the conclusion of two upon the
matter, and their order, act or proceeding in relation thereto, shall be
as valid as though it were the conclusion, order, act or proceeding of
the three; and a recital of the two in their minute of the conclusion,
act or proceeding, or in their order, act or proceeding of the fact of
such notice, or of such meeting and deliberation, shall be conclusive
evidence thereof.
 3. A meeting of the board may be ordered by any member thereof, by
giving not less than twenty-four hours' notice of the same.
 § 1607. Powers of trustees when vacancies on board exist. 1. While
there is one vacancy in the office of trustee, the two trustees shall
have all the powers and be subject to all the duties and liabilities of
the three. And while there are two such vacancies, the trustee in
office shall have all the powers and be subject to all the duties and
liabilities of the three, as though he were a sole trustee.
 2. When a vacancy shall occur in the office of trustee, the board
shall immediately call a special meeting of the district to fill such
vacancy.
 § 1608. Estimated expenses for ensuing year. 1. It shall be the duty
of the trustees of each common school district to present at the annual
budget hearing a detailed statement in writing of the amount of money
which will be required for the ensuing year for school purposes,
specifying the several purposes and the amount for each. The amount for
each purpose estimated necessary for payments to boards of cooperative
educational services shall be shown in full, with no deduction of
estimated state aid. The amount of state aid provided and its percentage
relationship to the total expenditures shall also be shown. This section
shall not be construed to prevent the trustees from presenting such
statement at a budget hearing held not less than seven nor more than
fourteen days prior to a special meeting called for the purpose, nor
from presenting a supplementary and amended statement or estimate at any
time.
 2. Such statement shall be completed at least seven days before the
budget hearing at which it is to be presented and copies thereof shall
be prepared and made available, upon request and at the school district
offices, at any public library or free association library within the
district and on the school district's internet website, if one exists,
to residents within the district during the period of fourteen days
immediately preceding the annual meeting and election or special
district meeting at which the budget vote will occur and at such meeting
or hearing. The board shall also as a part of the notice required by
section two thousand three of this chapter give notice of the date, time
and place of the budget hearing and that a copy of such statement may be
obtained by any resident in the district at each schoolhouse in the
district in which school is maintained during certain designated hours
on each day other than a Saturday, Sunday or holiday during the fourteen
days immediately preceding such meeting. The board shall include notice
of the availability of such statement at least once during the school
year in any district-wide mailing distributed.
 3. Commencing with the proposed budget for the nineteen hundred
ninety-seven--ninety-eight school year, such proposed budget shall be in
plain language and shall be consistent with regulations promulgated by
the commissioner pursuant to subdivision twenty-six of section three
hundred five of this chapter. Categorization of and format for revenue,
including payments in lieu of taxes, property tax refunds from
certiorari proceedings, expenditure, transfer, and fund balance
information and changes in such data from the prior year and, in the
case of a resubmitted or amended budget, changes in such information
from the prior year's submitted budget, shall be complete and accurate
and set forth in such a manner as to best promote public comprehension
and readability.
 4. Commencing with the proposed budget for the nineteen hundred
ninety-eight--ninety-nine school year, such proposed budget shall be
presented in three components: a program component, a capital component
and an administrative component which shall be separately delineated in
accordance with regulations of the commissioner after consultation with
local school district officials. The administrative component shall
include, but need not be limited to, office and central administrative
expenses, traveling expenses and all compensation, salaries and benefits
of all school administrators and supervisors, including business
administrators, superintendents of schools and deputy, assistant,
associate or other superintendents under all existing employment
contracts or collective bargaining agreements any and all expenditures
associated with the operation of the office of trustee or board of
trustees, the office of the superintendent of schools, general
administration, the school business office, consulting costs not
directly related to direct student services and programs, planning and
all other administrative activities. The program component shall
include, but need not be limited to, all program expenditures of the
school district, including the salaries and benefits of teachers and any
school administrators or supervisors who spend a majority of their time
performing teaching duties, and all transportation operating expenses.
The capital component shall include, but need not be limited to, all
transportation capital, debt service, and lease expenditures; costs
resulting from judgments in tax certiorari proceedings or the payment of
awards from court judgments, administrative orders or settled or
compromised claims; and all facilities costs of the school district,
including facilities lease expenditures, the annual debt service and
total debt for all facilities financed by bonds and notes of the school
district, and the costs of construction, acquisition, reconstruction,
rehabilitation or improvement of school buildings, provided that such
budget shall include a rental, operations and maintenance section that
includes base rent costs, total rent costs, operation and maintenance
charges, cost per square foot for each facility leased by the school
district, and any and all expenditures associated with custodial
salaries and benefits, service contracts, supplies, utilities, and
maintenance and repairs of school facilities. For the purposes of the
development of a budget for the nineteen hundred
ninety-eight--ninety-nine school year, the trustee or board of trustees
shall separate the district's program, capital and administrative costs
for the nineteen hundred ninety-seven--ninety-eight school year in the
manner as if the budget for such year had been presented in three
components.
 5. The trustee or board of trustees shall append to the statement of
estimated expenditures a detailed statement of the total compensation to
be paid to the superintendent of schools, and any assistant or associate
superintendents of schools in the ensuing school year, including a
delineation of the salary, annualized cost of benefits and any in-kind
or other form of remuneration. The trustees shall also append a list of
all other school administrators and supervisors, if any, whose annual
salary will be eighty-five thousand dollars or more in the ensuing
school year, with the title of their positions and annual salary
identified; provided however, that the commissioner may adjust such
salary level to reflect increases in administrative salaries after June
thirtieth, nineteen hundred ninety-eight. The trustees shall submit a
copy of such list and statement, in a form prescribed by the
commissioner, of compensation to the commissioner within five days after
their preparation. The commissioner shall compile such data, together
with the data submitted pursuant to subdivision three of section
seventeen hundred sixteen of this chapter, into a single statewide
compilation, which shall be made available to the governor, the
legislature, and other interested parties upon request.
 6. Each year, the board of education shall prepare a school district
report card, pursuant to regulations of the commissioner, and shall make
it publicly available by transmitting it to local newspapers of general
circulation, appending it to copies of the proposed budget made publicly
available as required by law, making it available for distribution at
the annual meeting, and otherwise disseminating it as required by the
commissioner. Such report card shall include measures of the academic
performance of the school district, on a school by school basis, and
measures of the fiscal performance of the district, as prescribed by the
commissioner. Pursuant to regulations of the commissioner, the report
card shall also compare these measures to statewide averages for all
public schools, and statewide averages for public schools of comparable
wealth and need, developed by the commissioner. Such report card shall
include, at a minimum, any information on the school district regarding
pupil performance and expenditure per pupil required to be included in
the annual report by the regents to the governor and the legislature
pursuant to section two hundred fifteen-a of this chapter; and any other
information required by the commissioner. School districts (i)
identified as having fifteen percent or more of their students in
special education, or (ii) which have fifty percent or more of their
students with disabilities in special education programs or services
sixty percent or more of the school day in a general education building,
or (iii) which have eight percent or more of their students with
disabilities in special education programs in public or private separate
educational settings shall indicate on their school district report card
their respective percentages as defined in this subparagraph and
subparagraphs (i) and (ii) of this paragraph as compared to the
statewide average.
 7. a. Each year, commencing with the proposed budget for the two
thousand--two thousand one school year, the trustee or board of trustees
shall prepare a property tax report card, pursuant to regulations of the
commissioner, and shall make it publicly available by transmitting it to
local newspapers of general circulation, appending it to copies of the
proposed budget made publicly available as required by law, making it
available for distribution at the annual meeting, and otherwise
disseminating it as required by the commissioner. Such report card shall
include: (i) the amount of total spending and total estimated school tax
levy that would result from adoption of the proposed budget and the
percentage increase or decrease in total spending and total school tax
levy from the school district budget for the preceding school year; and
(ii) the district's tax levy limit determined pursuant to section two
thousand twenty-three-a of this title, and the estimated school tax
levy, excluding any levy necessary to support the expenditures pursuant
to subparagraphs (i) through (iv) of paragraph i of subdivision two of
section two thousand twenty-three-a of this title, that would result
from adoption of the proposed budget; and (iii) the projected enrollment
growth for the school year for which the budget is prepared, and the
percentage change in enrollment from the previous year; and (iv) the
percentage increase in the consumer price index, as defined in paragraph
c of this subdivision; and (v) the projected amount of the
unappropriated unreserved fund balance that will be retained if the
proposed budget is adopted, the projected amount of the reserved fund
balance, the projected amount of the appropriated fund balance, the
percentage of the proposed budget that the unappropriated unreserved
fund balance represents, the actual unappropriated unreserved fund
balance retained in the school district budget for the preceding school
year, and the percentage of the school district budget for the preceding
school year that the actual unappropriated unreserved fund balance
represents, and a schedule of reserve funds, setting forth the name of
each reserve fund, a description of its purpose, the balance as of the
close of the third quarter of the current school district fiscal year
and a brief statement explaining any plans for the use of each such
reserve fund for the ensuing fiscal year.
 b. A copy of the property tax report card prepared for the annual
district meeting shall be submitted to the department in the manner
prescribed by the department by the end of the business day next
following approval of the report card by the trustee or board of
trustees, but no later than twenty-four days prior to the statewide
uniform voting day. The department shall compile such data for all
school districts whose budgets are subject to a vote of the qualified
voters and shall make such compilation available electronically at least
ten days prior to the statewide uniform voting day.
 c. For purposes of this subdivision, "percentage increase in the
consumer price index" shall mean the percentage that represents the
product of one hundred and the quotient of: (i) the average of the
national consumer price indexes determined by the United States
department of labor for the twelve-month period preceding January first
of the current year minus the average of the national consumer price
indexes determined by the United States department of labor for the
twelve-month period preceding January first of the prior year, divided
by (ii) the average of the national consumer price indexes determined by
the United States department of labor for the twelve-month period
preceding January first of the prior year, with the result expressed as
a decimal to two places.
 § 1609. Annual report of trustees of certain joint districts. Where a
common school district lies in two or more counties, its trustees shall
file their annual report in the office of the district superintendent
having jurisdiction over the schools of the town in which the principal
schoolhouse of the district is situated.
 § 1610. Trustees' annual report to district. The trustees shall
render to the district, at its annual meeting, a just, full and true
account in writing, of all moneys received by them respectively for the
use of the district, or raised or collected by taxes, in the preceding
year, and of the manner in which the same shall have been expended, and
showing to which of them an unexpended balance, or any part thereof, is
chargeable; and of all drafts or orders made by them upon the county
treasurer, collector, treasurer or other custodian of moneys of the
district; and a full statement of all appeals, actions or suits and
proceedings brought by or against them, and of every special matter
touching the condition of the district.
 § 1611. Penalty for failure of trustee to account. By a wilful
neglect or refusal to render such account, a trustee forfeits any
unexpired term of his office, and becomes liable to the trustees for any
district moneys in his hands.
 § 1612. Payment by trustee to successor. An outgoing trustee shall
forthwith pay, to his successor or any other trustees of the district in
office, all moneys in his hands belonging to the district.
 § 1613. Trustees' right of action against predecessor. The trustees
in office shall sue for and recover any district moneys in the hands of
any former trustee, or of his personal representatives, and apply them
to the use of the district.
 § 1614. Notice of non-payment of moneys apportioned. If any portion
of the moneys apportioned to the district shall not be paid by the
collector or treasurer of the district, upon the due requirement of the
trustees, they shall forthwith notify the treasurer of the county and
the commissioner of education of the fact. In case of such non-payment
by the county treasurer, such notification shall be given to the
commissioner of education.
 § 1615. Taxation for expenses incurred by trustees. When trustees are
required or authorized by law, or by a vote of their district, to incur
any expenses for such district, and when any expenses incurred by them
are made, by express provision of law, a charge upon such district, they
may raise the amount thereof by tax in the same manner as if the
definite sum to be raised had been voted by a district meeting.
 § 1616. Issuing order in excess of available funds a misdemeanor. 1.
The trustees of a common school district shall not issue an order or
draft upon a county treasurer, collector or treasurer of the district
for the payment of the salary of a teacher unless there shall be in the
hands of such county treasurer, collector or treasurer at the time
sufficient money belonging to the district to meet such order or draft.
 2. A violation of this section by the trustees of a district shall be
a misdemeanor.
 § 1618. New York State School Boards Association, Inc. The trustee,
trustees or board of education of any school district may determine to
expend and raise by taxation annually such sums as may be required
toward defraying the actual and necessary expenses of maintaining and
continuing the New York State School Boards Association, Inc., and any
of its activities in this state for the purpose of devising practical
ways and means for obtaining greater economy and efficiency in the
administration of school district affairs and projects.
 § 1619. Advertising for bids; letting of contracts. The trustees
shall let all contracts for public work and all purchase contracts to
the lowest responsible bidder after advertisement for bids where so
required by section one hundred three of the general municipal law.
 ARTICLE 35
 UNION FREE SCHOOL DISTRICTS
Section 1701. Boards of education corporate bodies.
 1702. Board of education; election; terms of office.
 1703. Change in number of members of board of education.
 1704. Length of school year, and expenditure of funds.
 1705. Annexing territory to a union free school district.
 1706. Power of removal of member of board of education.
 1707. Annual organizational meetings of boards of education.
 1708. Regular meetings; visitation of schools.
 1709. Powers and duties of boards of education.
 1709-a. Powers of boards of education to ban fraternities,
 sororities and other secret societies.
 1710. Boards of education have powers of trustees of common
 schools and trustees of academies.
 1711. Appointment of superintendent of schools.
 1712. Kindergartens; nursery and night schools.
 1713. Academy may be adopted as academic department.
 1714. Contracts with academies.
 1715. Retransfer of academy to its former trustees.
 1716. Estimated expenses for ensuing year.
 1717. Corporate authorities must raise tax certified by board
 of education.
 1718. Limitation upon expenditures.
 1719. Deposit, custody and payment of moneys in villages.
 1720. Moneys and accounts in union free school districts.
 1721. Records; reports.
 1722. Application of article.
 1723-a. Temporary investment of school moneys.
 1724. Form and audit of claims.
 1725. Lease of personal property.
 1725-a. Powers of boards of education; instructional equipment.
 1726. Lease and lease-purchase of buildings.
 § 1701. Boards of education corporate bodies. The board of education
of each union free school district is hereby created a body corporate
and it shall, at its first meeting and at each annual meeting
thereafter, elect one of its members president. It may also, in its
discretion, elect one of its members vice president, who shall have the
power to exercise the duties of the president in case of the absence or
disability of the president. In case of vacancy in the office of
president, the vice president shall act as president until a president
shall be elected. All property which is now vested in, or shall
hereafter be transferred to the board of education of a union free
school district, for the use of schools in the district, shall be held
by them as a corporation.
 § 1702. Board of education; election; terms of office. 1. Whenever a
union free school district shall be established, pursuant to the
provisions of subdivision three of section fifteen hundred four of this
chapter, or, pursuant to the provisions of sections fifteen hundred
twenty-two and fifteen hundred twenty-three of this chapter, it shall be
the duty of the meeting at which such union free school district is
established to elect by ballot not less than three nor more than nine
trustees, who shall, by the order of such meeting, be divided into a
sufficient number of classes so that as nearly as possible an equal
number of members shall be elected to the board each year, based upon a
normal term of three, four or five years, as such meeting may determine.
Thereafter there shall be elected in such districts, at the annual
meeting, trustees to take the places of those whose terms of office
expire. Such successors shall be elected to serve for a full term of
three, four or five years, as the case may be.
 2. The trustees thus elected, shall enter at once upon their offices,
and the office of any existing trustees in such districts, before the
establishment of a union free school district therein, shall cease,
except for the purposes stated in section fifteen hundred eighteen of
this chapter. The said trustees and their successors in office shall
constitute the board of education of the union free school district thus
established.
 3. Each union free school district that operates a high school shall
establish a process for designating at least one student as an ex
officio member pursuant to paragraph c of this subdivision. If, prior to
August fifth, two thousand three, a school district had a policy that
allowed a student or students to be ex officio members of the school
board, such policy shall be deemed to meet the requirements of this
subdivision and shall be deemed to have full legal effect. In any
district that contains more than one high school, such process shall
take into consideration the number of high schools within the district
and provide for a mechanism which allows for fair representation among
the schools. Such school district shall allow such selected student or
students to serve as ex officio members of such district's board of
education and provided further that:
 a. The ex officio student members of the board shall be entitled to
sit with board members at all public meetings and hearings of the board
and may participate in other board activities and responsibilities at
the discretion of the board.
 b. The ex officio student members shall not be allowed to vote, shall
not be allowed to attend executive session or any other meetings or
hearings not open to the public, and shall not be entitled to receive
compensation of any form for participating at board meetings.
 c. Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, the ex officio
student members of the board may be any of the following: the student
that has been duly elected as student president of the high school; a
student duly elected by the student body; a student selected by the high
school student government; a student selected by the high school
principal; a student selected by the superintendent of schools; a
student selected by majority vote of the school board.
 d. The ex officio student members shall have attended such high school
for at least one year prior to selection.
 § 1703. Change in number of members of board of education. 1. The
number of members of the board of education of a union free school
district may be increased or decreased at an annual meeting by a
majority vote of the qualified voters present and voting to be
ascertained by taking and recording the ayes and noes or by ballot. The
number of members of such board shall not be increased to more than nine
nor decreased to less than three.
 2. No vote shall be taken upon the proposition to increase or decrease
the number of members of such board of education unless the notice of
the annual meeting shall contain a statement to the effect that the
voters of such district will vote upon such proposition. The board of
education of any such district shall, upon the application of at least
twenty-five voters or five percent of the number of voters who voted in
the previous annual election of the members of the board of education,
whichever is greater, such number to be determined by the number of
persons recorded on the poll list as having voted at such election,
include in the notice of the annual meeting a statement that the
proposition to increase or decrease such board will be presented to the
annual meeting for determination. If the board refuses or fails to give
such notice, the notice may be given in such manner as the commissioner
of education may direct.
 3. The additional members first elected shall be elected at a special
meeting which shall be called by the board and be held not less than
thirty nor more than sixty days following the annual meeting at which
the number was increased, and pending the first election of such
additional members no vacancy shall be deemed to exist in the offices
thereof except for the purpose of filling the same by election,
notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of any law.
 § 1704. Length of school year, and expenditure of funds. 1. No board
of education or community board in the city school district of the city
of New York, except as otherwise provided by law, shall authorize or
permit the expenditure of funds under its control at a rate which will
exhaust the amount appropriated prior to the conclusion of the period or
the completion of the purpose for which such funds were appropriated.
 2. Except as otherwise provided by law, no board of education or
community board in the city school district of the city of New York
shall provide for a school year consisting of fewer than one hundred
eighty days of school.
 § 1705. Annexing territory to a union free school district. 1.
Territory may be annexed to a union free school district as provided in
this section.
 a. The commissioner is authorized and empowered to make and enter in
the commissioner's office orders dissolving one or more common, union
free or central school districts and annexing the territory of such
districts, or portions thereof, to one or more adjoining union free
school districts, subject to approval of the voters of each school
district affected thereby.
 b. When an order annexing territory to a union free school district
has been made and entered as provided in this section, the commissioner
shall, within ten days thereafter, cause certified copies of said order
to be filed with the clerk or school authorities of each school district
affected thereby. Within thirty days of filing of such order, the
commissioner shall fix a time and place for a special meeting of the
qualified voters of each school district affected by the proposed
annexation and shall cause notice thereof to be posted at least ten days
before each such meeting in ten conspicuous places in the school
district. In addition to the posting of such notice, a copy thereof
shall be duly published, at least three days before each such meeting,
in a daily or weekly newspaper published within, or in general
circulation in, the school district in which such meeting is to be held.
The expense of posting and publishing such notice shall be a charge upon
the school district conducting such meeting.
 2. Except as provided in this subdivision, any special district
meeting held pursuant to paragraph b of subdivision one of this section
shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures specified in
section eighteen hundred three of this chapter.
 a. At a meeting held pursuant to paragraph b of subdivision one of
this section, a resolution in substantially the following form shall be
presented for the action and determination of the meeting, viz.:
"Resolved that the...(insert simplified name of district in accordance
with section three hundred fifteen of this chapter) school district be
annexed to the...union free school district (designate union free school
district) as provided in the order of the commissioner of education now
before this meeting."
 b. If at any such meeting the resolution described in paragraph a of
this subdivision shall be presented and shall not be adopted, there
shall be no further proceedings at such meeting, except a motion to
reconsider the question. No such meeting shall again be called by the
commissioner within one year after such original meeting. If no meeting
shall be called to reconsider the question within two years after such
original meeting, or if at any such meeting called within two years
after such original meeting the resolution shall again be rejected by
the voters, the order of the commissioner to which the resolution
relates shall be deemed null and void and of no further force or effect.
 c. If the resolution submitted to the voters as provided in paragraph
a of this subdivision shall be adopted by the voters of each school
district affected by the order of the commissioner, the territory
described therein shall thereupon be annexed to the existing union free
school district or districts as provided in such order.
 3. Whenever a common school district, union free school district or
central school district becomes a part of a union free school district
pursuant to the provisions of this section, the union free school
district of which any such district shall have become a part, shall
succeed to all the property rights of such common, union free or central
school districts and all indebtedness of any such school district
evidenced by bonds or notes or relating to school building construction
shall become a charge upon such union free school district of which such
district shall have become a part, but all other indebtedness of any
such district shall be paid by any such district in accordance with the
provisions of section fifteen hundred eighteen of this chapter and to
that extent any such district shall continue to exist in law for the
purpose of providing for and paying all such indebtedness in accordance
with the provisions of such section.
 4. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, whenever a common
school district, union free school district or central school district
is annexed in its entirety to a union free school district pursuant to
this section, all employees of the former school districts at the time
of dissolution shall immediately become employees of the reorganized
union free school district, shall retain their tenure and/or employment
status and the seniority gained in the annexed district, and the
seniority list of the employees of the annexed school district shall be
merged with the seniority list of the employees of the annexing school
district. If the number of teaching positions needed to provide services
in the reorganized union free school district is less than the number of
teachers considered to be employees of the reorganized union free school
district pursuant to this subdivision, the board of education shall
abolish the unneeded positions and place teachers on preferred eligible
lists in accordance with section three thousand thirteen of this
chapter. For salary, sick leave and other purposes, an employee's length
of service with the annexed school district shall be credited as
employment time with the annexing union free school district. This
section shall in no way be construed to limit the rights of any such
employees set forth in this section granted by any other provision of
law.
 § 1706. Power of removal of member of board of education. For cause
shown, and after giving notice of the charge and opportunity of defense,
the commissioner of education may remove any member of a board of
education. Wilful disobedience of any lawful requirement of the
commissioner of education, or a want of due diligence in obeying such
requirement or wilful violation or neglect of duty is cause for removal.
 § 1707. Annual organizational meetings of boards of education. The
annual organizational meeting of the board of education of every union
free school district shall be held in July on or before the Monday after
the twentieth day in July of each year.
 § 1708. Regular meetings; visitation of schools. 1. It shall be the
duty of each board of education elected pursuant to the provisions of
this article to have a regular meeting at least once in each quarter.
 2. Each board shall appoint one or more committees, to visit every
school or department under its supervision and such committee or
committees shall visit such schools at least once annually, and report
at the next regular meeting of the board on the condition thereof.
 3. The meetings of all such boards shall be open to the public, but
said boards may hold executive sessions, at which sessions only the
members of such boards or the persons invited shall be present.
 § 1709. Powers and duties of boards of education. The said board of
education of every union free school district shall have power, and it
shall be its duty:
 1. To adopt such by-laws and rules for its government as shall seem
proper in the discharge of the duties required under the provisions of
this chapter.
 2. To establish such rules and regulations concerning the order and
discipline of the schools, in the several departments thereof, as they
may deem necessary to secure the best educational results.
 3. To prescribe the course of study by which the pupils of the schools
shall be graded and classified, and to regulate the admission of pupils
and their transfer from one class or department to another, as their
scholarship shall warrant.
 4. To prescribe the text-books to be used in the schools, and to
compel a uniformity in the use of the same, pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter, and to furnish the same to pupils out of any moneys
provided for that purpose.
 4-a. To develop a plan to ensure that all instructional materials to
be used in the schools of the district are available in a usable
alternative format for each student with a disability, as defined in
section forty-four hundred one of this chapter, and for each student who
is a qualified individual with a disability as defined in the
rehabilitation act of nineteen hundred ninety-three (29 U.S.C. 701) as
amended, in accordance with his or her educational needs and course
selection, at the same time as such instructional materials are
available to non-disabled students. As part of such plan, the board of
education shall amend its procurement policies to give a preference in
the purchase of instructional materials to vendors who agree to provide
materials in alternative formats. For purposes of this subdivision,
"alternative format" shall mean any medium or format for the
presentation of instructional materials, other than a traditional print
textbook, that is needed as an accommodation for a disabled student
enrolled in the school district, including but not limited to Braille,
large print, open and closed captioned, audio, or an electronic file in
an approved format, as defined in the regulations of the commissioner.
When an electronic file is provided, the plan shall specify how the
format will be accessed by students and/or how the district shall
convert to an accessible format. Such plan shall identify the needs of
students residing in the district for alternative format materials. Such
plan shall also specify ordering timelines to ensure that alternative
format materials are available at the same time as regular format
materials. Such plans shall include procedures to address the need to
obtain materials in alternative format without delay for disabled
students who move into the school district during the school year.
 5. To make provision for the instruction of pupils in all subjects in
which such instruction is required to be given under the provisions of
article seventeen of this chapter.
 6. To purchase sites, or additions thereto, for recreation grounds,
for agricultural education purposes, and for schoolhouses for the
district, when designated by a meeting of the district; and to construct
such schoolhouses and other structures and additions thereto as may be
so designated; and to operate the facilities provided and to market any
surplus of farm products that might be so raised and as may be so
designated; to purchase furniture and apparatus for such schoolhouses,
and to keep the furniture and apparatus therein in repair; and, when
authorized by such meeting, to purchase implements, supplies, and
apparatus for agricultural, athletic, playground, and social center
purposes.
 7. To lease, on a temporary basis, necessary space not located on
school property, when the facilities of the district are overcrowded or
damaged or destroyed, and to furnish and equip such space for school
district use. The use of such space shall be subject to annual approval
by the commissioner.
 8. To insure the schoolhouses and their furniture, apparatus and
appurtenances, and the school library, in some insurance company created
by or under the laws of this state, or in some insurance company
authorized by law to transact business in this state, and to comply with
the conditions of the policy, and raise the sums required for premiums
by district tax; provided, however, that the members of the board shall
not be personally liable for any claim arising out of the use or
condition of the aforementioned property if the board, after due
diligence, is unable to obtain such insurance.
 8-a. In its discretion to insure pupils against damage occasioned
because of accidental personal injuries sustained while participating in
physical education classes, intramural and interscholastic sports
activities, in such a company, and raise the sums required for premiums
by district tax.
 8-b. In its discretion, to purchase insurance against accidents to
pupils occurring in school, on school grounds, while being transported
between home and school in a school bus as defined in section thirty-six
hundred twenty-one, and during sponsored trips.
 8-c. To establish and maintain a program of reserves not to exceed
three per centum, exclusive of any planned balance presently authorized,
of the annual budget of the district to cover property loss and
liability claims. In the event that three per centum, exclusive of any
planned balance presently authorized, of the annual budget of the
district would result in less than fifteen thousand dollars, the total
reserve funds may be for an amount not to exceed fifteen thousand
dollars. Separate funds shall be established for property loss and for
liability claims and the separate identity of each fund shall be
maintained whether its assets consist of cash or investments or both.
The moneys in such funds shall be accounted for separate and apart from
all other funds of the school district, in the same manner as provided
in subdivision ten of section six-c of the general municipal law. Such
moneys may be invested in accordance with section seventeen hundred
twenty-three-a of this chapter. Any interest earned or capital gain
realized on the moneys so deposited shall accrue and become part of such
funds. Such reserve funds shall not be reduced to amounts less than the
total of the amounts estimated to be necessary to cover incurred but
unsettled claims or suits including expenses in connection therewith
other than by payments for losses for which such amounts were
established. Payments from such reserve funds shall not be made for
purposes other than those for which such funds were established without
authorizations by vote of the electors of the district, except that such
board may authorize use of such funds other than amounts allocated for
unsettled claims or suits including expenses in connection therewith to
pay premiums for insurance policies purchased to insure subsequent
losses in areas previously self-insured, in the event of dissolution of
the self-insurance plan.
 9. To take charge and possession of the schoolhouses, sites, lots,
furniture, books, apparatus, and all school property within its
district; and the title of the same shall be vested respectively in said
board of education.
 10. To alter and equip for use as a public library any former
schoolhouse or part thereof, the title to which is vested in the board,
when duly authorized by the qualified voters of the school district.
 11. To sell, when authorized by a vote of the qualified voters of the
school district, any former school site or lot, or any real estate the
title to which is vested in the board, and the buildings thereon, and
appurtenances or any part thereof, at such price and upon such terms as
said voters shall prescribe, and to convey the same by deed to be
executed by the board or a majority of the members thereof. Also to
exchange real estate belonging to the district for the purpose of
improving or changing schoolhouse sites. All deeds or other conveyances
of real property heretofore made and delivered, executed by said board
of education by its officers, or in the manner in which deeds are
executed by corporations, or executed in any other manner, shall be as
valid and of the same force and effect as if executed by said board of
education or a majority of the members thereof; but this provision shall
not affect any action or proceeding pending at the time of the taking
effect hereof.
 12. To take and hold for the use of the said schools or of any
department of the same, any real estate transferred to it by gift,
grant, bequest or devise, or any gift, legacy or annuity, of whatever
kind, given or bequeathed to the said board, and apply the same, or the
interest or proceeds thereof, according to the instructions of the donor
or testator.
 12-a. To take and hold in trust for the purpose of awarding
scholarships in said schools any real estate transferred to it by gift,
grant, bequest or devise, or any gift, legacy or annuity, of whatever
kind, given or bequeathed to said board and apply the same, or the
interest or proceeds thereof, according to the instructions of the donor
or testator.
 12-b. To establish a charitable fund, by resolution of the board, to
receive unrestricted charitable monetary donations made to such fund for
use by the district for public educational purposes. The monies of such
charitable fund shall be deposited and secured in the manner provided by
section ten of the general municipal law. The monies of such charitable
fund may be invested in the manner provided by section eleven of the
general municipal law. Any interest earned or capital gain realized on
the money so invested shall accrue to and become part of such fund. At
such time and in such amounts as determined by the board, the monies of
such charitable fund shall be transferred to the school district's
general fund for expenditure consistent with the charitable purposes of
the fund, provided that the amount of taxes to be levied by the school
district for any school year shall be determined without regard to any
such transfer. The school district shall maintain an accounting of all
such deposits, interest or capital gain, transfers, and expenditures.
 13. To have in all respects the superintendence, management and
control of said union free schools, and to establish therein, in
conformity with the regents rules, an academic department, whenever in
their judgment the same is warranted by the demand for such instruction;
to receive into said union free schools any pupils residing out of said
district, and to regulate and establish the tuition fees of such
nonresident pupils in the several departments of said schools.
 14. To provide fuel, furniture, apparatus and other necessaries for
the use of said schools.
 15. To appoint such librarians as they may from time to time deem
necessary.
 16. To contract with and employ such persons as by the provisions of
this chapter are qualified teachers, to determine the number of teachers
to be employed in the several departments of instruction in said school,
and at the time of such employment, to make and deliver to each teacher
a written contract as required by section three thousand eleven of this
chapter, except as otherwise provided by sections three thousand twelve
and three thousand thirteen; and employ such persons as may be necessary
to supervise, organize, conduct and maintain athletic, playground and
social center activities, or for any one or more of such purposes; and
to adopt rules and regulations governing the excusing of absences of all
teachers and other employees and for the granting of leaves of absence
to such employees either with or without pay. The regular teachers of
the school may be employed at an increased compensation or otherwise,
and by separate agreement, written or oral, for one or more of such
purposes.
 17. To fill any vacancy which may occur in said board by reason of the
death, resignation, removal from office or from the school district, or
refusal to serve, of any member or officer of said board; and the person
so appointed in the place of any such member of the board shall hold his
office until the next regular school district election. The person
elected to fill such vacancy shall take office immediately upon filing
of his official oath of office with the district clerk.
 18. To remove any member of their board for official misconduct. But a
written copy of all charges made of such misconduct shall be served upon
him at least ten days before the time appointed for a hearing of the
same; and he shall be allowed a full and fair opportunity to refute such
charges before removal.
 19. To provide and maintain suitable and convenient waterclosets as
provided in section four hundred eleven of this chapter.
 20. To raise by tax upon the property of the district any moneys
required to pay the salary of teachers employed.
 20-a. a. In its discretion to adopt a resolution establishing the
office of claims auditor and appoint a claims auditor who shall hold his
or her position subject to the pleasure of such board of education. In
its discretion, the board of education may adopt a resolution
establishing the office of deputy claims auditor who shall act as claims
auditor in the absence of the claims auditor. Such claims auditor shall
report directly to the board of education. No person shall be eligible
for appointment to the office of claims auditor or deputy claims auditor
who shall also be:
 (1) a member of the board of education;
 (2) the clerk or treasurer of the board of education;
 (3) the superintendent of schools or other official of the district
responsible for business management;
 (4) the person designated as purchasing agent; or
 (5) clerical or professional personnel directly involved in accounting
and purchasing functions of the school district.
 b. Such claims auditor or deputy claims auditor shall not be required
to be a resident of the district, and such position shall be classified
in the exempt class of the civil service. Such board of education, at
any time after the establishment of the office of claims auditor or
deputy claims auditor, may adopt a resolution abolishing such office,
whereupon such office shall be abolished. When the office of claims
auditor shall have been established and a claims auditor shall have been
appointed and shall have qualified, the powers and duties of the board
of education with respect to claims auditing, allowing or rejecting all
accounts, charges, claims or demands against the school district shall
devolve upon and thereafter be exercised by such claims auditor, during
the continuance of such office. A board shall be permitted to delegate
the claims audit function to one or more independent entities by using
(1) inter-municipal cooperative agreements, (2) shared services to the
extent authorized by section nineteen hundred fifty of this title, or
(3) independent contractors, to fulfill this function.
 c. When the board of education delegates the claims audit function
using an inter-municipal cooperative agreement, shared service
authorized by section nineteen hundred fifty of this title, or an
independent contractor, the board shall be responsible for auditing all
claims for services from the entity providing the delegated claims
auditor, either directly or through a delegation to a different
independent entity.
 21. To provide school health services, as defined in subdivision two
of section nine hundred one of this chapter, to all children in
attendance upon schools under their supervision and to pay any expense
incurred therefor.
 22. To provide, purchase, lease, furnish and maintain buildings or
other suitable accommodations for the use of teachers or other employees
of the district when duly authorized by a meeting of the district and to
raise by tax upon the taxable property of the district and moneys
necessary for such purposes; and also to provide, maintain and operate a
cafeteria or restaurant service for the use of pupils and teachers while
at school. Such cafeteria may be used by the community for school
related functions and activities and to furnish meals to the elderly
residents, sixty years of age or older, of the district. Such
utilization shall be subject to the approval of the board of education.
Charges shall be sufficient to meet the direct cost of preparing and
serving such meals, reducible by available reimbursements.
 23. To provide milk for pupils within the limitations of an
appropriation made therefor.
 24. To provide transportation, home-teaching or special classes, as
defined under sections forty-four hundred one and forty-four hundred two
of this chapter for physically or mentallly handicapped and delinquent
children. Such transportation, home-teaching or special classes, when
provided pursuant to this subdivision, shall be granted to all such
children irrespective of the school they legally attend.
 25. a. To purchase and maintain, when authorized by a vote of the
qualified voters of the school district, a motor vehicle or vehicles to
be used for the transportation of the school children of the district.
Any replacement of a motor vehicle or vehicles, necessitated by damage
to or loss of such vehicles, owned by the school district and used for
the transportation of pupils residing within the district, may be
purchased by the board of education without voter approval, using any
unencumbered funds in the general fund or by the issuance of budget
notes in accordance with section 29.00 of the local finance law, in
addition to any available insurance proceeds.
 b. Such motor vehicle or vehicles may be leased to another school
district or to a board of cooperative educational services or to a
county vocational education and extension board or to an Indian tribe
for educational purposes when not needed for such transportation.
 c. Likewise when not so needed such motor vehicle or vehicles may be
leased to a school district or an Indian tribe, for the purpose of
transporting children and instructors in connection with (1) a
recreation project or a youth service project operated by a school
district or by an Indian tribe, if such project is authorized and
approved by the state youth commission, or (2) a youth bureau or agency
or activity or project of a county, town, city, village or an Indian
tribe which is devoted to the welfare of youth therein or to providing
leisure-time activities for youth or assistance to children, as
authorized in section ninety-five of the general municipal law, or (3)
one or more playgrounds and neighborhood recreation centers operated and
maintained by one or more cities except New York, Buffalo and Rochester,
counties except Erie and the counties within the city of New York,
towns, villages, or Indian tribes, whether or not any school board or
district joins in such operating and maintaining, as authorized in
section two hundred forty-four-b of the general municipal law.
 d. The board of education may lease such motor vehicle or vehicles
from a board of cooperative educational services or from a county
vocational education and extension board.
 e. Under emergency conditions, as determined by the commissioner, the
board of education may lease such vehicle or vehicles from sources other
than a school district, board of cooperative educational services or
county vocational education and extension board.
 f. In any case when such motor vehicle shall be leased as provided in
this subdivision, public liability and property damage insurance, fire
insurance and compensation insurance of drivers shall be provided and
collision insurance shall be provided in the amount of the value of the
vehicle, to protect the lessor. The additional cost of such insurance
shall be paid by the lessee. No part of the costs and expenses resulting
from operation, maintenance and repair of such vehicles during the
leasing thereof shall be included in determining the amount of any form
of state aid received by such school district.
 g. The board of education is authorized to provide regional
transportation services by rendering such services jointly with other
school districts or boards of cooperative educational services. Such
services may include pupil transportation between home and school,
transportation during the day to and from school and a special education
program or service or a program at a board of cooperative educational
services or an approved shared program at another school district,
transportation for field trips or to and from extracurricular
activities, and cooperative school bus maintenance.
 h. The board of education is authorized to enter into a contract with
another school district, a county, municipality, or the state office of
children and family services to provide transportation for children,
including contracts to provide such transportation as regional
transportation services, provided that the contract cost is appropriate.
In determining the appropriate transportation contract cost, the
transportation service provider school district shall use a calculation
consistent with regulations adopted by the commissioner for the purpose
of assuring that charges reflect the true costs that would be incurred
by a prudent person in the conduct of a competitive transportation
business.
 i. In addition to the authority granted in paragraph e of this
subdivision, the board of education shall be authorized to lease a motor
vehicle or vehicles to be used for the transportation of the children of
the district from sources other than a school district, board of
cooperative educational services or county vocational education and
extension board under the conditions specified in this paragraph. No
such agreement for the lease of a motor vehicle or vehicles shall be for
a term of more than one school year, provided that when authorized by a
vote of the qualified voters of the district such lease may have a term
of up to five years, or eight years for the lease of zero-emission
school buses as defined in section thirty-six hundred thirty-eight of
this chapter. Where the board of education enters a lease of a motor
vehicle or vehicles pursuant to this paragraph for a term of one school
year or less, such board shall not be authorized to enter into another
lease of the same or an equivalent replacement vehicle or vehicles, as
determined by the commissioner, without obtaining approval of the
voters.
 26. To pay any judgment levied against the school district and in the
event there are no moneys otherwise available, to levy a tax upon the
taxable property of the district to pay the same.
 27. To contract with any person, corporation or other school district
for the conveyance of pupils residing within the district, when
authorized to do so under subdivision nineteen of section two thousand
twenty-one of this chapter, by vote of the inhabitants of the district
entitled to vote, or to contract for the operation, maintenance and
garaging of motor vehicles owned by the district, in accordance with
such rules and regulations as such board of education may establish,
consistent with the regulations of the commissioner. Upon authorization
by a school district meeting, every such contract of transportation may
be made for a period not exceeding five years, notwithstanding any
provision of any other law inconsistent herewith.
 28. To furnish lighting facilities, janitorial care and supervision
for highway underpasses when authorized to do so by vote of a district
meeting under the provisions of subdivision twenty of section two
thousand fifteen of this chapter.
 29. To establish a petty cash fund for the use of such school district
officers and employees as may be designated by the board of education
for the payment, in advance of authorization, of properly itemized bills
for materials, supplies or services furnished to the school district
under conditions calling for immediate payment to the vendor upon
delivery of any such materials or supplies or the rendering of any such
services. The amount of such a petty cash fund, the method of handling
same and the officers and employees eligible to use such fund shall be
in accordance with regulations established by the commissioner.
 * 30. To provide, in its discretion, compensation to a speaker or
speakers at commencement day exercises in such amount as may be
determined by the board.
 * NB There are 2 sub 30's
 * 30. To reimburse candidates for teaching positions for actual travel
and other necessary expenses incurred by them in appearing for purposes
of interview or observation with respect to such positions, when such
appearance is made upon the request of any authorized representative of
the board and when such reimbursement is deemed appropriate and proper
by the board, in its discretion, to aid in the obtaining of qualified
persons for such positions.
 * NB There are 2 sub 30's
 31. To explore, develop and produce natural gas solely for school
district purposes in accordance with section three hundred sixty-eight
of the general municipal law.
 32. To provide, in its discretion, in-service training for its
teachers.
 33. To have in all respects the superintendence, management and
control of the educational affairs of the district, and, therefore,
shall have all the powers reasonably necessary to exercise powers
granted expressly or by implication and to discharge duties imposed
expressly or by implication by this chapter or other statutes.
 34. To provide workmen's compensation coverage as provided in the
workmen's compensation law for all teachers and other employees for
injuries incurred in actual performance of duty.
 34-a. In its discretion, to provide under a group insurance policy or
policies issued by any insurance company or insurance companies
authorized to do business in this state or under a group contract issued
by one or more corporations subject to article forty-three of the
insurance law, life insurance or accident and health insurance benefits
or medical and surgical benefits or hospital service benefits or any two
or more of such kinds of benefits to teachers and other employees of the
school district who participate in a plan or plans, as hereinafter
provided. The disbursing officer of the school district is authorized to
deduct from the salary of such participant with his prior consent, in
writing, the sums representing the participant's share of the premium or
premiums which are payable by such officer to such insurance company or
corporation. Such board of education is authorized to pay from such
moneys as are available for the purpose, a share of the cost of such
benefit or benefits in such amount as is required to be paid under such
group insurance policy or policies or group contract or contracts by the
board of education, as employer. The sum to be paid by the board of
education under such policy or policies or contract or contracts, in the
discretion of such board may be any percentage of the total cost of the
benefit or benefits including the whole thereof.
 34-b. In its discretion, to purchase insurance against personal
injuries incurred by an authorized participant in a school volunteer
program, including but not limited to, those authorized participants who
assist on school buses, school sponsored transportation to and from
school, or on school sponsored field trips or any other school sponsored
activity; provided, however, that the injuries were incurred while the
authorized participant was functioning either within the scope of his or
her authorized volunteer duties or under the direction of the board of
education, trustee, or board of cooperative educational services, or
both.
 35. In its discretion, and with the written consent of any employee,
to deduct from the salary of such employee such amount as may be agreed
to by such employee for payment to any credit union doing business in
the state of New York as such employee may designate. Any such written
authorization may be withdrawn by such employee at any time.
 37. In its discretion to provide that the proceeds of the sale or
appropriation of school district real property shall, after being used
for any legally required purpose, be used to reduce real property taxes
in such district for a period not to exceed ten school years, or such
lesser period as it may direct. Such proceeds may be invested and any
interest obtained may also be used for such purpose. Such reserve fund
shall be invested and reinvested pursuant to the provisions of
subdivision two of section seventeen hundred twenty-three-a of this
article.
 38. To offer monetary rewards, in sums not to exceed one thousand
dollars, to individuals for information leading to the arrest and
conviction of any person or persons for felonies or misdemeanors
directly connected to vandalism of district property. Such rewards may
be offered on any conditions such board of education may determine,
subject to whatever qualifications it may deem appropriate.
 39. a. Shall require, for purposes of a criminal history record check,
the fingerprinting of all prospective employees pursuant to section
three thousand thirty-five of this chapter, who do not hold valid
clearance pursuant to such section or pursuant to section three thousand
four-b of this chapter or section five hundred nine-cc or twelve hundred
twenty-nine-d of the vehicle and traffic law. Prior to initiating the
fingerprinting process, the prospective employer shall furnish the
applicant with the form described in paragraph (c) of subdivision thirty
of section three hundred five of this chapter and shall obtain the
applicant's consent to the criminal history records search. Every set of
fingerprints taken pursuant to this subdivision shall be promptly
submitted to the commissioner for purposes of clearance for employment.
 b. Upon the recommendation of the superintendent, the board may
conditionally appoint a prospective employee. A request for conditional
clearance shall be forwarded to the commissioner along with the
prospective employee's fingerprints, as required by paragraph a of this
subdivision. Such appointment shall not commence until notification by
the commissioner that the prospective employee has been conditionally
cleared for employment and shall terminate forty-five days after such
notification of conditional clearance or when the prospective employer
is notified of a determination by the commissioner to grant or deny
clearance, whichever occurs earlier, and may not be extended or renewed
unless the commissioner issues a new conditional clearance after finding
that there was good cause for failing to obtain clearance within such
period, provided that if clearance is granted the appointment shall
continue and the conditional status shall be removed. Prior to
commencement of such conditional appointment, the prospective employer
shall obtain a signed statement for conditional appointment from the
prospective employee, indicating whether, to the best of his or her
knowledge, he or she has a pending criminal charge or criminal
conviction in any jurisdiction outside the state.
 c. Upon the recommendation of the superintendent, the board may make
an emergency conditional appointment when an unforeseen emergency
vacancy has occurred. When such appointment is made, the process for
conditional appointment pursuant to paragraph b of this subdivision must
also be initiated. Emergency conditional appointment may commence prior
to notification from the commissioner on conditional clearance but shall
terminate twenty business days from the date such appointment commences
or when the prospective employer is notified by the commissioner
regarding conditional clearance, whichever occurs earlier, provided that
if conditional clearance is granted the appointment shall continue as a
conditional appointment. Prior to the commencement of such appointment,
the prospective employer must obtain a signed statement for emergency
conditional appointment from the prospective employee, indicating
whether, to the best of his or her knowledge, he or she has a pending
criminal charge or criminal conviction in any jurisdiction. An
unforeseen emergency vacancy shall be defined as: (i) a vacancy that
occurred less than ten business days before the start of any school
session, including summer school, or during any school session,
including summer school, without sufficient notice to allow for
clearance or conditional clearance; (ii) when no other qualified person
is available to fill the vacancy temporarily; and (iii) when emergency
conditional appointment is necessary to maintain services which the
district is legally required to provide or services necessary to protect
the health, education or safety of students or staff. The provisions of
subparagraph (i) of this paragraph shall not apply if the board finds
that the district has been unable to fill the vacancy despite good faith
efforts to fill such vacancy in a manner which would have allowed
sufficient time for clearance or conditional clearance.
 d. Shall develop a policy for the safety of the children who have
contact with an employee holding conditional appointment or emergency
conditional appointment.
 40. Shall upon commencement and termination of employment of an
employee by the school district, provide the commissioner with the name
of and position held by such employee.
 41. Where the district has provided transportation to students
enrolled in such district to a school sponsored field trip,
extracurricular activity or any other similar event, it shall provide
transportation back to either the point of departure or to the
appropriate school in the district, unless the parent or legal guardian
of a student participating in such event has provided the school
district with written notice, consistent with district policy,
authorizing an alternative form of return transportation for such
student or unless intervening circumstances make such transportation
impractical. In cases where intervening circumstances make
transportation of a student back to the point of departure or to the
appropriate school in the district impractical, a representative of the
school district shall remain with the student until such student's
parent or legal guardian has been (a) contacted and informed of the
intervening circumstances which make such transportation impractical and
(b) such student had been delivered to his or her parent or legal
guardian.
 42. a. To enter into a lease, sublease or other agreement with the
dormitory authority providing for the financing or refinancing of all or
a portion of school district capital facilities or school district
capital equipment in accordance with section sixteen hundred eighty of
the public authorities law and with the approval of the commissioner.
Such lease, sublease, or other agreement may provide for the payment of
annual or other payments to the dormitory authority, and contain such
other terms and conditions as may be agreed upon by the parties thereto,
including the establishment of reserve funds and indemnities. For
purposes of this subdivision, school district capital equipment shall
have the meaning ascribed thereto in section sixteen hundred seventy-six
of the public authorities law.
 b. Notwithstanding any provisions of law to the contrary, the
dormitory authority and the board of education are hereby authorized and
empowered to perform any and all acts and to enter into any and all
agreements necessary or desirable to effectuate the purposes of this
subdivision.
 * 43. To pass a resolution, in the discretion of the board of such
district, authorizing the entering of an agreement with a county, city,
village or town within such district, for the installation and use of
school bus photo violation monitoring systems pursuant to section eleven
hundred seventy-four-a of the vehicle and traffic law, provided that the
purchase, lease, installation, operation and maintenance, or any other
costs associated with such cameras shall not be considered an aidable
expense pursuant to section thirty-six hundred twenty-three-a of this
chapter.
 * NB Repealed December 1, 2029
 § 1709-a. Powers of boards of education to ban fraternities,
sororities and other secret societies. 1. In its discretion, the board
of education of each school district, may adopt rules and regulations to
abolish and/or prohibit any fraternity, sorority or other secret society
in any secondary school under its jurisdiction.
 1 (a) Prior to the adoption and promulgation of a rule or regulation
in accordance with the provisions of subdivision one of this section by
any board of education of a school district, the board of education of
the school district must find that the fraternity, sorority or secret
society group has by virtue of its activities caused or created a
disruption of or interference with the academic processes of any
secondary school within its jurisdiction or caused or created any
interference with or disruption of the academic progress of any
individual student or students in any secondary school within its
jurisdiction.
 2. For the purposes of this chapter a fraternity, sorority or secret
society shall mean any organization composed wholly or in part of pupils
enrolled in public secondary schools which exists or seeks to perpetuate
itself by taking in additional members from the pupils enrolled in such
schools on the decision of the membership rather than upon the free
choice of any pupil in such school but shall not be construed to include
organizations institutionally sponsored by agencies of public welfare,
the Boy Scouts of America, the Girl Scouts of America, the Campfire
Girls, Young Men's Christian Association, Young Women's Christian
Association, Young Men's Hebrew Association, Young Women's Hebrew
Association, Catholic Youth Organization, Kiwanis International, Hi-Y or
other similar organizations without limitation to the foregoing.
 3. Upon and after the adoption and promulgation of a rule or
regulation in accordance with the provisions of subdivision one of this
section by the board of education of any such school district, such
board of education may in any secondary school under it's jurisdiction
discipline any pupil who shall promise to join, or shall become a member
of, or shall remain a member of, or shall solicit other persons to join
any such fraternity, sorority or secret society.
 § 1710. Boards of education have powers of trustees of common schools
and trustees of academies. The board of education of a union free
school district shall possess all the powers and privileges, and be
subject to all the duties, which the trustees of common school districts
possess or are subject to under this chapter, not especially provided
for in this article, and not inconsistent with the provisions of this
article, including, but not limited to, those provided for in sections
sixteen hundred four, sixteen hundred six to sixteen hundred seventeen,
both inclusive, and sixteen hundred nineteen of this chapter; and shall
enjoy, whenever an academic department shall be by them established, all
the immunities and privileges now enjoyed by the trustees of academies
in this state.
 § 1711. Appointment of superintendent of schools. 1. The board of
education of any union free school district may appoint a superintendent
consistent with the provisions of this section.
 2. Such superintendent shall possess, unless otherwise specified by
the by-laws of the board of education, the following powers and be
charged with the following duties:
 a. To be the chief executive officer of the school district and the
educational system, and to have the right to speak on all matters before
the board, but not to vote.
 b. To enforce all provisions of law and all rules and regulations
relating to the management of the schools and other educational, social
and recreational activities under the direction of the board of
education.
 c. To prepare the content of each course of study authorized by the
board of education. The content of each such course shall be submitted
to the board of education for its approval and, when thus approved, the
superintendent shall cause such courses of study to be used in the
grades, classes and schools for which they are authorized.
 d. To recommend suitable lists of textbooks to be used in the schools.
 e. To have supervision and direction of associate, assistant and other
superintendents, directors, supervisors, principals, teachers,
lecturers, medical inspectors, nurses, claims auditors, deputy claims
auditors, attendance officers, janitors and other persons employed in
the management of the schools or the other educational activities of the
district authorized by this chapter and under the direction and
management of the board of education; to transfer teachers from one
school to another, or from one grade of the course of study to another
grade in such course, and to report immediately such transfers to such
board for its consideration and actions; to report to such board
violations of regulations and cases of insubordination, and to suspend
an associate, assistant or other superintendent, director, supervisor,
expert, principal, teacher or other employee until the next regular
meeting of such board, when all facts relating to the case shall be
submitted to such board for its consideration and action.
 f. To have supervision and direction over the enforcement and
observance of the courses of study, the examination and promotion of
pupils, and over all other matters pertaining to playgrounds, medical
inspection, recreation and social center work, libraries, lectures, and
all other education activities under the management, direction and
control of the board of education.
 3. Such superintendent shall be under the direction of the board of
education, which shall prescribe his or her powers and duties, except as
otherwise provided in subdivision two of this section. The
superintendent shall be paid a salary, to be fixed by the board of
education, and he may be removed from office by a vote of the majority
of all the members of such board, provided, however, that a board of
education may enter into a contract with such superintendent for a
period of not less than three and not more than five years, and upon
such other terms as shall be mutually acceptable to the parties,
including but not limited to, fringe benefits and procedures for
termination by either party prior to the expiration of the term of such
contract. The services of such a superintendent of schools may be
discontinued at any time by a majority vote of the board of education,
and upon sixty days notice in writing to the superintendent of schools.
The other terms of any such contract, including any provisions relating
to an increase in salary, compensation or other benefits, shall not be
based on or tied to the terms of any contract or collective bargaining
agreement that the board of education has or will enter with the
teachers or other employees of the school district.
 4. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of law, the provisions
of paragraph e of subdivision two of this section relating to the
transfer of teachers may be modified by an agreement that is
collectively negotiated pursuant to the provisions of article fourteen
of the civil service law.
 § 1712. Kindergartens; nursery and night schools. 1. The board of
education of each school district may maintain kindergartens which shall
be free to resident children between the ages of four and six years,
provided, however, such board may fix a higher minimum age for admission
to such kindergartens.
 2. A board of education may maintain nursery schools which shall be
free to resident children and may fix the age for admission.
 3. Night schools wherein the common branches and such additional
subjects as may be adapted to students applying for instruction are
taught on at least two nights each week, for two hours each night, shall
be maintained by the board of education and in each school district
where twenty or more persons from seventeen to twenty-one years of age
are required to attend upon evening instruction, or where twenty or more
persons over the age of sixteen years make applications for instruction
in a night school, on at least fifty nights. All night schools shall be
free to all persons residing in the district.
 § 1713. Academy may be adopted as academic department. Whenever a
union free school district shall be established under the provisions of
article thirty-one, and there shall exist within the district an
academy, the board of education, when authorized by a vote of the voters
of the district, may adopt such academy as the academic department of
the district, with the consent of the trustees of the academy, and
thereupon the trustees by a resolution to be attested by the signatures
of the officers of the board and filed in the office of the clerk of the
county, shall declare their offices vacant, and thereafter the said
academy shall be the academic department of such union free school
district. The board of education when thereto authorized by a vote of
the qualified voters of the district may lease said academy and site,
and maintain the academic department of such union free school district
therein and thereon.
 § 1714. Contracts with academies. The board of education of a union
free school district, with the approval of the commissioner of
education, may adopt an academy as the academic department thereof, and
contract for the instruction therein of pupils of academic grade,
residing in the district. The academy thereupon becomes the academic
department of such union free school district, and the district is
entitled to the same rights and privileges, is subject to the same
duties, and the apportionment and distribution of state school money
shall be made to it, as if an academic department had been established
in such district.
 § 1715. Retransfer of academy to its former trustees. If there shall
be, in a dissolved union free school district, an academy which shall
have been adopted as the academic department of the union free school
district, under the provisions of title nine, chapter five hundred
fifty-five of the laws of eighteen hundred sixty-four, and any amendment
thereof, or title eight of chapter five hundred fifty-six of the laws of
eighteen hundred ninety-four, and any amendment thereof, or under this
chapter, it shall, upon the application of a majority of the surviving
resident former trustees or stockholders, be transferred by the board of
education to said former trustees or stockholders.
 § 1716. Estimated expenses for ensuing year. 1. It shall be the duty
of the board of education of each district to present at the annual
budget hearing a detailed statement in writing of the amount of money
which will be required for the ensuing year for school purposes,
specifying the several purposes and the amount for each. The amount for
each purpose estimated necessary for payments to boards of cooperative
educational services shall be shown in full, with no deduction of
estimated state aid. The amount of state aid provided and its percentage
relationship to the total expenditures shall also be shown. This section
shall not be construed to prevent the board from presenting such
statement at a budget hearing held not less than seven nor more than
fourteen days prior to a special meeting called for the purpose, nor
from presenting a supplementary and amended statement or estimate at any
time.
 2. Such statement shall be completed at least seven days before the
budget hearing at which it is to be presented and copies thereof shall
be prepared and made available, upon request and at the school district
offices, at any public library or free association library within the
district and on the school district's internet website, if one exists,
to residents within the district during the period of fourteen days
immediately preceding the annual meeting and election or special
district meeting at which the budget vote will occur and at such meeting
or hearing. The board shall also as a part of the notice required by
section two thousand four of this chapter give notice of the date, time
and place of the budget hearing and that a copy of such statement may be
obtained by any resident in the district at each schoolhouse in the
district in which school is maintained during certain designated hours
on each day other than a Saturday, Sunday or holiday during the fourteen
days immediately preceding such meeting. The board shall include notice
of the availability of such statement at least once during the school
year in any district-wide mailing distributed.
 3. Commencing with the proposed budget for the nineteen hundred
ninety-seven--ninety-eight school year, such proposed budget shall be in
plain language and shall be consistent with regulations promulgated by
the commissioner pursuant to subdivision twenty-six of section three
hundred five of this chapter. Categorization of and format for revenue,
including payments in lieu of taxes, property tax refunds from
certiorari proceedings, expenditure, transfer, and fund balance
information and changes in such data from the prior year and, in the
case of a resubmitted or amended budget, changes in such information
from the prior year submitted budget, shall be complete and accurate and
set forth in such a manner as to best promote public comprehension and
readability.
 4. Commencing with the proposed budget for the nineteen hundred
ninety-eight--ninety-nine school year, such proposed budget shall be
presented in three components: a program component, a capital component
and an administrative component which shall be separately delineated in
accordance with regulations of the commissioner after consultation with
local school district officials. The administrative component shall
include, but need not be limited to, office and central administrative
expenses, traveling expenses and all compensation, salaries and benefits
of all school administrators and supervisors, including business
administrators, superintendents of schools and deputy, assistant,
associate or other superintendents under all existing employment
contracts or collective bargaining agreements, any and all expenditures
associated with the operation of the board of education, the office of
the superintendent of schools, general administration, the school
business office, consulting costs not directly related to direct student
services and programs, planning and all other administrative activities.
The program component shall include, but need not be limited to, all
program expenditures of the school district, including the salaries and
benefits of teachers and any school administrators or supervisors who
spend a majority of their time performing teaching duties, and all
transportation operating expenses. The capital component shall include,
but need not be limited to, all transportation capital, debt service,
and lease expenditures; costs resulting from judgments in tax certiorari
proceedings or the payment of awards from court judgments,
administrative orders or settled or compromised claims; and all
facilities costs of the school district, including facilities lease
expenditures, the annual debt service and total debt for all facilities
financed by bonds and notes of the school district, and the costs of
construction, acquisition, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement
of school buildings, provided that such budget shall include a rental,
operations and maintenance section that includes base rent costs, total
rent costs, operation and maintenance charges, cost per square foot for
each facility leased by the school district, and any and all
expenditures associated with custodial salaries and benefits, service
contracts, supplies, utilities, and maintenance and repairs of school
facilities. For the purposes of the development of a budget for the
nineteen hundred ninety-eight--ninety-nine school year, the board of
education shall separate the district's program, capital and
administrative costs for the nineteen hundred ninety-seven--ninety-eight
school year in the manner as if the budget for such year had been
presented in three components.
 5. The board of education shall append to the statement of estimated
expenditures a detailed statement of the total compensation to be paid
to the superintendent of schools, and any assistant or associate
superintendents of schools in the ensuing school year, including a
delineation of the salary, annualized cost of benefits and any in-kind
or other form of remuneration. The board shall also append a list of all
other school administrators and supervisors, if any, whose annual salary
will be eighty-five thousand dollars or more in the ensuing school year,
with the title of their positions and annual salary identified; provided
however, that the commissioner may adjust such salary level to reflect
increases in administrative salaries after June thirtieth, nineteen
hundred ninety-eight. The board of education shall submit a copy of such
list and statement, in a form prescribed by the commissioner, of
compensation to the commissioner within five days after their
preparation. The commissioner shall compile such data, together with the
data submitted pursuant to subdivision four of section sixteen hundred
eight of this chapter, into a single statewide compilation, which shall
be made available to the governor, the legislature, and other interested
parties upon request.
 6. Each year, the board of education shall prepare a school district
report card, pursuant to regulations of the commissioner, and shall make
it publicly available by transmitting it to local newspapers of general
circulation, appending it to copies of the proposed budget made publicly
available as required by law, making it available for distribution at
the annual meeting, and otherwise disseminating it as required by the
commissioner. Such report card shall include measures of the academic
performance of the school district, on a school by school basis, and
measures of the fiscal performance of the district, as prescribed by the
commissioner. Pursuant to regulations of the commissioner, the report
card shall also compare these measures to statewide averages for all
public schools, and statewide averages for public schools of comparable
wealth and need, developed by the commissioner. Such report card shall
include, at a minimum, any information of the school district regarding
pupil performance and expenditure per pupil required to be included in
the annual report by the regents to the governor and the legislature
pursuant to section two hundred fifteen-a of this chapter; and any other
information required by the commissioner. School districts (i)
identified as having fifteen percent or more of their students in
special education, or (ii) which have fifty percent or more of their
students with disabilities in special education programs or services
sixty percent or more of the school day in a general education building,
or (iii) which have eight percent or more of their students with
disabilities in special education programs in public or private separate
educational settings shall indicate on their school district report card
their respective percentages as defined in this paragraph and paragraphs
(i) and (ii) of this subdivision as compared to the statewide average.
 7. a. Each year, commencing with the proposed budget for the two
thousand--two thousand one school year, the board of education shall
prepare a property tax report card, pursuant to regulations of the
commissioner, and shall make it publicly available by transmitting it to
local newspapers of general circulation, appending it to copies of the
proposed budget made publicly available as required by law, making it
available for distribution at the annual meeting, and otherwise
disseminating it as required by the commissioner. Such report card shall
include: (i) the amount of total spending and total estimated school tax
levy that would result from adoption of the proposed budget and the
percentage increase or decrease in total spending and total school tax
levy from the school district budget for the preceding school year; and
(ii) the district's tax levy limit determined pursuant to section two
thousand twenty-three-a of this title, and the estimated school tax
levy, excluding any levy necessary to support the expenditures pursuant
to subparagraphs (i) through (iv) of paragraph i of subdivision two of
section two thousand twenty-three-a of this title, that would result
from adoption of the proposed budget; and (iii) the projected enrollment
growth for the school year for which the budget is prepared, and the
percentage change in enrollment from the previous year; and (iv) the
percentage increase in the consumer price index, as defined in paragraph
c of this subdivision; and (v) the projected amount of the
unappropriated unreserved fund balance that will be retained if the
proposed budget is adopted, the projected amount of the reserved fund
balance, the projected amount of the appropriated fund balance, the
percentage of the proposed budget that the unappropriated unreserved
fund balance represents, the actual unappropriated unreserved fund
balance retained in the school district budget for the preceding school
year, a schedule of reserve funds, setting forth the name of each
reserve fund, a description of its purpose, the balance as of the close
of the third quarter of the current school district fiscal year and a
brief statement explaining any plans for the use of each such reserve
fund for the ensuing fiscal year and the percentage of the school
district budget for the preceding school year that the actual
unappropriated unreserved fund balance represents.
 b. A copy of the property tax report card prepared for the annual
district meeting shall be submitted to the department in the manner
prescribed by the department by the end of the business day next
following approval of the report card by the board of education, but no
later than twenty-four days prior to the statewide uniform voting day.
The department shall compile such data for all school districts whose
budgets are subject to a vote of the qualified voters and shall make
such compilation available electronically at least ten days prior to the
statewide uniform voting day.
 c. For purposes of this subdivision, "percentage increase in the
consumer price index" shall mean the percentage that represents the
product of one hundred and the quotient of: (i) the average of the
national consumer price indexes determined by the United States
department of labor for the twelve-month period preceding January first
of the current year minus the average of the national consumer price
indexes determined by the United States department of labor for the
twelve-month period preceding January first of the prior year, divided
by (ii) the average of the national consumer price indexes determined by
the United States department of labor for the twelve-month period
preceding January first of the prior year, with the result expressed as
a decimal to two places.
 § 1717. Corporate authorities must raise tax certified by board of
education. 1. The corporate authorities of any incorporated village in
which any such union free school district shall be established, shall
have power, and it shall be their duty, to raise, from time to time, by
tax, to be levied upon all the real property in said village, as by law
provided for the defraying of the expenses of its municipal government,
such sum as the board of education established therein shall declare
necessary for teachers' salaries and the ordinary contingent expenses of
supporting the schools of said district.
 2. The sums so declared necessary shall be set forth in a detailed
statement in writing, addressed to the corporate authorities by the
board of education, giving the various purposes of anticipated
expenditure, and the amount necessary for each; and the said corporate
authorities shall have no power to withhold the sums so declared to be
necessary; and such corporate authorities as aforesaid shall have power
and it shall be their duty to raise, from time to time, by tax as
aforesaid, any such further sum to be set forth in a detailed statement
in writing, addressed to the corporate authorities by the board of
education, giving the various purposes of the proposed expenditure, and
the amount necessary for each which may have been or which may hereafter
be authorized by a majority of the voters of such union free school
district present and voting at any special district meeting duly
convened for any of the purposes stated in section four hundred sixteen
of this chapter.
 § 1718. Limitation upon expenditures. 1. No board of education shall
incur a district liability in excess of the amount appropriated by a
district meeting unless such board is specially authorized by law to
incur such liability.
 2. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision one of this section,
grants in aid received from the state and federal governments for
specific purposes, other state grants in aid identified by the
commissioner for general use as specified by the board of education,
other gifts which are required to be spent for particular objects or
purposes and insurance proceeds received for the loss, theft, damage or
destruction of real or personal property, when proposed to be used or
applied to repair or replace such property, may be appropriated by
resolution of the board of education at any time for such objects or
purposes.
 § 1719. Deposit, custody and payment of moneys in villages. 1. All
moneys raised for the support of schools in any union free school
district whose boundaries are coterminous with the boundaries of an
incorporated village or apportioned to the same by the education
department or otherwise, shall be paid into the treasury of such village
to the credit of the board of education therein; and the funds so
received into such treasury shall be kept separate and distinct from any
other funds received into the said treasury. And the officer having the
charge thereof shall give such additional security for the safe custody
thereof as the corporate authorities of such village shall require. The
board of education in any such union free school district may, in its
discretion, fix the compensation to be paid to the treasurer of such
village for the services imposed upon him by this section, and such
compensation, as so fixed, shall be paid from such moneys.
 2. No money shall be drawn from such funds, credited to a board of
education, unless in pursuance of a resolution of said board, and on
voucher-order checks signed by the treasurer, payable to the order of
the persons entitled to receive such money, and stating on their face
the purpose or service for which such moneys have been authorized to be
paid by the said board of education. The board of education may in its
discretion require that such checks be countersigned by another officer
of such district. When authorized by resolution of the board of
education such checks may be signed with the facsimile signature of the
treasurer and other district officer whose signature is required, as
reproduced by a machine or device commonly known as a checksigner. No
resolution of the board of education, however, shall be necessary for
the payment of compensation for services of an officer or employee
engaged at agreed wages by the hour, day, week, month or year when the
name of such officer or employee appears upon a duly certified payroll,
or of the principal of or interest on indebtedness of the district. By
resolution duly adopted, the board may determine to enter into a
contract to provide for the deposit of the periodic payroll of the
school district in a bank or trust company for disbursal by it in
accordance with provisions of section ninety-six-b of the banking law.
 3. When obligations are issued and sold pursuant to the local finance
law by a union free school district whose boundaries are the same as the
boundaries of an incorporated village, the proceeds of the sale of such
obligations shall be paid into the treasury of said incorporated
village, to the credit of the board of education.
 4. So much of this section as relates to the deposit of moneys raised
for the support of schools in any union free school district shall not
apply to the Bronxville union free school district.
 § 1720. Moneys and accounts in union free school districts. 1. All
moneys raised in a union free school district or apportioned thereto by
the education department or otherwise, shall be paid to the treasurer of
the district entitled to receive the same, and be applied to the uses of
the district and the board shall annually render their accounts of all
moneys received and expended by them for the use of said schools.
 2. No money shall be drawn from such funds in possession of such
treasurer, unless in pursuance of a resolution of said board, and on
voucher-order checks signed by the treasurer, payable to the order of
the persons entitled to receive such money and stating on their face the
purpose or service for which said moneys have been authorized to be paid
by the said board of education. The board of education may in its
discretion require that such checks be countersigned by another officer
of such district. When authorized by resolution of the board of
education such checks may be signed with the facsimile signature of the
treasurer and other district officer whose signature is required, as
reproduced by a machine or device commonly known as a check-signer.
Such board may by resolution designate one of its members other than
said other officer whose signature is required or appoint a deputy
treasurer who shall serve at the discretion of the board, to sign such
checks in lieu of either the treasurer or other officer whose signature
is required, in case of their absence or inability, provided that any
board member or deputy treasurer so authorized shall, before acting in
the place and stead of the treasurer, execute and file an official
undertaking in an amount and in the manner required as to such treasurer
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. No resolution of the board,
however, shall be necessary for the payment of compensation for services
of an officer or employee engaged at agreed wages by the hour, day,
week, month or year, where the name of such officer or employee appears
upon a duly certified payroll, or of the principal of or interest on
indebtedness of the district. By resolution duly adopted, the board may
determine to enter into a contract to provide for the deposit of the
periodic payroll of the school district in a bank or trust company for
disbursal by it in accordance with provisions of section ninety-six-b of
the banking law.
 § 1721. Records; reports. It shall be the duty of the board of
education of a union free school district to keep an accurate record of
all its proceedings in books provided for that purpose. It shall also
be the duty of said board to cause to be published once in each year,
during the month of July or during the month of August, in at least one
public newspaper, published in such district or, if one public newspaper
is not published in such district, then in a public newspaper having
general circulation within such district, a full and detailed account of
all moneys received by the board or the treasurer of said district, for
its account and use, and of all the moneys expended therefor, giving the
items of expenditure in full; should there be no paper published in or
having general circulation within said district said board shall publish
such account by notice to the taxpayers, by posting copies thereof in
five public places in said district.
 § 1722. Application of article. The provisions of this article shall
apply to all union free school districts heretofore organized pursuant
to the provisions of chapter four hundred thirty-three of the laws of
eighteen hundred fifty-three, and the amendments thereof, chapter five
hundred fifty-five of the laws of eighteen hundred sixty-four, and the
amendments thereof, and of chapter five hundred fifty-six of the laws of
eighteen hundred ninety-four and the amendments thereof; and sections
seventeen hundred seventeen, four hundred one, subdivision one, four
hundred sixteen and seventeen hundred nineteen, subdivision three, of
this chapter are made applicable to all school districts established by
and organized under special statutes, except those of cities; and
sections seventeen hundred eleven and four hundred one, subdivision two,
of this chapter are made applicable to all school districts, except
those of cities, having a population of five thousand and upwards
established by and organized under special statutes.
 § 1723-a. Temporary investment of school moneys. The board of
education of any union free school district may authorize the district
treasurer or other officer having custody of district moneys to invest
moneys of the district in the manner provided by section eleven of the
general municipal law.
 § 1724. Form and audit of claims. 1. No claim against a central school
district or a union free school district, except for compensation for
services of an officer or employee engaged at agreed wages by the hour,
day, week, month or year or for the principal of or interest on
indebtedness of the district, shall be paid unless an itemized voucher
therefor approved by the officer whose action gave rise or origin to the
claim, shall have been presented to the board of education of the
district and shall have been audited and allowed. The board of education
shall be authorized, but not required, to prescribe the form of such
voucher.
 2. The board of education, in considering any claim, may require any
person presenting the same to be sworn before it or before any member
thereof and to give testimony relative to the justness and accuracy of
such claim, and may take evidence and examine witnesses under oath in
respect to the claim, and for that purpose may issue subpoenas for the
attendance of witnesses. When a claim has been finally audited by the
board of education the clerk of such board shall endorse or attach a
certificate of such audit upon the claim or upon an abstract on which
such claims are listed and file the same as a public record in his
office. When any claim has been so audited and a certificate thereof so
filed, the clerk of the board of education shall draw a warrant
specifying the name of the claimant, the amount allowed and the fund,
function and object chargeable therewith and such other information as
may be deemed necessary and essential, directed to the treasurer of the
district, authorizing and directing him to pay to the claimant the
amount allowed upon his claim. A copy of such warrant shall be filed in
the office of the clerk.
 3. The board of education may by resolution authorize the payment in
advance of audit of claims for public utility services, postage, freight
and express charges. All such claims shall be presented at the next
regular meeting for audit, and the claimant and the officer incurring or
approving the same shall be jointly and severally liable for any amount
disallowed by the board of education.
 As used in this subdivision, the term public utility services shall
mean electric, gas, water, sewer and telephone services.
 § 1725. Lease of personal property. 1. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of law, a board of education of any union free school
district may enter into agreements for the lease of personal property.
 2. Before executing any such agreement, the board of education must
adopt a resolution determining that such agreement is in the best
financial interests of the school district and stating the bases of that
determination.
 3. No agreement for the lease of personal property shall be for a term
of more than the current school year unless such agreement shall be
approved by the voters of the district, either as a separate proposition
or as an appropriation with indication that a lease is intended or
possible, or unless the board of education shall have determined that
such lease of property is an ordinary contingent expense.
 4. Such agreements shall be subject to the bidding requirements of the
general municipal law for purchase contracts.
 § 1725-a. Powers of boards of education; instructional equipment.
Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of law, the board of
education of any school district is hereby authorized and empowered to
enter into agreements for the lease-purchase of instructional equipment,
with the payments to be applied against the purchase price of the
equipment. The term "instructional equipment" shall be defined in
regulations by the commissioner. Any such lease-purchase agreements
shall have the prior written approval of the commissioner before
execution. Such agreements shall be subject to the bidding requirements
of the general municipal law.
 § 1726. Lease and lease-purchase of buildings. 1. Notwithstanding any
inconsistent provision of law, the board of education of any union free
school district may enter into agreements pursuant to the provisions of
this section for the lease or lease-purchase of buildings for school
purposes, to be placed or erected on a site owned by the district.
 1-a. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of law, the board of
education of any union free school district may enter into agreement
with the dormitory authority for the lease or lease-purchase for school
purposes from the dormitory authority of a dormitory (or any part
thereof), as defined in section sixteen hundred seventy-six of the
public authorities law, including, if the agreement so provides, land,
buildings, any attendant facilities, and equipment, provided such
dormitory (a) is owned by or in the possession of the dormitory
authority, and (b) was originally provided or financed by the authority
for an educational institution as defined in subdivision one of section
sixteen hundred eighty of the public authorities law and (c) is no
longer being used by such educational institution. Any such agreement
may provide for the alteration, reconstruction or rehabilitation of any
such dormitory or part thereof by the school district or the authority
as capital items. The provisions of subdivisions three, four, six, eight
and nine of this section shall not apply to any agreement with the
dormitory authority authorized by this subdivision, provided,
nevertheless, that the lease or lease-purchase agreement may not be made
for a period in excess of the applicable period of probable usefulness
for the building or buildings, as so altered, reconstructed or
rehabilitated, and provided, further, that the plans and specifications
for such building or buildings, as so altered, reconstructed or
rehabilitated, shall be subject to approval of the commissioner of
education, before such alteration, reconstruction or rehabilitation may
be authorized by the board of education of such school district.
 2. Before executing any such agreement, the board of education shall
adopt a resolution determining that such agreement is in the best
financial interests of the school district and stating the basis of that
determination.
 3. Such agreements shall be subject to the bidding requirements of the
general municipal law, except that the provisions of section one hundred
one of the general municipal law shall not apply to lease or
lease-purchase of pre-manufactured items delivered to the site, but
shall apply to installation and other work to be performed on the site.
 4. No agreement for the lease of a building or buildings may be made
for a term of more than five years, beginning with the time of
occupancy. No lease-purchase agreement may be made for a period
exceeding the applicable period of probable usefulness pursuant to the
provisions of the local finance law. Nothing herein contained shall be
deemed to prohibit a board of education from entering into a renewal of
such lease agreement of such building or buildings for like periods,
provided, however, that the total lease payments or the total amount of
lease-purchase agreement payments over the period of any such agreement
including all lease renewals, may not exceed the purchase price of such
building or buildings, together with interest of not to exceed six
percent per annum on any unpaid balance.
 5. A board of education may not enter into any lease or lease-purchase
agreement authorized by this section without the previous approval of
the voters of the district; provided that a board of education may, with
the approval of the commissioner, lease necessary space in case of an
unforeseeable emergency.
 6. Any agreement by which a building is leased to a school district
for installation on land owned by the district must include provision
for the removal of such building by the lessor within ninety days after
termination of the lease, unless such lease is renewed or title to the
building passes to the school district in accordance with the provisions
of this section.
 7. The commissioner, with the approval of the director of the budget,
shall establish a uniform procedure for allocation of payments under
lease-purchase agreements for the purpose of determining operating aid
and aid for building purposes, respectively; provided, however, that no
building aid shall be paid unless and until the school district has
legally committed itself to the purchase in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
 8. Plans and specifications and the proposed lease, lease renewal or
lease-purchase agreement for buildings to be leased or purchased
pursuant to the provisions of this section must be approved by the
commissioner before a board of education may authorize or execute any
agreement, or renewal thereof, for such purposes.
 9. The term "lease", as used in this section, shall include a lease
with an option to purchase; provided, however, that in the case of a
lease with an option to purchase, no part of any lease payments may be
counted against the purchase price, in case the option to purchase is
exercised.
 10. The term of no lease agreement including renewals thereof, may
exceed the period of probable usefulness provided for such building or
buildings by the local finance law.
 11. No annual installment of lease-purchase payment may exceed any
other such installment under any such agreement by more than fifty per
centum thereof.
 12. Any school district entering into any lease-purchase agreement
under this section, shall pledge its full faith and credit for the full
performance of all obligations under such agreement, including all
annual payments required to be made thereunder.
 13. The annual payments to be made by the school district under any
such agreement shall commence within two years after the execution of
any such agreement, or within thirty days from the time the board of
education shall have approved such building for occupancy, whichever
shall be later.
 14. The total amount of any unpaid annual payments of a lease-purchase
agreement in relation to the principal of any such indebtedness, in case
of a school district in a city as defined in the local finance law shall
be deemed to be indebtedness of the school district for a capital
improvement within the meaning of subparagraph (b) of subdivision three
of paragraph a of section 135.00 of the local finance law.
 15. The annual payments by such a school district in a city in
relation to such indebtedness and interest shall be deemed to be
"indebtedness" and "interest" within the meaning of section ten of
article eight of the state constitution.
 16. No such agreement shall be renegotiated or amended in such manner
as to constitute a refunding within the meaning of section two of
article eight of the state constitution.
 ARTICLE 37
 CENTRAL SCHOOL DISTRICTS
Section 1801. Formation and changes of central school districts.
 1802. Organization procedure.
 1803. Proceedings at meeting.
 1803-a. Alternative voting procedure.
 1804. Board of education; election; powers and duties.
 1805. Powers of central school district; officers of component
 districts; transition state aid.
 1807. Transportation of school children.
 1809. Apportionment to central school districts containing
 former central school districts.
 § 1801. Formation and changes of central school districts. 1. The
commissioner of education is hereby authorized and empowered to lay out
central school districts for the establishment of central schools to
give instruction in elementary or elementary and high school subjects
and to fix, determine and define the boundaries of said districts as
hereinafter provided.
 2. The commissioner is authorized and empowered to make and enter in
his office orders laying out territory in new central school districts
or annexing to existing central school districts territory not contained
within a city school district in a city having a population of more than
ten thousand inhabitants, and not contained within a city school
district having a full valuation of taxable real estate per public
school pupil residing in the district of more than fifteen thousand
dollars; provided, however, that no territory contained within a city
school district in a city having a population of ten thousand
inhabitants or less may be included in new central school districts or
annexed to existing central school districts after July first, nineteen
hundred fifty-five. The commissioner of education is authorized and
empowered to make and enter in his office orders dissolving and annexing
a central school district or districts to another central school
district, pursuant to the provisions of subdivision two of section
eighteen hundred two of this chapter. The commissioner in laying out
such central school districts and in fixing and defining the boundaries
thereof shall include only territory of suitable size conveniently
located for the attendance of pupils and having a sufficient number of
pupils for the establishment of a central school. The commissioner shall
designate all central school districts by such simplified name as he
shall deem proper.
 3. Within ten days after the making and entry of the order pursuant to
this section, the commissioner shall transmit a certified copy thereof
to the clerk, or in the event there is no clerk, to the trustee or
trustees of each school district the territory of which is affected by
said order. The clerk, the trustee or trustees, as the case may be,
shall, within five days after receipt of such order, post a copy thereof
in five conspicuous places in such district.
 4. No central school district laid out by order of the commissioner
shall operate as a central school district, nor be entitled to receive
the benefits of a central school district until it has been organized by
the qualified voters of the district in accordance with the provisions
of this article, provided, however, a central school district which was
organized prior to April seventh, nineteen hundred forty-four, or
pursuant to the provisions of this section and to which territory may be
annexed shall not be required to again organize.
 5. The commissioner of education is hereby authorized and empowered to
make and enter in his office an order annexing the territory of common
school district number three of the town of Wilmington, Essex county to
central school district number two of the town of North Elba, Essex
county, together with such territory of common school district number
one of the town of Wilmington, Essex county as will provide contiguity
between the aforementioned Wilmington common school district number
three and North Elba central school district number two.
 § 1802. Organization procedure. 1. New central school districts shall
be organized as provided in this subdivision.
 a. When an order laying out a central school district has been made
and entered as provided in section eighteen hundred one of this chapter,
a petition may be presented by persons qualified to vote at school
district meetings asking for the organization of a central school
district and the establishment of a central school therein. Said
petition shall be signed by at least one hundred of such qualified
voters or by a number of such qualified voters equal to at least ten per
centum of the pupils of said central school district as determined by
the last school census, whichever shall be less.
 b. Said petition shall be filed with the commissioner and shall
request that a meeting of the qualified voters within said territory be
called for the purpose of determining whether or not such territory
shall be organized as a central school district and a central school be
established therein for instruction in elementary or elementary and high
school subjects. If the commissioner is satisfied that the petition has
been duly signed as provided in this section, he shall fix a time and
place for a special meeting of the qualified voters within the central
school district, which meeting shall be held not more than thirty days
after the filing of the petition aforesaid. The commissioner shall
cause notice of such meeting to be posted at least ten days before the
meeting in three conspicuous places in each school district wholly or
partly within the central school district. In addition to the posting of
such notice, a copy thereof shall be published at least three days
before the meeting in a daily or weekly newspaper published within the
territory or in a newspaper circulating therein. The expense of posting
and publishing of the notice shall be borne equally by the several
school districts within the territory, unless a central school district
is organized, in which event such expense shall become a charge upon
said central school district.
 2. Territory shall be annexed to a central school district as provided
in this subdivision.
 a. When an order annexing territory to a central school district has
been made and entered as provided in section eighteen hundred one of
this chapter, the commissioner shall within ten days thereafter cause
certified copies of said order to be filed with the clerk of the central
school district and the trustee or trustees of each school district
affected thereby. Said order annexing territory to the central school
district shall become final sixty days after such filing of the
certified copy thereof, unless a permissive referendum is requested as
hereinafter provided. Said order may state that it shall take effect on
a date specified therein which date shall not, however, be earlier than
sixty days after such filing.
 b. When at least one hundred of the qualified voters residing in a
central school district, as it existed prior to the order of annexation,
or a number of such qualified voters equal to at least ten per centum of
the pupils therein, as determined by the last school census, whichever
shall be less; or when at least one hundred qualified voters residing
within any school district affected by such order or a number of such
qualified voters equal to at least ten per centum of the pupils therein,
as determined by the last school census, whichever shall be less, shall,
within sixty days after the last filing of the copies of the aforesaid
order, file a petition with the commissioner requesting a special
meeting of the qualified voters of such district affected thereby, a
special meeting shall be held pursuant to notice, as hereinafter set
forth, to determine whether the order annexing the school district or
districts, or any one of such districts, shall be approved. If the
commissioner determines that the petition has been duly signed by the
number of qualified voters required, he shall fix a time and place,
within thirty days after the receipt by him of said petition, for a
special meeting of the qualified voters of the central school district
or school district in respect of which a petition has been filed as
aforesaid. The commissioner shall cause notice thereof to be posted at
least ten days before the meeting in ten conspicuous places in such
central school district or such school district. In addition to the
posting of such notice a copy thereof shall be duly published, at least
three days before the meeting, in a daily or weekly newspaper published
within such central school district or any of the school districts in
which such meeting is to be held, or in a newspaper circulating in the
territory. The expense of posting and publishing the notice aforesaid
shall be a charge upon the central school district or school district
conducting such meeting.
 § 1803. Proceedings at meeting. 1. Any meeting held pursuant to the
notice provided in section eighteen hundred two shall be called to order
by a school official or a qualified voter of the district, designated by
the commissioner of education for the purpose. The first order of
business shall be the election of a chairman and a clerk who shall be
qualified voters of the district. The meeting may be adjourned from time
to time by a majority vote of the qualified voters present but no such
adjournment shall be for a longer period than ten days. The affirmative
vote of a majority of the qualified voters present and voting shall be
required on the adoption of a resolution.
 2. At a meeting held pursuant to subdivision one of section eighteen
hundred two a resolution in substantially the following form shall be
presented for the action and determination of the meeting, viz.:
"Resolved that the ........ central school district (add designation) as
described in the order of the commissioner of education now before this
meeting, be organized and a central school for instruction in elementary
and high school subjects be established."
 3. At a meeting held in an existing central school district pursuant
to subdivision two of section eighteen hundred two a resolution in
substantially the following form shall be presented for the action and
determination of the meeting, viz.: "Resolved that the ........ (insert
simplified name of district in accordance with section three hundred
fifteen of this chapter) school district be annexed to the .........
central school district (designate central school district) as provided
in the order of the commissioner of education now before this meeting."
Said resolution may be amended by a majority vote of the qualified
voters present to exclude one or more of the districts described in said
order of the commissioner from annexation to the central school
district.
 4. At a meeting held in any common or union free school district
pursuant to subdivision two of section eighteen hundred two a resolution
in substantially the following form shall be presented for the action
and determination of the meeting, viz.: "Resolved that the .........
(insert simplified name of district in accordance with section three
hundred fifteen of this chapter) school district be annexed to the
.......... central school district (designate central school district) as
provided in the order of the commissioner of education now before this
meeting."
 5. Votes upon the adoption of a resolution shall be cast in the same
manner as votes for the election of school district trustees. The
commissioner of education may order such modifications in the manner of
voting as are customary for school district elections in the community
affected by such vote. Such modifications may include the use of voting
machines and shall include the use of absentee ballots as provided under
section two thousand eighteen-a or two thousand eighteen-b of this
title, whichever shall apply, and early mail ballots as provided in
section two thousand eighteen-e or two thousand eighteen-f of this
title, whichever shall apply.
 6. A copy of the minutes of the meeting or meetings duly certified by
the clerk shall be filed by him with the commissioner of education, with
each school superintendent in whose jurisdiction such school district,
or any part thereof, is or may thereafterward be located and with the
town clerk of each town in which any part of said school district is or
may thereafterward be located.
 7. If the resolution described in subdivision two of this section is
adopted, then the voters shall proceed to organize in accordance with
the provisions of this article.
 8. If at any such meeting the resolution described in subdivision two,
three or four of this section shall be presented and shall not be
adopted, there shall be no further proceedings at such meeting, except a
motion to reconsider the question. No such meeting shall again be called
within one year after such original meeting. No new meeting shall be
called unless a petition therefor shall be presented to the commissioner
in the manner provided in subdivision two of section eighteen hundred
two of this article. If no meeting shall be called to reconsider the
question within two years after such original meeting or if at any such
meeting called within two years after such original meeting the
resolution shall again fail of adoption, the order of the commissioner
of education to which the resolution relates shall be deemed null and
void and of no further force or effect.
 9. If the resolution submitted to the voters as provided in either
subdivision three or subdivision four of this section shall be adopted
the territory described therein shall thereupon be annexed to the
existing central school district.
 § 1803-a. Alternative voting procedure. 1. When an order laying out a
central school district has been made and entered as provided in section
eighteen hundred one of this chapter, and the petitions referred to in
paragraph a of subdivision one of section eighteen hundred two thereof
have been, or are being, presented and filed with the commissioner, a
second petition may be presented by persons qualified to vote in any
school district, all of which is included in the area of the central
school district as laid out by such order, and which school district at
the time of such order maintained its own schoolhouse. Such second
petition may request the alternative voting procedure authorized by this
section, and shall be signed by at least one hundred qualified voters of
such district or by a number of such qualified voters equal to at least
ten per centum of the pupils of such district as determined by the last
school census, whichever shall be less; provided, however, that such
second petition must, in any event, contain not less than ten
signatures. Such second petition shall be filed with the commissioner at
the same time as the first petition is filed. If the commissioner is
satisfied that both petitions have been duly signed as provided by law,
he shall fix a time and place for an election of the qualified voters
within the central school district, which said election shall be held
not more than thirty days after the filing of the petitions aforesaid.
The commissioner shall cause notice of such election to be posted at
least ten days prior thereto in three conspicuous places in each school
district wholly or partly within the central school district. In
addition to the posting of such notice, a copy thereof shall be
published at least three days before the election in a daily or weekly
newspaper published within the territory or in a newspaper circulating
therein. The expense of posting and publishing of the notice shall be
borne equally by the several school districts within the territory,
unless a central school district is organized, in which event such
expense shall become a charge upon said central school district.
 2. Elections for the establishment of a central school district under
the provisions of this section shall be conducted as follows:
 a. They shall take place on a day and at a place designated by the
commissioner for a vote by all the qualified voters within the central
school district, except as otherwise provided in paragraph b of this
subdivision.
 b. The qualified voters of any school district from which a second
petition pursuant to subdivision one of this section has been received,
shall vote on the designated day at the principal schoolhouse located in
such district. Such petitioning district shall be known as a special
election district.
 c. The election shall take place during at least four consecutive
hours between the hours of seven o'clock in the forenoon and ten o'clock
in the evening, as determined by the commissioner of education.
 d. The ballots for the election shall be furnished by the commissioner
of education and shall contain a resolution in substantially the
following form: "Resolved that the ........... central school district
(add designation) as described in the order of the commissioner of
education be organized and a central school for instruction in
elementary and high school subjects be established."
 e. Before each person casts his ballot he shall be required to sign a
statement contained in a poll book provided for the purpose, declaring
that he is a qualified voter within the central school district.
 f. Provision shall be made for the use of absentee ballots as provided
under section two thousand eighteen-a or two thousand eighteen-b of this
title, whichever shall apply, and early mail ballots as provided under
section two thousand eighteen-e or two thousand eighteen-f of this
title, whichever shall apply.
 3. The commissioner shall appoint a board of canvass whose duty it
shall be to act as a board of elections at the central voting place
designated by the commissioner pursuant to paragraph a of subdivision
two of this section, and also to act as a board of canvass for the
entire area included in the central school district, including any
district petitioning pursuant to subdivision one of this section. Such
board shall, as soon as the ballot boxes and books containing the names
of the voters have been delivered to the board of canvass at the place
designated by the commissioner, count the ballots of all those voting in
the central school district. Prior to ascertaining the manner in which
any voter has marked a ballot, the number of ballots from the central
voting place and each special election district shall be counted
separately without opening them and if the number does not correspond
with the number of names contained in the poll book of such central
voting place or special election district, the board before canvassing
the ballots, shall withdraw therefrom a number sufficient to make the
number of ballots correspond with the number of names in the poll book.
Such board shall then canvass the vote of the central voting place and
of each special election district separately and certify to the
commissioner the total number of votes cast at the central voting place
and at each special election district, the number of valid votes cast
for the organization, the number of valid votes cast against the
organization, the number of void ballots and the number of blank
ballots. A majority of the valid votes cast at the central voting place
and at each special election district shall be necessary to establish
the central school district. The board of canvass shall seal the books
and the ballots immediately upon the completion of the certificate,
setting forth the result and shall retain them in its possession for at
least thirty days. If an appeal is brought from an action of the
meeting, the ballots shall be available for the inspection of the
commissioner. The board of canvass shall file a copy of such certificate
with each school superintendent in whose jurisdiction the central school
district, or any part thereof, is or may thereafterward be located, and
shall also file a copy thereof with the town clerk of each town in which
any part of such central school district is or may thereafterward be
located.
 4. a. The trustee or board of trustees or education of each special
election district shall act as an election board for the conduct of the
election in such district. The sole trustee or president of the board
shall administer the challenges. If the president of the board is not
available, the board may elect any one of its members in his stead. If
no one is otherwise available or if during the course of the election it
becomes necessary for a trustee in a one-trustee district to absent
himself, the district superintendent of schools shall designate a voter
of the election district to carry out the duties of the election board.
Such board shall furnish a padlocked ballot box.
 b. After the polls are closed, and after all persons within the room
have voted, the election board shall forthwith proceed to deliver to the
board of canvass at the place designated by the commissioner of
education the ballot box and the book containing the names of the
voters. Any wilful violation of this paragraph shall be a misdemeanor.
 5. Upon an appeal to the commissioner of education, substantial
compliance with the procedures herein required shall be sufficient to
meet the intent of this section.
 6. If the resolution described in subdivision two of this section
shall be defeated, no such elections or meeting shall again be called
within one year after such elections. If no elections or meeting shall
be called to reconsider the question within two years after such
original elections or if at any such elections or meeting called within
two years of such original elections the resolution shall again fail of
adoption, the order of the commissioner of education to which the
resolution relates shall be null and void and of no further force and
effect.
 7. If at such election the resolution referred to in subdivision two
is adopted, the commissioner of education shall fix a time and place for
a special meeting of the qualified voters within the central school
district for the purpose of electing a board of education. The
commissioner shall cause notice of such meeting to be posted at least
ten days before the meeting in three conspicuous places in each former
school district wholly or partly within the central school district. In
addition to the posting of such notice, a copy thereof shall be
published at least three days before the meeting in a daily or weekly
newspaper published within the territory or in a newspaper circulating
therein. The expense of posting and publishing of the notice shall be
upon said central school district.
 8. The commissioner of education may order such modifications in the
manner of voting on the resolution described in subdivision two of
section eighteen hundred three of this chapter and for the election
described in subdivision seven of this section as are customary in
school district elections in the community affected by such vote. Such
modifications may include the use of voting machines and the use of
nominating petitions.
 § 1804. Board of education; election; powers and duties. 1. Each such
central school district shall be managed by a board of education
consisting of five, seven or nine members, which board shall have the
same powers and duties as boards of education in union free school
districts as prescribed by this chapter. Except as provided in this
article, all the provisions of this chapter or of any other general law
relating to or affecting union free school districts shall apply to
central districts organized as herein provided. The corporate existence
of any city school district the territory of which is enlarged by the
formation of a central school district pursuant to this article shall
continue and such central school district shall be and shall be
designated as a city school district and shall be subject to the
provisions of article fifty-one of this chapter and to those provisions
of this article which are not inconsistent with the provisions of
article fifty-one.
 2. The first board of education shall be elected at the meeting at
which the resolution organizing such central school district and
establishing a central school is adopted or in case the alternative
voting procedure authorized by section eighteen hundred three-a of this
chapter has been adopted, at the meeting referred to in subdivision
seven of such section. It shall be the duty of such meeting to elect
five, seven or nine members of the board of education who shall by order
of such meeting be divided into a sufficient number of classes so that
as nearly as possible an equal number of members shall be elected to the
board each year.
 3. The number of members of the board of education of an organized and
existing central school district may be increased to seven or nine
members in the same manner as increases are made in union free school
districts. The number of members of a board containing nine members may
be decreased to seven or five members and the number of members of a
board containing seven members may be decreased to five members in the
same manner as decreases are made in union free school districts.
 4. The annual meeting and election in each central school district
shall be held on the third Tuesday of May provided, however that such
annual meeting and election shall be held on the second Tuesday in May
if the commissioner at the request of a local school board certifies no
later than March first that such election would conflict with religious
observances, and any school budget revote shall be held on the date
specified in subdivision three of section two thousand seven of this
title. Such annual meeting and school budget revote shall be conducted
and the election of members of the board shall be held in the same
manner as in union free school districts organized and operating under
the provisions of this chapter. The board of education of each central
school district shall hold a budget hearing not less than seven nor more
than fourteen days prior to the annual or special district meeting at
which a school budget vote will occur, and shall prepare and present to
the voters at such budget hearing a proposed school district budget for
the ensuing school year.
 5. a. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to deprive any
existing school district of the property belonging to such district, or
to affect the indebtedness of said district. An existing district within
the meaning of this article shall be construed to mean a district that
lies within the boundaries of a central school district. Each such
existing district shall be deemed to continue to exist in law for the
purpose of paying all its just debts, including obligations lawfully
issued prior to the organization of such central school district,
together with all interest thereon as the same shall fall due. In
levying the annual school tax upon the property of such central school
districts, the board of education shall also assess and levy upon the
taxable property of each such existing district which has an outstanding
indebtedness, an additional sum sufficient to pay all of such
indebtedness which shall fall due during the school year for which the
tax is levied less any sum received by such central school district and
apportioned and credited to the existing school district pursuant to the
provisions of subdivision four of section eighteen hundred six of this
article.
 b. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph a of this subdivision,
whenever a common school district or a union free school district shall,
after July first, nineteen hundred sixty-four, become a part of a
central school district either pursuant to the provisions of subdivision
one of section eighteen hundred two of this article, or pursuant to the
provisions of subdivision two thereof, or whenever a central school
district, after such date, shall become a part of another central school
district pursuant to either of such provisions, the central school
district, of which any such district shall have become a part, shall
succeed to all the property rights of such common, union free or central
school district and all indebtedness of any such school district
evidenced by bonds or notes or relating to school building construction
shall become a charge upon such central school district of which such
district shall have become a part, but all other indebtedness of any
such district shall be paid by any such district in accordance with the
provisions of section fifteen hundred eighteen of this chapter and to
that extent any such district shall continue to exist in law for the
purpose of providing for and paying all such indebtedness in accordance
with the provisions of such section.
 6. a. The board of education shall not sell or otherwise dispose of
the property of any such existing district except with the approval of a
majority of the qualified voters of such existing district present and
voting upon the question at a meeting of such voters duly called by such
board of education; provided, however, that upon the expiration of five
years from the date of discontinuance of a school, pursuant to section
one thousand eight hundred five of this chapter, the board of education
may, in its discretion, without a vote by such qualified voters upon
such question, sell or otherwise dispose, in the manner provided by law,
of such a school or other building previously used for school purposes
and the real property on which it is situated. For that purpose the
proceeds of such sale or disposal of property belonging to such existing
district, after deducting the cost of repairs or improvements made after
the organization of the central school district, shall be used for the
payment of the portion payable by such existing district of any
outstanding indebtedness of such existing district which shall be due
and payable or which may thereafter become due and payable. Any balance
remaining after the payment of such indebtedness shall be apportioned
among the taxpayers of such existing district as they appear upon the
last completed town or city assessment roll preceding the date of sale,
providing such apportioned sum shall equal or exceed five dollars and
unless the voters of such existing district by a majority vote of those
present and voting at a special district meeting called for that purpose
shall vote to turn over the proceeds of such sale or disposal of such
property to the central district to be used for the benefit of the
central district. Any balance of funds remaining in the treasury of the
several districts included within the central school district on July
first next following the date of the establishment of such central
school district, after paying all outstanding obligations then due and
payable, shall be turned over to the treasurer of the central school
district within thirty days thereafter and shall become available for
use by the board of education of the central school district; provided,
however, that if any such existing district shall have any obligations
which shall become due and payable after such July first, so much of any
such balance of funds as may be necessary shall be held in a special
account by the treasurer of the central school district for the purpose
of paying the principal of, and interest on, such obligations, as the
same shall become due and payable from time to time. The title to all
property erected or otherwise acquired after the organization of such
central school district shall be vested in the central district,
irrespective of the location of such property.
 b. The provisions of paragraph a of this subdivision shall not be
applicable to the property of any common or union free school district
which, after July first, nineteen hundred sixty-four, shall become part
of a central school district, nor to any central school district which,
after such date, shall become part of another central school district.
 c. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph a of this subdivision,
the board of education of a central school district may, by resolution,
after a period of at least seven years of centralization, sell any piece
of real property which such board shall deem to be of no use or value
therefor. The sale of such property shall be without the approval of the
qualified voters of the school district, unless a petition requiring
that the question as to the sale of such property be submitted to a vote
by the qualified voters of such district. Such petition shall be
subscribed and acknowledged by at least ten per centum of the qualified
voters of such district, and filed with the clerk of the board of
education within thirty days of the adoption of such resolution. Upon
the affirmative vote of a majority of the qualified voters, voting
thereon, such resolution shall become effective. The proceeds derived
from such sale shall revert to the use and benefit of the entire
district. Upon approval by the board of education, such funds may be (i)
utilized to reduce existing bonded indebtedness; (ii) applied to
construction, reconstruction or renovation within such district; or
(iii) applied to the general fund of such district.
 7. Deeds of property sold or disposed of under the provisions of the
preceding subdivision shall be executed by the board of education of the
central school district or a majority of the members thereof. Any deed
duly executed and delivered by the board of education of the central
school district in the course of a sale or disposal of real property of
a constituent district pursuant to the provisions of the preceding
subdivision shall be valid and effectual to pass all the estate or
interest of such constituent district in the premises. All deeds or
other conveyances of real property of any district heretofore made and
delivered, executed by said board of education of said central school
district by its officers, or in the manner in which deeds are executed
by corporations, or executed in any other manner, shall be as valid and
of the same force and effect as if executed by said board of education
of said central school district or a majority of the members thereof;
but this provision shall not affect any action or proceeding pending at
the time of the taking effect hereof.
 8. The board of education may, in its discretion, provide compensation
to a speaker or speakers at commencement day exercises in such amount as
may be determined by the board.
 9. a. The board of education shall, for purposes of a criminal history
record check, require the fingerprinting of all prospective employees
pursuant to section three thousand thirty-five of this chapter, who do
not hold valid clearance pursuant to such section or pursuant to section
three thousand four-b of this chapter or section five hundred nine-cc or
twelve hundred twenty-nine-d of the vehicle and traffic law. Prior to
initiating the fingerprinting process, the prospective employer shall
furnish the applicant with the form described in paragraph (c) of
subdivision thirty of section three hundred five of this chapter and
shall obtain the applicant's consent to the criminal history records
search. Every set of fingerprints taken pursuant to this subdivision
shall be promptly submitted to the commissioner for purposes of
clearance for employment.
 b. Upon the recommendation of the superintendent, the board may
conditionally appoint a prospective employee. A request for conditional
clearance shall be forwarded to the commissioner along with the
prospective employee's fingerprints, as required by paragraph a of this
subdivision. Such appointment shall not commence until notification by
the commissioner that the prospective employee has been conditionally
cleared for employment and shall terminate forty-five days after such
notification of conditional clearance or when the prospective employer
is notified of a determination by the commissioner to grant or deny
clearance, whichever occurs earlier, and may not be extended or renewed
unless the commissioner issues a new conditional clearance after finding
that there was good cause for failing to obtain clearance within such
period, provided that if clearance is granted the appointment shall
continue and the conditional status shall be removed. Prior to
commencement of such conditional appointment, the prospective employer
shall obtain a signed statement for conditional appointment from the
prospective employee, indicating whether, to the best of his or her
knowledge, he or she has a pending criminal charge or criminal
conviction in any jurisdiction outside the state.
 c. Upon the recommendation of the superintendent, the board may make
an emergency conditional appointment when an unforeseen emergency
vacancy has occurred. When such appointment is made, the process for
conditional appointment pursuant to paragraph b of this subdivision must
also be initiated. Emergency conditional appointment may commence prior
to notification from the commissioner on conditional clearance but shall
terminate twenty business days from the date such appointment commences
or when the prospective employer is notified by the commissioner
regarding conditional clearance, whichever occurs earlier, provided that
if conditional clearance is granted the appointment shall continue as a
conditional appointment. Prior to the commencement of such appointment,
the prospective employer must obtain a signed statement for emergency
conditional appointment from the prospective employee, indicating
whether, to the best of his or her knowledge, he or she has a pending
criminal charge or criminal conviction in any jurisdiction. An
unforeseen emergency vacancy shall be defined as: (i) a vacancy that
occurred less than ten business days before the start of any school
session, including summer school, or during any school session,
including summer school, without sufficient notice to allow for
clearance or conditional clearance; (ii) when no other qualified person
is available to fill the vacancy temporarily; and (iii) when emergency
conditional appointment is necessary to maintain services which the
district is legally required to provide or services necessary to protect
the health, education or safety of students or staff. The provisions of
subparagraph (i) of this paragraph shall not apply if the board finds
that the district has been unable to fill the vacancy despite good faith
efforts to fill such vacancy in a manner which would have allowed
sufficient time for clearance or conditional clearance.
 d. Shall develop a policy for the safety of the children who have
contact with an employee holding conditional appointment or emergency
conditional appointment.
 10. The board of education shall upon commencement and termination of
employment of an employee by the school district, provide the
commissioner with the name of and position held by such employee.
 11. Where the district has provided transportation to students
enrolled in such district to a school sponsored field trip,
extracurricular activity or any other similar event, it shall provide
transportation back to either the point of departure or to the
appropriate school in the district, unless the parent or legal guardian
of a student participating in such event has provided the school
district with written notice, consistent with district policy,
authorizing an alternative form of return transportation for such
student or unless intervening circumstances make such transportation
impractical. In cases where intervening circumstances make
transportation of a student back to the point of departure or to the
appropriate school in the district impractical, a representative of the
school district shall remain with the student until such student's
parent or legal guardian has been (a) contacted and informed of the
intervening circumstances which make such transportation impractical and
(b) such student had been delivered to his or her parent or legal
guardian.
 12. Each central school district shall establish a process for
designating at least one student as an ex officio member pursuant to
paragraph c of this subdivision. If, prior to August fifth, two thousand
three, a school district had a policy that allowed a student or students
to be ex officio members of the school board, such policy shall be
deemed to meet the requirements of this subdivision and shall be deemed
to have full legal effect. In any district that contains more than one
high school, such process shall take into consideration the number of
high schools within the district and provide for a mechanism which
allows for fair representation among the schools. Such school district
shall allow such selected student or students to serve as ex officio
members of such district's board of education and provided further that:
 a. The ex officio student members of the board shall be entitled to
sit with board members at all public meetings and hearings of the board
and may participate in other board activities and responsibilities at
the discretion of the board.
 b. The ex officio student members of the board shall not be allowed to
vote, shall not be allowed to attend executive session or any other
meetings or hearings not open to the public, and shall not be entitled
to receive compensation of any form for participating at board meetings.
 c. Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, the ex officio
student members of the board may be any of the following: the student
that has been duly elected as student president of the high school; a
student duly elected by the student body; a student selected by the high
school student government; a student selected by the high school
principal; a student selected by the superintendent of schools; a
student selected by majority vote of the school board.
 d. The ex officio student members shall have attended such high school
for at least one year prior to selection.
 § 1805. Powers of central school district; officers of component
districts; transition state aid. All central school districts shall
have the same powers and be subject to the same limitations that are now
conferred or imposed by law upon union free school districts as provided
by this chapter. The district officers of the several existing
districts shall remain in office until August first next following
organization of such central school district for the purpose of
conducting and maintaining school in the several districts, the carrying
out of contracts in force at the time of the organization of such
central school district, of paying all just debts and obligations of
such existing districts due and payable on or prior to said August
first, and of levying and collecting taxes raised or necessary to be
raised for any of said purposes. For the purposes of the apportionment
and payment of public moneys, notwithstanding any other provisions of
this article, any apportionments and payments made during the school
year in which such central school district was organized shall be
apportioned and credited to the existing districts. Any apportionments
made and paid during the school year next succeeding the date of the
organization of such central school district shall be made and credited
to the central school district but the amounts thereof shall be
determined upon the basis of the continuance of the existing districts
as separate districts during the entire school year in which such
central school district was organized.
 § 1807. Transportation of school children. 1. The commissioner of
education shall have power in any such central school district to
require the payment by the district of such expense of transportation of
school children to and from the schools they legally attend within the
district as in his judgment such transportation is required because of
the remoteness of the school to the pupil or for the promotion of the
best interests of such children and the same shall be a charge upon the
district.
 2. In any part of the city school district of the city of Syracuse for
which transportation of school children is not provided and which the
board of education of such district shall have designated as an area
presenting a danger or hazard to school children walking to and from
school, such board may provide transportation for such school children
to and from the school they legally attend within the district and the
cost of such transportation shall be a charge upon the district.
 § 1809. Apportionment to central school districts containing former
central school districts. Whenever a new central school district shall
be laid out and organized out of territory including existing central
school districts, or whenever a central school district shall have
territory annexed to it including existing central school districts,
such central school district shall be entitled to receive the same
apportionments as it would have received had all the districts included
in the existing central school district or districts included in such
territory been originally laid out and organized as a central school
district; provided that the amount of the building quota or quotas if
any for each central school district included in such new central school
district or annexed to such central school district shall continue to be
paid to the new central school district or the central school district
to which such territory is annexed.
 ARTICLE 39
 CENTRAL HIGH SCHOOL DISTRICTS
Section 1901. Central high school districts; number and election of
 members of board of education.
 1902. Other districts may join central high school district.
 1903. Powers of board of education; laws applicable.
 1905. District treasurer and clerk; custody and disbursement
 of funds.
 1906. District meetings; vote upon school taxes.
 1907. Transportation of pupils.
 1908. Apportionment of expenses.
 1909. State aid.
 1910. Location of site or sites.
 1911. Acquisition of site and erection of building.
 1912. Formation of central high school districts in the county
 of Suffolk.
 1913. Laying out; referendum procedure.
 1914. Board of education; number and election.
 1915. Facilities; housing of program.
 1916. Superintendent status.
 1917. Employees; employment rights.
 1917-a. Employees; employment rights; creation of new central
 high school district.
 § 1901. Central high school districts; number and election of members
of board of education. 1. Existing central high school districts are
continued. Boards of education of such central high school districts
heretofore established shall continue as constituted under the order of
the commissioner. The number of their members shall be not less than
five. There shall be at least one member of such a board from each
common school district and at least two from each union free school
district within the central high school district. The board of education
of each union free school district in each such central high school
district shall appoint the number of persons so designated by the
commissioner to represent such district as members of the board of
education of such central high school district. In each common school
district having a sole trustee, such trustee shall represent such
district as a member of the board of education of such central high
school district. If a common school district have three trustees, such
board of trustees shall designate one of its members to represent such
district as a member of such board of education. The persons so
designated shall be members of the board of education of the central
high school district during their terms of office as members of the
board of education or as trustees of the districts respectively
represented by them. Whenever a vacancy shall occur in the office of a
member of the board of education of such central high school district,
it shall be filled as above provided.
 2. Each central high school district shall establish a process for
designating at least one student as an ex officio member pursuant to
paragraph c of this subdivision. If, prior to August fifth, two thousand
three, a school district had a policy that allowed a student or students
to be ex officio members of the school board, such policy shall be
deemed to meet the requirements of this subdivision and shall be deemed
to have full legal effect. In any district that contains more than one
high school, such process shall take into consideration the number of
high schools within the district and shall provide for a mechanism which
allows for fair representation among the schools. Such district shall
allow such selected student or students to serve as ex officio members
of such board of education, and provided further that:
 a. The ex officio student members of the board shall be entitled to
sit with board members at all public meetings and hearings of the board
and may participate in other board activities and responsibilities at
the discretion of the board.
 b. The ex officio student members of the board shall not be allowed to
vote, shall not be allowed to attend executive session or any other
meetings or hearings not open to the public, and shall not be entitled
to receive compensation of any form for participating at board meetings.
 c. Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, the ex officio
student members of the board may be any of the following: the student
that has been duly elected as student president of the high school; a
student duly elected by the student body; a student selected by the high
school student government; a student selected by the high school
principal; a student selected by the superintendent of schools; a
student selected by majority vote of the school board.
 d. The ex officio student members shall have attended such high school
for at least one year prior to selection.
 § 1902. Other districts may join central high school district. Other
school districts that were not included in the establishment of the
original central high school district may join such district upon a vote
of the majority of the electors of such district present and voting at a
district meeting duly called for that purpose and upon the consent of
the board of education of the central high school district and the order
of the commissioner of education.
 § 1903. Powers of board of education; laws applicable. 1. The board of
education of a central high school district shall have jurisdiction over
the pupils residing therein who have completed the work of the sixth
grade and shall have the same powers and duties in respect to the school
therein as a board of education of a union free school district has,
under this chapter, in respect to the schools in such district. Except
as otherwise provided in this article, the provisions of this chapter as
to the courses of study, the qualifications and employment of teachers
and the maintenance, conduct and supervision of public schools in union
free school districts shall apply to a central high school district.
 2. Where the district has provided transportation to students enrolled
in such district to a school sponsored field trip, extracurricular
activity or any other similar event, it shall provide transportation
back to either the point of departure or to the appropriate school in
the district, unless the parent or legal guardian of a student
participating in such event has provided the school district with
written notice, consistent with district policy, authorizing an
alternative form of return transportation for such student or unless
intervening circumstances make such transportation impractical. In cases
where intervening circumstances make transportation of a student back to
the point of departure or to the appropriate school in the district
impractical, a representative of the school district shall remain with
the student until such student's parent or legal guardian has been (a)
contacted and informed of the intervening circumstances which make such
transportation impractical and (b) such student had been delivered to
his or her parent or legal guardian.
 § 1905. District treasurer and clerk; custody and disbursement of
funds. The board of education of a central high school district shall
appoint a treasurer, who shall hold office during the pleasure of the
board and shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter relative to
the treasurer of a union free school district. The amount raised by tax
in the several districts included within the central high school
district for the support and maintenance of such central high school,
shall be paid to the treasurer of such central high school district and
shall be paid out by him upon the orders of the board of education
issued and executed in pursuance of a resolution of said board. The
provisions of this chapter relative to the payment of claims against a
union free school district shall apply, so far as practicable, to the
payment of claims against a central high school district. The board of
education of such district may appoint one of its members or a qualified
elector of such district as clerk of the district.
 § 1906. District meetings; vote upon school taxes. 1. The annual
meeting and election of a central high school district shall be held on
the third Tuesday in May, provided, however, that such annual meeting
and election shall be held on the second Tuesday in May if the
commissioner at the request of a local school board certifies no later
than March first that such election would conflict with religious
observances, and any school budget revote shall be held on the date
specified in subdivision three of section two thousand seven of this
title. The board of education of every central high school district
shall hold a budget hearing prior to each annual meeting and election or
special district meeting at which a school budget vote will occur, and
shall prepare and present to the voters at such budget hearing a
proposed school district budget for the ensuing school year. Special
meetings may be called in the same manner and for the same purposes as
special meetings in union free school districts. Such meetings shall be
held for the same purposes and in the same manner, and be subject to the
same provisions of law, except as may be provided otherwise in
subdivision two of this section, as like meetings in union free school
districts, and all persons who are qualified electors of the school
districts included in such central high school district may vote at such
meetings.
 2. For any annual or special meeting the board of education may on its
own motion divide the central high school district into such number of
election districts as there shall be union free school districts within
the central high school district. The boundaries of such election
districts shall be coterminous with the boundaries of such union free
school districts. Such meetings shall be held so far as possible in the
public schoolhouse within each such election district designated by the
board of education. The schoolhouse or other place so designated for
each election district shall be stated in the notice of the meeting. The
legal voters present in each election district shall elect a chairman
and secretary and the chairman so elected shall appoint at least three
inspectors of election who shall canvass the result of the election in
such election district and prepare and sign a statement showing the
results of the voting. Each such statement shall be forthwith delivered
to the district clerk. The district clerk shall forthwith examine and
tabulate the statements and prepare a certificate of the combined
results of the voting, announce the result thereof and record the
certificate with the records of the meeting. The proceedings, in the
event of such division, in all other respects shall be the same as if
the school meeting were held in one place.
 3. The board of education of such district shall present at the annual
meeting a detailed statement in writing of the estimated expenditures
required for the support and maintenance of the central high school
therein for the ensuing year. The said meeting shall vote the necessary
taxes to meet such expenditures, in the same manner as taxes are voted
at a district meeting in a union free school district. The provisions of
sections seventeen hundred twenty-five and seventeen hundred sixteen to
seventeen hundred nineteen, inclusive, of this chapter, and all other
provisions relative to the making of appropriations, the voting of
taxes, and the expenditure of moneys for the support, maintenance and
expenses of public schools in union free school districts, shall apply
to the support, maintenance, and expenses of a central high school
district.
 4. a. Whenever the board of education of a central high school
district in the county of Nassau shall have provided for the personal
registration of voters at school meetings or elections in such district,
such board of education shall fix the day or days for registration by
resolution adopted not later than the fortieth day preceding each annual
or special meeting or election in such district. The last day for such
registration shall not be more than eleven nor less than three days
preceding each annual or special meeting or election. Such board shall
forthwith notify the clerk of each component union free school district
providing for personal registration, of such registration day or days
for each annual meeting. Such board shall also notify each such clerk of
every special meeting or election in such central high school district
at least ten days prior thereto. The board of registration of the
central high school district shall meet on the day or days fixed by such
board of education for the purpose of preparing a register,
complementary to the register or registers of any component union free
school district providing for personal registration, for the personal
registration of qualified voters within any component union free school
district providing for personal registration, which voters have not
registered for the annual or any subsequent special meeting or election
in such union free school district, and for the personal registration of
qualified voters of any component union free school district not
providing for personal registration.
 b. Whenever personal registration of voters shall have been provided
for in any such central high school district, any qualified voter of a
component union free school district who is duly registered in such
union free school district for the annual meeting or a subsequent
special meeting or election therein, shall be deemed duly registered for
and entitled to vote at the annual meeting or any special meeting or
election in such central high school district occurring between the date
of such registration and the next ensuing annual meeting.
 c. Whenever the board of education of such central high school
district shall have so provided for registration of voters, the board of
education of any component union free school district in such central
high school district, which board of education shall have provided or
shall provide for personal registration of voters at school meetings or
elections of such union free school district, shall designate the day or
days for registration so that the last day for such registration shall
not be more than eleven nor less than five days preceding each such
school meeting. In designating the day or days of registration for the
annual meeting such board shall include the day or days which shall have
been theretofore designated by the board of education of the central
high school district as the registration day or days for the annual
meeting of the central high school district. The register prepared in
such union free school district, in addition to complying with the
requirements of subdivision two of section two thousand fourteen of this
chapter, shall include columns or space to make the proper entries
relating to any annual or special central high school district meeting
or election. Such register shall be delivered by the clerk of such union
free school district to the custody of the clerk of the central high
school district on the day preceding the meeting or election of the
central high school district at which it is to be used. It shall be
returned to the clerk of the union free school district on the day
following such meeting or election. Such register shall at all
reasonable times be open to inspection by any qualified voter of the
central high school district, even though in the possession of the clerk
of such union free school district.
 d. The provisions of sections two thousand four, two thousand fourteen
and two thousand fifteen of this chapter shall be applicable in any
central high school district providing for personal registration, except
as otherwise provided in this subdivision.
 e. Nothing contained in this subdivision shall be deemed to require
the board of education of any component union free school district to
provide for personal registration of voters for meetings or elections in
such union free school district.
 5. a. The board of education of a central high school district in the
county of Nassau, which has provided for the personal registration of
voters at school meetings and elections in such central high school
district, may, by resolution duly adopted and entered upon its minutes,
on its own motion divide the central high school district into election
districts. The boundaries of such election districts shall be
coterminous with the boundaries of the union free school districts
within the central high school district, except that where a component
union free school district, in turn, shall have been or hereafter is
divided into school election districts pursuant to section two thousand
seventeen of this chapter, such school election districts of such union
free school districts shall in such case, without further action of the
board of education of the central high school district, become and be
election districts of the central high school district.
 b. Where the board of education shall have so divided the central high
school district into election districts pursuant to the provisions of
this subdivision, notwithstanding the provisions of subdivisions one and
three of this section, the vote upon the appropriation of the necessary
funds to meet the estimated expenditures of the central high school
district and upon any propositions involving the expenditure of money by
the central high school district or upon any other matter which may
properly be brought before the annual meeting or election of the central
high school district, shall be held at the same time as the annual
meetings or elections of the component union free school districts. The
clerk of the central high school district shall give the notices
required by subdivision one of section two thousand four of this
chapter, in relation to such annual meeting.
 c. Where the procedure of this subdivision is used, the board of
education of the central high school district shall notify the clerk of
each component union free school district of such determination, not
later than thirty days preceding the date of such annual meeting. In
such case, also, the board of education of the central high school
district shall complete the statement required by section seventeen
hundred sixteen of this chapter and shall forward a sufficient number of
copies thereof to the clerk of each component union free school district
therein, not later than ten days preceding such annual meeting or
election, and such copies shall thereupon be made available by the clerk
of each such component union free school district, together with the
copies of the statement relating to such component union free school
district, provided, however, that an additional supply of copies of such
statement shall also be made available to the annual meeting of the
central high school district by the clerk of such district.
 d. Each clerk of a component union free school district shall
thereupon include in the notices required by section two thousand four
of this chapter, relating to the annual meeting or election in such
component union free school district, a statement to the effect that the
meeting or election will also vote on the appropriation of the necessary
funds to meet the estimated expenditures of the central high school
district and upon any propositions involving the expenditure of moneys
by the central high school district or upon any other matter which may
be properly brought before the annual meeting or election of the central
high school district. Such appropriation and propositions, if any, shall
then appear separately upon the ballot or voting machines used at such
meetings or elections in such component union free school districts. The
canvass of the result of the vote on each such appropriation and
proposition relating to the central high school district shall forthwith
be certified to the clerk of each such component union free school
district, who in turn shall forthwith certify such canvass to the clerk
of the central high school district. Such clerk shall forthwith examine
and tabulate such statements and prepare a certificate of the combined
results of the vote, announce the result thereof to the board of
education of the central high school district and record the certificate
with the records of the meeting or election.
 e. Where the board of education of a central high school district
proceeds under the provisions of this subdivision, the registration of a
qualified voter of a component union free school district upon the
register of such union free school district shall be a sufficient
registration for the purpose of the vote of such voter on the
appropriation and propositions of the central high school district.
 f. When the board of education of such central high school district
calls a special meeting or election of such central high school
district, the respective boards of registration of the component union
free school districts shall meet on such day or days as shall be fixed
by the board of education of the central high school district and the
provisions of section two thousand fourteen of this chapter shall be
applicable to the registration for special meetings or elections of the
central high school district, except as otherwise provided in this
subdivision. The canvass of the result of the voting at such special
meeting or election shall forthwith be certified to the clerk of the
central high school district who shall forthwith proceed in the same
manner as hereinbefore provided in the case of an annual meeting or
election.
 g. If voting machines are used in any component union free school
district of such central high school district, the rules printed and
distributed pursuant to section two thousand thirty-five of this chapter
in such union free school district shall also contain the rules
similarly adopted or to be adopted by the board of education of the
central high school district with respect to any propositions relating
to such central high school district.
 h. All the provisions of articles thirty-nine and forty-one of this
chapter shall be applicable to any annual or special meeting or election
held pursuant to this subdivision, except as otherwise provided in this
subdivision either expressly or by necessary implication.
 i. Upon an appeal to the commissioner of education, substantial
compliance with the procedures herein required shall be sufficient to
meet the intent of this subdivision.
 6. The provisions of this section shall not apply with respect to any
person registered to vote pursuant to the provisions of section three
hundred fifty-two of the election law.
 § 1907. Transportation of pupils. The board of education of such
central high school district may cause transportation to be furnished to
the pupils residing in the district who are entitled to attend such
central high school or other public or non-public high school within the
central high school district and who reside so remote from the high
school they legally attend that they will be deprived of the privilege
of attendance thereat unless such transportation is furnished. The cost
of such transportation shall be a charge against such central high
school district and shall be raised by tax without a vote of the
district and be paid in the same manner as are any expenditures for the
support and maintenance of such central high school district. The
commissioner of education may, upon sufficient notice to such board of
education and after an opportunity to such board to be heard in its
defense, issue an order directing such board to provide such
transportation.
 § 1908. Apportionment of expenses. 1. The board of education of such
central high school district shall cause to be apportioned among the
school districts included in such central high school district the
amount required for the payment of the principal and interest of all
obligations issued for the purchase or acquisition of a school site, the
erection thereon of a new school building and the construction of
improvements and other structures on such site, and for the payment of
the authorized expenditures for the maintenance, support and expenses of
such high school during the ensuing school year. There shall be
apportioned to each such district such portion of such amount as the
assessed valuation of the taxable property in such district bears to the
total assessed valuation of all the school districts included in such
central high school district, as appears from the last preceding
assessment roll. The board of education of such central high school
district shall on or before July first of each year present to the board
of education of each union free school district and to the trustee or
board of trustees of each common school district in such central high
school district a certified statement of the portion of such amount to
be paid by each of such districts, except that in a central high school
district where the board of education has by resolution pursuant to
section nineteen hundred six determined that the annual meeting of such
central high school district shall be held on the last Tuesday in April,
and where the annual meeting has been so held, the board of education of
such central high school district must present the above mentioned
certified statement in the manner above set out on or before May tenth
of each year, and the said boards of education, boards of trustees or
trustees shall cause the same to be raised by tax on the taxable
property in such districts in the same manner as other taxes for the
support and maintenance of the schools therein.
 2. The board of education of a central high school district in the
county of Westchester shall present such certified statements to the
board of education of each union free school district and to the
trustees or board of trustees of each common school district in such
central high school district on or before the third Tuesday in June each
year, and such boards of education, boards of trustees or trustees shall
include such amount in the annual school taxes of such districts and
certify the same to the supervisor of the town before July first each
year as provided in the laws applicable to such county.
 3. The board of education or the trustees of each school district
within and forming a part of such central high school district situate
within the county of Nassau, within ten days after receipt of any
payment of moneys raised by taxation as determined by the school
district assessment roll, shall pay or cause to be paid over to the
treasurer of such central high school district a sum of money not less
than an amount which bears the same ratio to such payment received by
the said board of education or trustees as such school district's share
of the central high school budget bears to the total budget of such
school district.
 § 1909. State aid. 1. Public moneys shall be apportioned to such
central high school district on account of the central high school
maintained therein, in the same amount and under the same conditions as
in the case of apportionments to union free school districts on account
of secondary instruction given in the public schools of such districts,
under the provisions of this chapter. There shall be apportioned to such
central high school district the amounts allowed by section two thousand
forty-five of this chapter for the instruction of non-resident academic
pupils, on account of pupils attending the high school in such central
high school district from a district or districts included in such
central high school district not maintaining an academic department at
the time of the establishment of such district.
 2. Any state aid representing tax savings duly provided by a component
school district of the central high school district pursuant to section
thirteen hundred six-a of the real property tax law for taxes levied to
fund expenditures of the central high school district shall be claimed
by such component school district pursuant to subdivision three of
section thirteen hundred six-a of the real property tax law, and any
resulting payment of state aid to the component school district based on
such tax savings shall be paid by the component school district, within
ten days after receipt of such payment, over to the treasurer of such
central high school district in an amount equal to the product of the
total payment received by such component school district for all tax
savings provided pursuant to section thirteen hundred six-a of the real
property tax law multiplied by the quotient of the tax savings provided
for taxes levied to fund expenditures of the central high school
district divided by the total tax savings duly provided by such
component school district pursuant to section thirteen hundred six-a of
the real property law.
 § 1910. Location of site or sites. The board of education of such
central high school district shall designate the site or sites for one
or more central high school buildings in such district or for any other
school purpose by resolution containing a description thereof by metes
and bounds. If such board of education is unable to agree as to the
selection of such site or sites, or shall for any reason neglect or
refuse to designate such site or sites, the commissioner of education
may upon submission of the question to him, after a hearing and due
investigation, issue an order determining the location of such site or
sites.
 § 1911. Acquisition of site and erection of building. 1. The board of
education of a central high school district shall, when the site of the
said high school building shall have been designated as provided herein,
submit to the qualified electors of such district a proposition
authorizing the levy and collection of a tax, in one sum or by
installments, sufficient in amount for the purchase or acquisition of
such site.
 2. The said board of education shall also submit to the qualified
electors of the said central high school district a proposition
authorizing the levy and collection of a tax, in one sum or in
installments, for the erection on such site of a new building suitable
for high school purposes and for the construction of such improvements
or structures on such site as may be required for the establishment and
maintenance of a high school in such district.
 3. Such propositions shall be voted upon by the qualified electors of
the district at a meeting called by the board of education of such
central high school district, and for the purpose of voting upon such
propositions the said district shall be deemed to be a school district
and the provisions of this chapter relative to district meetings and the
adoption of propositions authorizing the levy of school taxes shall
apply to meetings held in such central high school district for the
purposes herein specified.
 § 1912. Formation of central high school districts in the county of
Suffolk. A central high school district may be formed by the
combination of two or more central, union free or common school
districts in the county of Suffolk. The territory shall be contiguous.
 § 1913. Laying out; referendum procedure. 1. The commissioner is
authorized to lay out a central high school district for the
establishment and maintenance of instruction for secondary pupils in
grades seven through twelve and to fix its boundaries.
 2. Within ten days after the making and entry of the order pursuant to
this section, the commissioner shall transmit a certified copy thereof
to the clerk, or in the event there is no clerk, to the trustee or
trustees of each school district affected by such order. The clerk, the
trustee or trustees, as the case may be, shall, within five days after
receipt of such order, post a copy thereof in five conspicuous places in
such district.
 3. No central high school district laid out by order of the
commissioner shall operate as such until it has been established by the
qualified voters of the district in accordance with the provisions of
this article.
 4. Upon the request of the boards of education of two or more school
districts involved, or upon the receipt of petitions representing
qualified voters equal to ten percent of resident school age pupils from
each of a majority of the districts to be included, the commissioner
shall order a referendum to be conducted in each of the districts
included in the proposed reorganization. The conduct of such referenda
shall be consistent with the provisions of sections eighteen hundred
one, eighteen hundred two, eighteen hundred three and eighteen hundred
four of this chapter, except as specifically provided in this article.
If the resolution to establish the central high school district is
passed in all of the districts, the central high school district shall
be established as laid out. If the proposition to establish the central
high school district shall fail to receive a majority of the votes cast
in any district, the order laying out such central high school district
shall be deemed void. However, nothing herein contained shall prevent
the commissioner from issuing a new order and ordering a vote in
districts in which a resolution shall have received a majority of the
votes cast. An order defeated at the polls may not be reissued for two
years. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of law, upon consent
of the commissioner and each of the boards of education of the school
districts involved, there may also be offered before the qualified
voters of all the districts, at the same time as the referendum to form
a central high school district, a bond referendum for the construction
of a new high school to serve as the central high school of the new
central high school district, provided, however, that if either
referendum shall fail to gain approval, both shall be deemed to have
failed and provided, further, that the boards of education of the school
districts involved shall submit the proposition and that such
proposition shall be deemed to have been submitted by the board of
education of the newly formed central high school district. The board of
education of the central high school district subsequently formed shall
be authorized to carry out all acts necessary to effectuate such
construction, and such board shall be deemed to have assumed full
authority to take all action necessary and to proceed with all other
business to establish the central high school district and to enter into
any and all contracts, including but not limited to construction
contracts, and be eligible for any and all state aid and state aid
reimbursement pursuant to subdivision six and paragraph c of subdivision
fourteen of section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter, provided
that the percent increase pursuant to such paragraph c shall be thirty,
and shall be in effect for expenditures incurred on or after the date
upon which a bond referendum for the construction of a new high school
to serve as the central high school of the new central high school
district is offered before the qualified voters of the district.
 § 1914. Board of education; number and election. For any central high
school district formed on or after July first, nineteen hundred
eighty-one, the order of the commissioner establishing such central high
school district shall specify the number of members to constitute the
board of education of such district and the number of members
representing each of the districts included in such district. The number
of members of such board shall be not less than five. There shall be at
least one member of such board from each component school district. The
board of education of each union free school district or central school
district in such central high school district shall appoint the number
of persons so designated by the commissioner to represent such district
as members of the board of education thereof. In each common school
district having a sole trustee, such trustee shall represent such
district as a member of the board of education of such central high
school district. If a common school district has three trustees, such
board of trustees shall designate one of its members to represent such
district as a member of such board of education. The persons so
designated shall be members of the board of education of the central
high school district during their terms of office as members of the
board of education or as trustees of the districts respectively
represented by them. Whenever a vacancy shall occur in the office of a
member of the board of education of such central high school district,
it shall be filled as above provided; except that each component school
district may choose to fill vacancies from its district on the central
high school district board by election.
 § 1915. Facilities; housing of program. 1. The board of education may
lease existing buildings within a territory of the central high school
district from a component district or, if authorized by the voters of a
central high school district, construct, purchase or otherwise acquire
land and buildings for school purposes.
 2. The board of education of such central high school district shall
designate the site or sites for one or more high school buildings in
such district or for any other school purpose by resolution containing a
description thereof by metes and bounds.
 § 1916. Superintendent status. A central high school district will be
considered for eligibility for independent superintendency status under
criteria established by the commissioner.
 § 1917. Employees; employment rights. Teachers and other staff
members of component districts, except the superintendent of schools,
whose services in the component districts are no longer needed because
of creation of a central high school district, shall be granted
employment rights in central high school districts in accordance with
length of service in each tenure area.
 § 1917-a. Employees; employment rights; creation of new central high
school district. 1. Teachers and other staff members of component
districts, except the superintendent of schools, whose services in the
component districts are no longer needed because of the creation of a
central high school district or the transference of students to an
existing central high school district, shall be granted employment
rights in central high school districts in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
 2. As used in this section, a "component district" shall mean a
central, union free or common school district within the territory of
the central high school district, and a "central high school district"
shall mean a central high school district existing or created pursuant
to this article.
 3. In any case in which a component district sends students to a
central high school district, each teacher and all other employees
previously employed in the education of such students by such component
district prior to the time that such component district sends its
students to a central high school district shall be considered employees
of such central high school district, with the same tenure status held
in such component district.
 For purposes of this section, when a component district takes back
students that it sent to another district on a tuition basis and sends
such students to a central high school district, such central high
school district shall be deemed the "sending district" for purposes of
the rights and protections provided in section three thousand fourteen-c
of this chapter.
 4. If the number of teaching and other positions needed to provide the
educational services required by such central high school district is
less than the number of teachers and other employees eligible to be
considered employees of such central high school district as provided by
subdivision three of this section, the services of the teachers and
other employees having the least seniority in the component district
within the tenure area of the position shall be discontinued. Such
teachers and other employees shall be placed on a preferred eligible
list of candidates for appointment to a vacancy that may thereafter
occur in an office or position under the jurisdiction of the component
district, the "receiving district" as defined in section three thousand
fourteen-c of this chapter, from which a component district has taken
back students, and the central high school district similar to the one
such teacher or other employee filled in such component district. The
teachers and other employees on such preferred lists shall be reinstated
or appointed to such vacancies in such corresponding or similar
positions under the jurisdiction of the component district or the
central high school district in the order of their length of service in
such component district, within seven years from the date of the
abolition of such office or position.
 5. For any such teacher or other employee as described in subdivision
three of this section for salary, sick leave and any other purposes, the
length of service credited in such component district shall be credited
as employment time with such central high school district.
 6. This section shall in no way be construed to limit the rights of
any of such teachers or other employees described in this section
granted by any other provision of law.
 ARTICLE 40
 BOARDS OF COOPERATIVE EDUCATIONAL SERVICES
Section 1950. Establishment of boards of cooperative educational
 services pending the creation of intermediate districts.
 1951. Budget of board of cooperative educational services.
 1952. Technologies network ties program.
 § 1950. Establishment of boards of cooperative educational services
pending the creation of intermediate districts. 1. The boards of
education and school trustees of a supervisory district which is not
part of an intermediate district, meeting at a time and place to be
designated by the district superintendent of schools, may, by a majority
vote of their members present and voting, file with the commissioner of
education a petition for the establishment of a board of cooperative
educational services for the purpose of carrying out a program of shared
educational services in the schools of the supervisory district and for
providing instruction in such special subjects as the commissioner may
approve. The commissioner, by order, may establish such a board with
membership of not less than five nor more than fifteen, upon such
application and when a vacancy occurs in the office of district
superintendent of schools shall establish such a board, unless the
commissioner shall issue an order pursuant to section twenty-two hundred
one redistricting the county so as to provide for a lesser number of
supervisory districts. The commissioner, by order, may authorize a
board, established prior to July second, nineteen hundred sixty-five, to
increase its membership to not less than five nor more than fifteen.
 2. Upon the establishment by the commissioner of such a board, boards
of education and school trustees, by a vote pursuant to subdivision
two-a of this section shall elect a board of cooperative educational
services. Except for elections conducted pursuant to subdivision two-a
of this section, and the adoption of a public resolution regarding the
approval or disapproval of the tentative administrative budget pursuant
to subparagraph five of paragraph b of subdivision four of this section,
component districts having more than five board of education members
shall be limited to five votes on any matters relating to the district
superintendency or board of cooperative educational services. A full
term shall be three years to serve from July first next following
election. It shall be the duty of such meeting by order of such meeting
to divide into a sufficient number of classes the terms of the members
of the board of cooperative educational services so that as nearly as
possible an equal number of members shall be elected to the board each
year. Notwithstanding any other provision of this subdivision, upon the
decrease of the full term of members from five to three years, the board
of cooperative educational services shall direct that one or more
members be elected for a term of one, two or four years in order to
assure, as nearly as possible, that an equal number of members will be
elected to the board each year. Members of such board shall be
reimbursed for necessary expenses for attending meetings of such boards.
The district superintendent shall be the executive officer of the board,
and where a board of cooperative educational services comprises two or
more supervisory districts the district superintendents, together with
the president of the board of cooperative educational services, shall
act as an executive committee.
 2-a. a. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, commencing on and
after the first day of November, nineteen hundred ninety-three, the
members of a board of cooperative educational services shall be elected
in accordance with the provisions of this subdivision.
 b. Not later than the first day of February of each year the president
of the board of cooperative educational services shall designate a
single date on or after the sixteenth day and on or before the thirtieth
day of April on which each component board, other than the board of
education of a central high school district, shall conduct a public
meeting which may be a regular or special meeting, for the purpose of
electing members of the board of cooperative educational services and
adopting a public resolution concerning the approval or disapproval of
the tentative administrative budget. In the case of a central high
school district, such public meeting shall be held on the regular
business day next following the date designated by the president of the
board of cooperative educational services. Nomination of a person to be
elected to a board of cooperative educational services shall be made by
at least one component district by board resolution. Such resolution
shall be transmitted in writing to the clerk of the board of cooperative
educational services at least thirty days prior to the date of the
election as designated by the president of the board of cooperative
educational services. No nomination of a person to be elected to a board
of cooperative educational services from a component district which
currently has a resident serving on such board shall be accepted unless
such member's office is to expire at the end of the current year, unless
the size of such board exceeds the number of component school districts
or unless an unrepresented district declines to make a nomination. For
purposes of this subdivision, any such person or board member nominated
by a special act school district, a central high school district or any
district which is a component of a central high school district shall be
deemed a resident of the district that nominated him or her only.
Furthermore, it shall be the duty of the board of cooperative
educational services to encourage the nomination of persons residing in
component districts not currently represented on such board. The clerk
shall include the name and address of each person nominated on the
election ballot to be distributed in accordance with paragraph c of this
subdivision.
 c. Members of the boards of cooperative educational services shall be
elected by resolution of the component boards on a ballot prepared by
the clerk of the board of cooperative educational services. Such ballot
shall be mailed to each component district no later than fourteen days
prior to the date designated as the day of the election by the president
of the board of cooperative educational services. Each component
district shall be entitled to one vote for each vacant office to be
filled. A component board may not cast more than one vote for any
candidate. The candidates receiving a plurality of the votes cast for
the several offices shall be elected, provided, however, that no more
than one person residing in a particular component district may be
elected to serve as a member of a board of cooperative educational
services at one time unless the number of seats on such board exceeds
the number of component districts or unless an unrepresented district
declines to make a nomination, provided further that a person nominated
by a special act school district, a central high school district or a
component of a central high school district shall be deemed a resident
of the nominating district only for this purpose. Where more than one
position is to be filled by such election and there is a variance in the
length of the terms for which such offices are to be filled as
authorized by this subdivision, or one or more persons are to be elected
for a full term or terms and one or more persons are to be elected for
the unexpired portion of a term or terms, or both, the candidate
receiving the greatest number of votes shall be entitled to the longest
term and candidates receiving the next highest number of votes, to the
several offices in decreasing order of the length of such terms or
unexpired portions of such terms. Each component school district shall
mail or deliver its completed ballot to the clerk of the board of
cooperative educational services no later than one business day after
the election.
 d. In the event that more eligible persons than the number remaining
to be elected receive an equal number of votes sufficient that fewer
persons receiving such number of votes would be elected, the president
of the board of cooperative educational services shall call a run-off
election to be conducted in accordance with the provisions of paragraph
c of this subdivision and to be held on a date within twenty days of the
initial vote. The only persons who shall be deemed nominated for such
run-off election shall be the candidates who have received such equal
number of votes. In the event that equal numbers of votes are received
by eligible candidates for offices with a variance in the length of the
term of office but the number of votes received by such candidates is
sufficient to elect each of the candidates to the board of cooperative
educational services, the candidates receiving such equal number of
votes shall draw lots to determine who of them shall fill each such
office.
 e. Notwithstanding any other provision of this subdivision to the
contrary, in the event a component school district will be transferred
to a new supervisory district as of July first next succeeding the date
designated for the annual election of the board of cooperative
educational services, and such component district, as of April fifteenth
of the current year, does not have a resident who is a member of the
board of cooperative educational services of the supervisory district of
which it is a component in the current year, such component district
shall be eligible to nominate candidates and vote in the annual board
election of the boards of cooperative educational services to which the
component district will be transferred, as if such transfer had already
occurred.
 f. In the event of a vacancy in the membership of a board of
cooperative educational services, such board of cooperative educational
services may fill such vacancy by appointment, provided that
notification be provided to all component boards of such vacancy and
that the component boards are given ten days to provide any comments
and/or objections to fill the vacancy by appointment, and the person so
appointed shall hold office until the next annual election of the board
of cooperative educational services.
 2-b. Where the commissioner of education has established or hereafter
establishes a board of cooperative educational services for the purpose
of carrying out a program of shared educational services in the schools
of two or more supervisory districts, the commissioner may by order
designate the number of members of such board which shall not be less
than five nor more than fifteen, or may by order increase the number of
members of such board to a maximum of fifteen or decrease the number of
members to a minimum of five. Except for elections conducted pursuant to
subdivision two-a of this section, and the adoption of a public
resolution regarding the approval or disapproval of the tentative
administrative budget pursuant to subparagraph five of paragraph b of
subdivision four of this section, component districts having more than
five board of education members shall be limited to five votes on any
matters relating to the district superintendency or board of cooperative
educational services.
 Boards of education and school trustees, shall elect the members of
such board of cooperative educational services pursuant to subdivision
two-a of this section. A full term shall be three years to serve from
July first next following election. It shall be the duty of such meeting
by order of such meeting to divide into a sufficient number of classes
the terms of the members of the board of cooperative educational
services so that as nearly as possible an equal number of members shall
be elected to the board each year. Notwithstanding any other provision
of this subdivision, upon the decrease of the full term of members from
five to three years, the board of cooperative educational services shall
direct that one or more members be elected for a term of one, two or
four years in order to assure, as nearly as possible, that an equal
number of members will be elected to the board each year. Members of
boards of cooperative educational services shall be reimbursed for
necessary expenses for attending meetings of such board. Where the board
of cooperative educational services comprises two or more supervisory
districts, the district superintendents, together with the president of
the board of cooperative educational services, shall act as an executive
committee.
 2-c. a. Each board of cooperative educational services shall have one
or more ex officio student members. Supervisory districts with ten or
fewer component districts shall have at least one ex officio student
member; supervisory districts with more than ten and fewer than or equal
to twenty component districts shall have at least two ex officio student
members; and supervisory districts with more than twenty component
districts shall have at least three ex officio student members.
 b. Each supervisory district shall establish a process for determining
which component district or districts shall select the ex officio
student members each school year. Such process shall take into
consideration the number of component districts within the supervisory
district and provide for a mechanism which allows for fair
representation among the component districts. Each supervisory district
shall also establish a process by which such component district or
districts shall select the ex officio student member or members,
provided that such members shall be students who have attended a high
school within their component district for at least one year and who
participate in a program administered by the supervisory district.
 c. The ex officio student members of the board shall be entitled to
sit with board members at all public meetings and hearings of the board
and may participate in other board activities and responsibilities at
the discretion of the board.
 d. The ex officio student members of the board shall not be allowed to
vote, shall not be allowed to attend executive session or any other
meetings or hearings not open to the public, and shall not be entitled
to receive compensation of any form for participating at board meetings.
 3. The boards of cooperative educational services in any two or more
supervisory districts may cooperate in the provision of any of the
services authorized by subdivision four of this section. In such cases,
the district superintendents of the respective supervisory districts
shall serve as an executive committee to carry out the decision of the
boards of cooperative educational services in their respective
districts. Agreements may be made by such boards arranging for such
cooperative services on such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon
and providing the method of allocation of the cost thereof. Such
agreements may be made for such period as may be approved by the
commissioner but not to exceed ten years. The terms of such agreement
shall be binding upon such boards and their component districts for the
period specified in such agreement.
 4. The board of cooperative educational services shall have the power
and duty to:
 a. (1) Appoint a district superintendent of schools in the manner
provided in section twenty-two hundred four of this chapter, and in its
discretion to provide for the payment of supplementary salary to the
district superintendent of schools by the supervisory district. The term
of any employment contract or agreement between a district
superintendent and the board of cooperative educational services that is
entered into or amended on or after the effective date of this
subparagraph shall not exceed three years. Copies of employment
contracts and amendments to such contracts entered into pursuant to this
paragraph shall be filed with the commissioner within five days of
execution.
 (2) Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of law in no event
shall the total salary including amounts paid pursuant to section
twenty-two hundred nine of this chapter for district superintendents for
the two thousand nineteen--two thousand twenty school year or any
subsequent school year exceed: (i) one hundred six percent of the salary
cap applicable in the preceding school year, or (ii) ninety-eight
percent of that earned by the commissioner in the two thousand
thirteen--two thousand fourteen state fiscal year, whichever is less. In
no event shall any district superintendent be permitted to accumulate
vacation or sick leave credits in excess of the vacation and sick leave
credits managerial/confidential employees of the state are permitted to
accumulate pursuant to regulations promulgated by the state civil
service commission, nor may any district superintendent at the time of
separation from service be compensated for accrued and unused vacation
credits or sick leave, or use accrued and unused sick leave for
retirement service credit or to pay for health insurance in retirement,
at a rate in excess of the rate permitted to managerial/confidential
employees of the state pursuant to regulations of the state civil
service commission. In addition to the payment of supplementary salary,
a board of cooperative educational services may provide for the payment
of all or a portion of the cost of insurance benefits for the district
superintendent of schools, including but not limited to health
insurance, disability insurance, life insurance or any other form of
insurance benefit made available to managerial/confidential employees of
the state; provided that any such payments for whole life, split dollar
or other life insurance policies having a cash value shall be included
in the total salary of the district superintendent for purposes of this
subparagraph, and provided further that any payments for the employee
contribution, co-pay or uncovered medical expenses under a health
insurance plan also shall be included in the total salary of the
district superintendent. Notwithstanding any other provision of law,
payments for such insurance benefits may be based on the district
superintendent's total salary or the amount of his or her supplementary
salary only. Any payments for transportation or travel expenses in
excess of actual, documented expenses incurred in the performance of
duties for the board of cooperative educational services or the state,
and any other lump sum payment not specifically excluded from total
salary pursuant to this subparagraph, shall be included in the total
salary of the district superintendent for purposes of this subparagraph.
Nothing herein shall prohibit a district superintendent from waiving any
rights provided for in an existing contract or agreement as hereafter
prohibited in favor of revised compensation or benefit provisions as
permitted herein. In no event shall the terms of the district
superintendent's contract, including any provisions relating to an
increase in salary, compensation or other benefits, be contingent upon
the terms of any contract or collective bargaining agreement between the
board of cooperative educational services and its teachers or other
employees. The commissioner may adopt regulations for the purpose of
implementing the provisions of this paragraph.
 (3) Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, any employee
of a board of cooperative educational services who is appointed as the
district superintendent of schools shall vacate his or her prior
position with the board of cooperative educational services upon
appointment as district superintendent, and no district superintendent
shall have a contract of employment with the board of cooperative
educational services other than a contract entered pursuant to this
paragraph.
 b. (1) Prepare, prior to the annual meeting of members of the boards
of education and school trustees, held as provided in paragraph o of
this subdivision, a tentative budget of expenditures for the program
costs, a tentative budget for capital costs, and a tentative budget for
the administration costs of the board of cooperative educational
services. Such budgets shall include the proposed budget for the
upcoming school year, the previous school year's actual costs and the
current school year's projected costs for each object of expenditure.
Such program, capital and administrative budgets shall be separately
delineated in accordance with the definition of program, capital and
administrative costs which shall be promulgated by the commissioner
after consultation with school district officials and the director of
the budget. Personal service costs for each budget shall include the
number of full-time equivalent positions funded and total salary and,
except as noted herein, fringe benefit costs for such positions by
program. Each program budget shall also include the local and statewide
unit costs of such programs and services proposed for the upcoming
school year, such actual unit costs for the previous school year, and
the current school year's projected unit costs, all established in
accordance with paragraph d of this subdivision. The capital budget
shall include facility construction and lease expenditures authorized
pursuant to paragraphs p, t and u of this subdivision, payments for the
repayment of indebtedness related to capital projects, payments for the
acquisition or construction of facilities, sites or additions, provided
that such budget shall contain a rental, operations and maintenance
section that will include base rent costs, total rent costs, operations
and maintenance charges, cost per square foot for each facility rented
or leased by such board of cooperative educational services, and any and
all expenditures associated with custodial salaries and benefits,
service contracts, supplies, utilities, maintenance and repairs for such
facilities, and that such budget shall include the annual debt service
and total debt for all facilities financed by bonds or notes of the
component districts, annual rental and lease payments and total rental
and lease costs for all facilities rented by such board; such capital
budget shall also include expenditures resulting from court judgments
and orders from administrative bodies or officers, and, to the extent a
board's administrative budget has been adopted, one-time costs incurred
in the first year in which an employee retires. The administrative
budget shall include, but need not be limited to, office and central
administrative expenses, traveling expenses and salaries and benefits of
supervisors and administrative personnel necessary to carry out the
central administrative duties of the supervisory district, any and all
expenditures associated with the board, the office of district
superintendent, general administration, central support services,
planning, and all other administrative activities. Such administrative
budget shall also specify the amount of supplementary salary and
benefits, if any, which the board determines should be paid to the
district superintendent of schools and the board shall append to such
budget a detailed statement of the total compensation to be paid the
district superintendent of schools by the board, including a delineation
of the salary, annualized cost of benefits and any in-kind or other form
of remuneration to be paid, plus, commencing with the presentation of
the budget for the nineteen hundred ninety-seven--ninety-eight school
year, a list of items of expense eligible for reimbursement on expense
accounts in the ensuing school year and a statement of the amount of
expenses paid to the district superintendent of schools in the prior
year for purposes of carrying out his or her official duties.
 (2) The board of cooperative educational services shall provide copies
of such tentative budgets and attachments to the trustees or board of
education of each component school district of the board of cooperative
educational services at least ten days prior to the annual meeting held
pursuant to paragraph o of this subdivision. Such trustees or boards of
education shall make such budgets available to the residents of their
respective school districts upon request.
 (3) The board of cooperative educational services shall comply with
any reasonable requests for additional information not contained in such
budgets which may be requested prior to the annual meeting held pursuant
to paragraph o of this subdivision.
 (4) The board of cooperative educational services shall give public
notice of the annual meeting held pursuant to paragraph o of this
subdivision by publishing a notice once each week within the two weeks
preceding the annual meeting held as provided in paragraph o of this
subdivision, the first publication to be at least fourteen days before
such meeting, in two newspapers if there be two, or in one newspaper if
there shall be but one, having general circulation within the board of
cooperative educational services. If no newspaper shall have general
circulation therein, said notice shall be posted in at least twenty of
the most public places in the board of cooperative educational services
at least fourteen days before such meeting. Such notice shall state that
the tentative budgets will be presented by the board of cooperative
educational services to the trustees or board of education of each
component school district of the board of cooperative educational
services in attendance at such meeting. Such notice shall also include a
summary of the tentative administrative, capital and program budgets in
a form prescribed by the commissioner. The summary of the administrative
budget shall include, but shall not be limited to, the salary and
benefits of supervisors and administrative personnel of the board of
cooperative educational services and the total compensation payable to
the district superintendent of schools. Such notice shall also indicate
when a copy of the tentative budgets will be available for inspection by
the public during regular business hours at one or more locations
specified in the notice.
 (5) The trustees or board of education of each component school
district of the board of cooperative educational services shall adopt a
public resolution which shall approve or disapprove such tentative
administrative budget at a regular or special meeting to be held within
the component district on the date designated pursuant to subdivision
two-a of this section as the date for election of members of the board
of cooperative educational services, or in the case of the board of
education of a central high school district on the regular business day
next following such designated date.
 If the resolutions adopted by the trustees or boards of education of a
majority of the component school districts of the board of cooperative
educational services actually voting approve the tentative
administrative budget, the board of cooperative educational services may
adopt the tentative administrative budget without modification. If a
majority of the component school districts actually voting fail to adopt
resolutions approving such tentative administrative budget, or if the
number of component school districts approving the budget equals the
number of school districts disapproving the budget, the board of
cooperative educational services shall prepare and adopt a contingency
administrative budget which shall not exceed the amount of the
administrative budget of the board of cooperative educational services
for the previous school year except to accommodate expenditure increases
attributable to supplemental retirement allowances payable pursuant to
section five hundred thirty-two of this chapter and section
seventy-eight of the retirement and social security law.
 (6) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any component
school district which will be transferred to a new supervisory district
as of July first next succeeding the date designated for the vote on the
tentative administrative budget shall vote on the administrative budget
of the board of cooperative educational services to which it will be
transferred, as if such transfer had already occurred. Where the
commissioner has issued an order for the merger of two or more
supervisory districts to take effect on July first, in the school year
immediately preceding the merger, the boards of cooperative educational
services to be merged shall jointly prepare a program, administrative
and capital budget for the merged board of cooperative educational
services and shall jointly conduct a vote on the tentative
administrative budget of the merged board of cooperative educational
services in accordance with this paragraph as if the merger was already
in effect. In the event such a merger does not take effect on July
first, the commissioner shall be authorized to order the boards of
cooperative educational services to be merged to develop program,
administrative and capital budgets and conduct a vote on administrative
budgets in the manner prescribed by this section on dates other than
those specified in this section.
 (7) Each component school district shall transmit the resolution
either approving or disapproving the board of cooperative educational
services' tentative administrative budget no later than one business day
after the adoption of such resolution. The board of cooperative
educational services shall, no later than the fifteenth day of May,
adopt the final program, capital and administrative budgets for the
ensuing year. Except as provided in paragraph d of this subdivision,
subparagraph (a) of paragraph p of this subdivision, and subdivision one
of section nineteen hundred fifty-one of this article, such
administrative and capital budgets, when so adopted, after deducting
state aid applicable thereto, shall be a charge against all of the
component school districts in the supervisory district and each
component school district's proportionate share shall be determined by
the board of cooperative educational services according to weighted
average daily attendance or according to true valuation or according to
resident public school district enrollment as defined in paragraph n of
subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter except
that only one method shall be applied among the component districts of a
board of cooperative educational services in any year, unless otherwise
provided by law. In a merged supervisory district in the county of
Suffolk each component school district's proportionate share of such
administrative and capital budgets may be determined according to
weighted average daily attendance, according to true valuation, or
according to using the weighted average daily attendance for a certain
percentage of the cost and true valuation for a certain percentage of
administrative and capital costs. Such costs, in a merged supervisory
district in the county of Suffolk, apportioned by using weighted average
daily attendance and true valuation shall be subject to adjustment by
the board of cooperative educational services in a manner that will
minimize the annual change in costs for the greatest number of component
districts. Such percentages shall be established by the board of
cooperative educational services upon the approval of the component
districts subject to the final approval of the commissioner. It is
further provided that such administrative budget approved by the board
shall be subject to review by the commissioner to determine: (i) the
level of administrative savings achieved by the merger and (ii) if such
administrative savings equals or exceeds the level identified by the
merger planning task force appointed by the district superintendent. If
the board of cooperative educational services determines to change the
method of apportioning administrative costs and capital expenses from
that followed in the previous year, such determination may be made only
if the board of cooperative educational services has conducted a hearing
at a regular or special meeting of such board which all members of
boards of education and school trustees have been invited to attend,
such hearing to be held at least thirty days prior to the annual meeting
of members of boards of education and school trustees. In the
Putnam/North Westchester board of cooperative educational services, each
component district's proportionate share of such administrative and
capital budgets may also be determined by using the weighted average
daily attendance for a certain percentage and the true valuation for a
certain percentage. Such percentages shall be applied according to
clause (i) of this subparagraph.
 (i) The three methods of apportionment of administrative and capital
expenses are as follows: (1) in accordance with the ratio which the
component school district's total full or true valuation in effect at
the time of the adoption of the budget bears to the total true or full
valuation of all of the component school districts within the board of
cooperative educational services, (2) by dividing the total amount of
such administrative and capital expenses by the total weighted average
daily attendance of pupils residing in all component school districts
contained within the board of cooperative educational services and
attending a public school and multiplying by the weighted average daily
attendance of such resident pupils in each of the component school
districts, or (3) by dividing the total amount of such administrative
and capital expenses by the total resident public school district
enrollment of all component school districts contained within the board
of cooperative educational services and multiplying by the resident
public school district enrollment of the component school districts. In
addition, in a merged supervisory district in the county of Suffolk,
where a combination of the first and second methods could be applied as
provided in the opening paragraph of this subparagraph may be utilized.
In the Putnam/North Westchester board of cooperative educational
services, where a combination of the first and second methods is
utilized, the percentages shall be used as follows: for the two thousand
five-two thousand six school year, ninety percent using true valuation
and ten percent using the weighted average daily attendance; for the two
thousand six-two thousand seven school year, eighty percent using true
valuation and twenty percent using the weighted average daily
attendance; for the two thousand seven-two thousand eight school year,
seventy percent using true valuation and thirty percent using the
weighted average daily attendance; for the two thousand eight-two
thousand nine school year, sixty percent using true valuation and forty
percent using the weighted average daily attendance; and for the two
thousand nine-two thousand ten school year and any school year
thereafter, fifty percent using true valuation and fifty percent using
the weighted average daily attendance.
 (ii) If the board of cooperative educational services chooses to
apportion administrative costs and capital expenses according to full or
true valuation, special school districts authorized to receive state aid
in accordance with chapter five hundred sixty-six of the laws of
nineteen hundred sixty-seven, as amended, shall have their full value
for purposes of this section computed by multiplying the resident
weighted average daily attendance by the state average full valuation
per pupil as established by the commissioner for the year in which the
budget is adopted. The school authorities of each component school
district shall add such amount to the budget of such component districts
and shall pay such amount to the treasurer of the board of cooperative
educational services and shall be paid out by the treasurer upon the
orders of the board of cooperative educational services issued and
executed in pursuance of a resolution of said board.
 c. Make or cause to be made surveys to determine the need for
cooperative educational services in the supervisory district and present
the findings of their surveys to local school authorities. Each board of
cooperative educational services shall prepare long range program plans,
including special education and career education program plans, to meet
the projected need for such cooperative educational services in the
supervisory district for the next five years as may be specified by the
commissioner, and shall keep on file and make available for public
inspection and review by the commissioner such plans and thereafter
annual revisions of such plans on or before the first day of December of
each year, provided that such plans may be incorporated into a board of
cooperative educational services district-wide comprehensive plan.
 d. (1) Aidable shared services. At the request of component school
districts, and with the approval of the commissioner, provide any of the
following services on a cooperative basis: school nurse teacher,
attendance supervisor, supervisor of teachers, dental hygienist,
psychologist, teachers of art, music, physical education, career
education subjects, guidance counsellors, operation of special classes
for students with disabilities, as such term is defined in article
eighty-nine of this chapter; pupil and financial accounting service by
means of mechanical equipment; maintenance and operation of cafeteria or
restaurant service for the use of pupils and teachers while at school,
and such other services as the commissioner may approve. Such cafeteria
or restaurant service may be used by the community for school related
functions and activities and to furnish meals to the elderly residents
of the district, sixty years of age or older. Utilization by elderly
residents or school related groups shall be subject to the approval of
the board of education. Charges shall be sufficient to bear the direct
cost of preparation and serving of such meals, exclusive of any other
available reimbursements.
 * (2) Certain services prohibited. Commencing with the nineteen
hundred ninety-seven--ninety-eight school year, the commissioner shall
not be authorized to approve as an aidable shared service pursuant to
this subdivision any cooperative maintenance services or municipal
services, including but not limited to, lawn mowing services and
heating, ventilation or air conditioning repair or maintenance or trash
collection, or any other municipal services as defined by the
commissioner. On and after the effective date of this paragraph, the
commissioner shall not approve, as an aidable shared service, any new
cooperative maintenance or municipal services for the nineteen hundred
ninety-six--ninety-seven school year, provided that the commissioner may
approve the continuation of such services for one year if provided in
the nineteen hundred ninety-five--ninety-six school year. No service
provided to an out-of-state school district pursuant to subparagraph ten
of paragraph h of this subdivision shall be eligible for aid.
 * NB Effective until July 1, 2029
 * (2) Certain services prohibited. Commencing with the nineteen
hundred ninety-seven--ninety-eight school year, the commissioner shall
not be authorized to approve as an aidable shared service pursuant to
this subdivision any cooperative maintenance services or municipal
services, including but not limited to, lawn mowing services and
heating, ventilation or air conditioning repair or maintenance or trash
collection, or any other municipal services as defined by the
commissioner. On and after the effective date of this paragraph, the
commissioner shall not approve, as an aidable shared service, any new
cooperative maintenance or municipal services for the nineteen hundred
ninety-six--ninety-seven school year, provided that the commissioner may
approve the continuation of such services for one year if provided in
the nineteen hundred ninety-five--ninety-six school year.
 * NB Effective July 1, 2029
 (2-a) Cost effectiveness of instructional and non-instructional
technology. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section to the
contrary, expenditures incurred pursuant to purchase and/or installation
contracts entered into on or after January fifteenth, two thousand, for
the following categories of instructional and non-instructional
technology purchase and installation:
 (i) computer equipment,
 (ii) conduits,
 (iii) wiring,
 (iv) powering and testing of hardware installations,
 (v) all costs associated with lease or purchase of local or wide area
network hardware located on district property, and
 (vi) incidental costs for original purchase and installation of
hardware, including installation of basic operating systems software
required for hardware testing,
shall not be considered an aidable shared service unless the component
school district is able to demonstrate that such shared service would be
more cost-effective than would otherwise be possible if such services
were to be purchased without the involvement of a board of cooperative
educational services. Any aid that may be payable for such shared
service pursuant to subdivision five of this section shall be excluded
in the demonstration and determination of cost-effectiveness and cost
savings pursuant to this subdivision. The commissioner shall issue
guidelines to advise component school districts in their determination
of cost-effectiveness. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, if a
component school district determines that any instructional and
non-instructional technology purchase and installation from the board of
cooperative educational services are not cost effective, as determined
pursuant to this paragraph, the commissioner shall, upon request, assist
the school district to enter into a cooperative service agreement
(CO-SER) with another BOCES, which is cost effective in the provision of
such technology purchases and installations.
 (3) Requests for shared services; operating plan; required notice.
Requests for such shared services shall be filed by component school
districts with the board of cooperative educational services not later
than the first day of February of each year, provided that such requests
shall not be binding upon the component school district. The board of
cooperative educational services shall submit its proposed annual
operating plan for the ensuing school year to the department for
approval not later than the fifteenth day of February of each year. Such
board shall, through its executive officer, notify each component school
district on or before the tenth day of March concerning the services
which have been approved by the commissioner to be made available for
the ensuing school year. Such notice shall set forth the local uniform
cost of each such service, based on (i) anticipated participation in the
ensuing school year, or (ii) participation in the current year, or (iii)
a two or three year average including participation in the current year,
which unit cost shall be the same for all participating component
districts and shall be based upon a uniform methodology approved
annually by at least three-quarters of the participating component
school districts after consultation by local school officials with their
respective boards; provided, however, such unit cost shall be subject to
final adjustment for programs for students with disabilities based on
actual participation in accordance with regulations of the commissioner.
Notwithstanding the determination of the local uniform unit cost
methodology selected in accordance with this paragraph, each board of
cooperative education services shall annually report to the commissioner
the budgeted unit cost and, when available, the actual unit cost of such
programs and services, in accordance with both the local uniform unit
cost methodology and a statewide uniform unit cost methodology
prescribed by the commissioner by regulation, where the budgeted
statewide unit cost shall be based on the anticipated participation in
the ensuing year and the actual statewide unit cost shall be based on
actual participation through the end of each year.
 (4) Contracts for shared services; allocation of costs. Each component
school district shall on or before the first day of May following such
notification notify the board of cooperative educational services of its
intention to participate or not to participate in such shared services
and the specific services which such district elects to utilize. Each
participating component school district shall be required to pay the
board of cooperative educational services for the cost of the services
set forth in such notification, except for adjustments caused by
subsequent unanticipated changes in the district's enrollment. The board
of cooperative educational services shall enter into contracts with its
component school districts for such requested services. A copy of each
executed contract for such purpose shall be filed with the commissioner
by the board of cooperative educational services on or prior to the
first day of August of each year. Notwithstanding the provisions of
paragraph b of this subdivision, any component school district which
does not elect to participate in any such specific cooperative services
authorized under this paragraph shall not be required to pay any share
of the moneys provided in the budget as salaries of teachers or other
personnel employed in providing such service, for equipment and supplies
for such service or for transportation of pupils to and from the place
where such service is maintained. Provided, further, that a board of
cooperative educational services may allocate the cost of such services
to component school districts in accordance with terms agreed upon
between such board and three-quarters of the boards of education and
trustees of local school districts participating in the service.
 (5) Operating plan and budget; unanticipated shared services. The
board of cooperative educational services shall submit to the
commissioner on or before the first day of June an operating plan and
budget based upon the request for services which it has received from
its component school districts. Such submission shall include the
budgeted unit cost of programs and services based on both the local and
the statewide uniform unit cost methodologies for each program and
service offered by the board of cooperative educational services. A
board of cooperative educational services which receives requests for
unanticipated shared services subsequent to the adoption of its budget
shall submit an amended operating plan including such additional shared
services to the commissioner, together with a statement from the chief
school administrator of each school district which has requested such
services indicating the availability of funds in the budget of the
school district to pay for such district's share of the cost of such
additional services. Such amended plan shall be submitted in the manner
and form prescribed by regulations of the commissioner. The board of
cooperative educational services shall allocate the cost of providing
such additional shared services among the component school districts
which have requested such services, and shall contract with the
component school districts for such services. A copy of each contract
for this purpose shall be filed by the board of cooperative educational
services with the commissioner not more than thirty days from its
execution. An annual program report and evaluation for each school year
as prescribed by the commissioner, shall be submitted by the board of
cooperative educational services to the commissioner on or before the
first day of September following such school year.
 e. Upon the recommendation of the district superintendent, employ such
administrative assistants, teachers, supervisors, clerical help and
other personnel as may be necessary to carry out its program.
 f. Receive all reimbursements from public funds on account of the
cooperative educational services performed under its jurisdiction, and
allocate the costs of cooperative educational activities and shared
services including administrative and clerical costs against the
component school districts and receive and disburse the same, and to
apportion surpluses and assessments for services on the basis of
participation to those components and to those school districts outside
the board of cooperative educational services contracting for such
programs, and to apportion surpluses and assessments for administrative
expenses to all component districts. All such apportionments shall be
made annually.
 g. Borrow money in anticipation of revenue due the board of
cooperative educational services.
 h. (1) Arrange cooperative educational services with and if necessary
make contracts covering same with other public agencies for shared
services and to produce educational television materials and programs,
and to own or lease television facilities and to enter into appropriate
contracts concerning the same.
 (2) To enter into contracts with the United States of America, the
State of New York, any school district, community college, public
institution of higher education, independent institution of higher
education eligible for aid under section sixty-four hundred one of this
chapter, public libraries, or public agency in relation to the program
of the board of cooperative educational services, and any such school
district, community college, institution of higher education, or public
agency is hereby authorized and empowered to do and perform any and all
acts necessary or convenient in relation to the performance of any such
contracts.
 (3) To enter into contracts with school districts which are component
districts in the board of cooperative educational services for the
education by such component school district or districts of children who
reside within the board of cooperative educational services in the
program of the board of cooperative educational services, and for all
purposes of this chapter in such event such children shall be deemed
attending classes maintained by the board of cooperative educational
services. School districts are hereby authorized and empowered to do and
perform any and all acts necessary or convenient in relation to the
performance of any such contracts.
 (4) To enter into contracts with nonpublic schools to provide data
processing services for pupil personnel records and other administrative
records of the nonpublic schools and the processing of fingerprints
utilized in criminal history record checks for those nonpublic schools
that elect to require such criminal history record checks pursuant to
paragraph (a) of subdivision thirty of section three hundred five of
this chapter.
 (5) To enter into contracts with the United States of America, the
state of New York, any community college, agricultural and technical
college or other public agency for the purpose of providing career
education programs to such agencies. Any such proposed contract shall be
subject to the review and approval of the commissioner, who may only
approve such proposed contract when, in his opinion, such contract will
result in a more economical utilization of existing career and career
education resources than would be achieved were such contract not
approved. The commissioner shall issue a finding in writing in making
all determinations pursuant to this article.
 (6) To enter into contracts with not-for-profit corporations to
participate in federal programs relating to career training and
experience. Any such proposed contract shall be subject to review and
approval of the commissioner, who may approve such proposed contract
only when in his opinion such contract will result in increased or
improved career opportunities. The commissioner shall issue a finding in
writing in making all determinations pursuant to this subparagraph.
 (7) To enter into contracts with the state of New York, any community
college, agricultural and technical college, or public agency for the
purpose of providing electronic data processing services to such
agencies. Any such proposed contract shall be subject to the review and
approval of the commissioner, who may only approve such proposed
contract when, in his opinion, such contract will not disrupt the level
of services provided to component school districts and will result in a
more economical utilization of existing board of cooperative educational
services computer facilities. The commissioner shall issue a finding in
writing in making all determinations pursuant to this subparagraph.
 (8) To enter into contracts with the commissioner of the office of
children and family services pursuant to subdivision six-a of section
thirty-two hundred two of this chapter to provide to such office, for
the benefit of youth in its custody, any special education programs,
related services, career and technical education services and music, art
and foreign language programs provided by the board of cooperative
educational services to component school districts. Any such proposed
contract shall be subject to the review and approval of the commissioner
to determine that it is an approved cooperative educational service.
Services provided pursuant to such contracts shall be provided at cost,
and the board of cooperative educational services shall not be
authorized to charge any costs incurred in providing such services to
its component school districts.
 * (10) To enter into contracts of no more than five years and subject
to the sunset date of this subparagraph, with out-of-state schools for:
(a) special education; and/or (b) career and technical education
services; and/or (c) for the use of existing products that demonstrate
how to map the next generation standards to assessments; and/or (d)
providing access to existing webinars or online courses relating to
implementation of the next generation standards; for providing
professional development to educators; and/or (e) technology products
developed for the use of school districts located in New York state,
including computer programs and software packages that help students
learn and assist districts in achieving greater efficiencies. For
purposes of this subparagraph, an out-of-state school shall mean a
public elementary or secondary school or a degree granting institution
of higher education, located outside of New York state; provided further
for purposes of providing services authorized in clauses (c), (d) and
(e) of this subparagraph, out-of-state shall also include schools
located outside the continental United States. Any contract shall be
approved by the commissioner, the board of cooperative educational
services and the district superintendent of schools, provided such
services are made available to any school district within the
supervisory district and that the requirements of this subparagraph are
met. Contracts must be executed by the board of cooperative educational
services and the trustees or boards of education of such out-of-state
schools and shall only authorize out-of-state students to participate in
an instructional program if such services are available to all eligible
students in New York state schools in the component districts and the
number of participating out-of-state students only comprises up to five
percent of the total number of the total enrolled students in the
instructional program at the board of cooperative educational services
and that the board of cooperative educational services spends no more
than thirty percent of its employees' time on services to out-of-state
schools pursuant to this subparagraph. To be approved by the
commissioner, the contract and any business plan, shall demonstrate that
any services provided to out-of-state schools pursuant to this
subparagraph shall not result in any additional costs being imposed on
component school districts and that any payments received by the board
of cooperative educational services for services provided in this
subparagraph that exceed any cost to the board of cooperative
educational services for providing such services shall be applied to
reduce the costs of aidable shared services allocated to component
school districts pursuant to paragraph d of this subdivision and shall
also be applied to reduce the approved cost of services pursuant to
subdivision five of this section. Services provided by a board of
cooperative educational services to component districts at the time of
approval of a contract under this paragraph shall not be reduced or
eliminated solely due to a board of cooperative educational services'
performance of services to out-of-state schools pursuant to this
paragraph.
 * NB Repealed July 1, 2029
 (11) To enter into contracts with individual public libraries or
public library systems for the purpose of providing high-speed
telecommunications services including, but not limited to, high-speed
internet services. Any such proposed contract shall be subject to the
review and approval of the commissioner, who may only approve such
proposed contract when, in such commissioner's opinion, such contract:
(a) will result in a more economical utilization of existing boards of
cooperative educational services high-speed telecommunications services
or resources than would be achieved were such contract not approved; (b)
will not disrupt the level of services to component school districts;
and (c) will result in a more economical utilization of existing library
resources. The commissioner shall issue a finding, in writing, making
any determination pursuant to this subparagraph. Such services to public
libraries and library systems shall be provided at cost and shall not be
eligible for aid pursuant to subdivision five of this section.
 (12) To enter into contracts with preschool special education program
providers approved pursuant to section forty-four hundred ten of this
chapter to process services relating to online application systems for
educators.
 (13) To establish, upon local interest from one or more component
school districts and subject to approval by the BOCES board of
education, an agriculture program that is designed to provide students
with the skills required to work in, and help sustain New York's
agriculture industry. Such program may include, but not be limited to,
a partnership with farms and other agriculture entities in the state
that provide students with hands-on experience combined with other
educational opportunities.
 i. Make such reports as are required by the commissioner of education.
 j. Appoint one of its members as president, one of its members or
another qualified voter in a district within the supervisory district as
clerk and another qualified voter in a district within the supervisory
district as treasurer. The duties of the clerk and treasurer shall be
the same as those established by statute and regulations of the
commissioner of education for clerks and treasurers of union free school
districts.
 k. Designate a depositary within the territorial limits of any
component district for the deposit of money in the manner provided by
section ten of the general municipal law. The receipt, deposit,
investment and disbursement of moneys, and all procedures relating
thereto, including, but not limited to the requirements for signatures,
the appointment of a claims auditor to approve claims for purchases, and
the optional use of claim forms, and the establishment of an internal
audit function, shall be subject to the laws relating to union free
school districts.
 m. At the request of officials of school districts, created by
legislative act, within the territory of a board of cooperative
educational services, provide services as outlined in paragraph d of
this subdivision. For such districts, there shall be apportioned from
state funds to the board of cooperative educational services a sum equal
to one-half the total cost of the approved services provided to such
school district.
 n. In those counties where taxes other than those on real property are
applied to school purposes, the tax rate shall be deemed to be that
which would result if such taxes had not been applied to school
purposes.
 o. A meeting of members of the boards of education and school trustees
of the component districts shall be held during the month of April on or
before the fifteenth day of April, on a date and at a place and hour
designated by the president of the board of cooperative educational
services. The tentative administrative capital and program budgets of
the board of cooperative educational services shall be available for
inspection of the boards of education and school trustees at such
meeting. Notice of the date, time and place of such meeting shall be
given to each of the members of the boards of education and trustees and
to the clerk of each of the component school districts by mail addressed
to the last known address of such persons at least fourteen days prior
to the meeting.
 p. * (a) To rent suitable land, classrooms, offices or buildings upon
or in which to maintain and conduct such cooperative educational
services and administrative offices for a period not to exceed ten years
for leases entered into with public entities and twenty years for leases
entered into with non-public entities and to improve, alter, equip and
furnish such land, classrooms, offices or buildings in a suitable manner
for such purposes, provided that: (1) before executing any lease, the
board shall adopt a resolution determining that such agreement is in the
best financial interests of the supervisory district and stating the
basis of that determination; (2) the rental payment shall not be more
than the fair market value as determined by the board and provided to
the commissioner; (3) The board discloses any conflict of interest
pursuant to subparagraph (c) of this paragraph, or any other potential
or perceived conflict of interest, to the commissioner, and in the event
of a conflict of interest or a potential or perceived conflict of
interest, provides detailed documentation to the commissioner
demonstrating that the cost of the lease is not more than fair market
value; and (4) upon the consent of the commissioner, renewal of such
lease may be made for a period of up to ten years. Nothing contained
herein shall prevent the board from entering into a lease agreement
which provides for the cancellation of the same by such board upon: (i)
a substantial increase or decrease in pupil enrollment; or (ii) a
substantial change in the needs and requirements of a board of
cooperative educational services with respect to facilities; or (iii)
any other change which substantially affects the needs or requirements
of a board of cooperative educational services or the community in which
it is located. No lease or other contract for the occupancy of such
land, classrooms, offices or buildings shall be enforceable against the
board of cooperative educational services unless and until the same
shall have been approved in writing by the commissioner. In the case of
a lease longer than ten years, the commissioner's written approval must
include a finding that the proposed lease complies with all requirements
of this paragraph and would be more cost-effective than a lease of ten
years or fewer.
 * NB Effective until July 1, 2029
 * (a) To rent suitable land, classrooms, offices or buildings upon or
in which to maintain and conduct such cooperative educational services
and administrative offices for a period not to exceed ten years and to
improve, alter, equip and furnish such land, classrooms, offices or
buildings in a suitable manner for such purposes (1) before executing
any lease, the board shall adopt a resolution determining that such
agreement is in the best financial interests of the supervisory district
and stating the basis of that determination; (2) the rental payment
shall not be more than the fair market value as determined by the board;
and (3) upon the consent of the commissioner, renewal of such lease may
be made for a period of up to ten years. Nothing contained herein shall
prevent the board from entering into a lease agreement which provides
for the cancellation of the same by such board upon: (i) a substantial
increase or decrease in pupil enrollment; or (ii) a substantial change
in the needs and requirements of a board of cooperative educational
services with respect to facilities; or (iii) any other change which
substantially affects the needs or requirements of a board of
cooperative educational services or the community in which it is
located. No lease or other contract for the occupancy of such land,
classrooms, offices or buildings shall be enforceable against the board
of cooperative educational services unless and until the same shall have
been approved in writing by the commissioner.
 * NB Effective July 1, 2029
 (b) To lease unneeded facilities to public or private agencies,
individuals, partnerships, or corporations, with the approval of the
commissioner of education, and for a term not to exceed five years,
which shall be renewable with the approval of the commissioner of
education.
 * (c) if any member of the board of education of the board of
cooperative educational services, officer or employee of the board of
cooperative educational services has a financial interest, either direct
or indirect, in any lease to which the board of cooperative educational
services is, or is to be, a party, such interest shall be disclosed to
the board of education of such board of cooperative educational services
in writing and shall be set forth in the minutes of the board of
education of the board of cooperative educational services. The member,
officer or employee having such interest shall not participate in any
action by the board of cooperative educational services with respect to
such lease.
 * NB Repealed July 1, 2029
 q. To provide transportation for pupils to and from classes maintained
by such board of cooperative educational services at the request of one
or more school districts. School districts and boards of cooperative
educational services are authorized to enter into contracts with one or
more school districts, private contractors, and one or more boards of
cooperative educational services and any municipal corporation and
authority to provide such transportation. Boards of cooperative
educational services may operate joint or regional transportation
systems for the transportation authorized by articles seventy-three and
eighty-nine of this chapter. Such transportation, except when provided
by a political subdivision or a board of cooperative educational
services, shall be subject to the requirements of subdivision fourteen
of section three hundred five of the education law.
 r. With the approval of the district superintendent of schools and of
the commissioner of education to furnish any of the educational services
provided for in this section or any other section of law which
authorizes such board to provide services to school districts outside of
the supervisory district, upon such terms as may be agreed upon pursuant
to contracts executed by such board of cooperative educational services
and the trustees or boards of education of such school districts.
 s. Provide workmen's compensation coverage as provided in the
workmen's compensation law for all teachers and other employees for
injuries incurred in actual performance of duty.
 t. When authorized by the qualified voters of the board, to purchase
or otherwise acquire buildings, sites or additions thereto, to purchase
or otherwise acquire real property for any lawful purpose and to
construct buildings thereon.
 u. To purchase necessary furniture, equipment, implements, apparatus
and supplies.
 v. To accept gifts of real and personal property.
 w. To furnish any of the services provided for in this section or any
other section of law which authorizes such board to provide services to
school districts outside of the board of cooperative educational
services, with the approval of the commissioner of education and of the
district superintendent of schools or superintendents of schools having
jurisdiction of such school districts for a period of not to exceed five
years, upon such terms as may be agreed upon pursuant to contracts
executed by the board of cooperative educational services and the
trustees or boards of education of such school districts.
 x. To sell, when authorized by the qualified voters of the board of
cooperative educational services, any real property the title of which
is vested in the board of cooperative educational services and buildings
thereon and appurtenances or any part thereof at such price and upon
such terms as shall be prescribed in such resolution; also, when so
authorized, to exchange real property belonging to the board of
cooperative educational services for the purpose of improving or
changing school sites. The proceeds of such sale shall be applied as
provided by the resolution authorizing such sale.
 * y. To enter into agreements for the lease of personal property.
Before executing any such agreement, the board shall adopt a resolution
determining that such agreement is in the best financial interests of
the board of cooperative educational services, which resolution shall
state the basis for that determination. Such agreements shall be subject
to the bidding requirements of the general municipal law. No agreement
for the lease of personal property may be made for a term in excess of
five years, beginning with the time of receipt of possession of the
subject of the lease.
 * NB There are 2 par. y's
 * y. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section and with the
consent of the commissioner, the board of cooperative educational
services of the county of Oswego may enter into contracts with the
county of Oswego to provide transportation for handicapped children in
the county of Oswego to and from any facility or institution for
educating handicapped children within or without such county.
 * NB There are 2 par. y's
 z. To furnish, with the approval of the commissioner of education, for
an amount not less than the cost thereof, any of the instructional
support services provided to component school districts, including but
not limited to audio-visual materials and related media services,
curricular materials, in-service education programs and pupil personnel
services for the diagnosis of handicapping conditions, to any nonpublic,
not-for-profit elementary or secondary school in the state of New York
which provides the instruction required by section thirty-two hundred
four and article seventeen of this chapter, and which is chartered by
the regents or registered with or subject to examination and inspection
by the state education department.
 aa. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a board of cooperative
educational services may, with the prior written approval of the
commissioner, contract to accept from a leasing company which has
qualified as lowest bidder pursuant to the provisions of the general
municipal law a sum sufficient to purchase data processing equipment
from the manufacturer thereof, pay such sum to the manufacturer of said
equipment, receive the equipment and title thereto and convey the same
to the leasing company with a simultaneous lease of the equipment from
such leasing company to the board of cooperative educational services
for a specified period of years. Before any such agreement shall be
executed, the board of cooperative educational services shall adopt a
resolution determining that such agreement is in the best financial
interest of the board. Such lease may be renewed for a further specified
period of years with the prior approval of the commissioner of
education.
 bb. Boards of cooperative educational services may provide academic
and other programs and services in the school year on a cooperative
basis, including summer programs and services. (1) Requests to provide
such programs and services shall be filed annually with the commissioner
for approval.
 (2) The commissioner may approve such programs and services only if
they (a) are requested by two or more component school districts; (b)
will provide additional opportunities for pupils; (c) will be expected
to result in a cost savings to the two or more component school
districts requesting the programs and services; (d) will provide greater
opportunity for pupils, including those with handicapping conditions, to
earn credit for academic subjects and (e) will insure a greater or more
appropriate use of facilities by boards of cooperative educational
services.
 (3) Such programs and services may include, but shall not be limited
to (a) expansion of itinerant teaching services in advanced academic
subject courses; (b) academic course offerings at regular board of
cooperative educational services centers or at leased sites during the
school year or summer school periods, as requested by component
districts; (c) block scheduling to enable students to attend classes at
a board of cooperative educational services center for an entire school
day; (d) satellite offerings of specific concentrations or
specializations sponsored by boards of cooperative educational services
at local schools, with cross-contracting for services; (e) expanded use
of interactive television and other technologies to offer academic
courses on site or at component school districts; and (f) programs of
academic intervention services approved by the commissioner designed to
fulfill the academic intervention services requirement imposed by the
regulations of the commissioner, provided that in approving such
programs and services for the two thousand--two thousand one school year
or thereafter, the commissioner shall assure that the program or service
results in a cost savings to all participating districts, disregarding
any aid pursuant to subdivision five of this section.
 (4) Such programs or services if approved by the commissioner, shall
be eligible for aid pursuant to subdivision five of this section.
 (5) A teacher whose position in a school district is abolished as the
result of a takeover of an academic program by a board or boards of
cooperative educational services shall be accorded the rights provided
by section thirty hundred fourteen-a of this chapter.
 (6) To implement a program or service approved under this paragraph, a
school district may transport pupils to the site of a board of
cooperative educational services program in those cases where a pupil
otherwise would be entitled to transportation but for the fact that the
program is at the board of cooperative educational services and not at a
school of the district. Under these circumstances, for those purposes of
article seventy-three of this chapter, the board of cooperative
educational services site shall be considered a school.
 cc. Upon approval by a vote of the board of cooperative educational
services, establish and maintain a program of reserves not to exceed
three per centum of the annual budget of the district to cover property
loss and liability claims. Separate funds shall be established for
property losses and for liability claims, and the separate identity of
each such fund shall be maintained whether its assets consist of cash or
investments or both. The money in such funds shall be deposited and
secured in the manner provided by section ten of the general municipal
law. The moneys so deposited shall be accounted for separate and apart
from all other funds of the district, in the same manner as provided in
subdivision ten of section six-c of the general municipal law. The
moneys in such funds may be invested in the manner provided by section
eleven of the general municipal law. Any interest earned or capital gain
realized on the money so deposited shall accrue and become part of such
funds. Such reserve funds shall not be reduced to amounts less than the
total of the amounts estimated to be necessary to cover incurred but
unsettled claims or suits including expenses in connection therewith
other than by payments for losses for which such reserve amounts were
established, except that such board may authorize use of such funds
other than amounts allocated for unsettled claims or suits including
expenses in connection therewith to pay premiums for insurance policies
purchased to insure subsequent losses in areas previously self-insured,
in the event of dissolution of the self-insurance plan.
 dd. Provide for activities and services pertaining to the arts at the
request of one or more school districts. Such activities and services
shall be eligible for aid and shall include, but not be limited to,
programs with, and performances by, artists or organizations approved by
the commissioner of education. Boards of cooperative educational
services are authorized to enter into contracts with one or more school
districts, or boards of cooperative educational services.
 ee. Upon approval by a vote of the board of cooperative educational
services and of the boards of education of a majority of the school
districts participating in the instructional program of such board,
establish a career education instructional equipment reserve fund for
the replacement and purchase of advanced technology equipment used in
instructional programs conducted by the board of cooperative educational
services. Subject to a limitation imposed by regulation of the
commissioner on the amount of money which may be maintained in equipment
reserve funds established pursuant to this paragraph, moneys for such
funds shall be obtained by including depreciation expenses for the
career education instructional equipment used in providing instructional
services on a cooperative basis in the computation of the cost of such
services pursuant to paragraph d of this subdivision. Proceeds from the
sale of career education instructional equipment used in the
instructional programs of the board and any income earned on money
deposited in a reserve fund shall become part of such fund. The moneys
in such funds shall be deposited and secured in the manner provided by
section ten of the general municipal law. The moneys so deposited shall
be accounted for separate and apart from all other funds of the
district, in the same manner as provided in subdivision ten of section
six-c of the general municipal law. The moneys in such funds may be
invested by the board of cooperative educational services in the manner
provided by section eleven of the general municipal law. In the event a
career education instructional equipment reserve fund is liquidated, the
moneys in such fund shall be allocated to the school districts
participating in the instructional programs of the board of cooperative
educational services in proportion to the value of the contributions to
the fund made by the participating districts. The commissioner may
promulgate regulations pertaining, but not limited, to the amount of
money to be retained in such reserve funds, the types of equipment for
which depreciation expenses may be charged and for which expenditures
may be made from the reserve fund, and required documentation of
transactions relating to such funds.
 ff. In its discretion, to purchase insurance against personal injuries
incurred by an authorized participant in a school volunteer program,
including but not limited to, those authorized participants who assist
on school buses, school sponsored transportation to and from school, or
on school sponsored field trips or any other school sponsored activity;
provided, however, that the injuries were incurred while the authorized
participant was functioning either within the scope of his or her
authorized volunteer duties or under the direction of the board of
education, trustee, or board of cooperative educational services, or
both.
 gg. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a board of cooperative
educational services may provide training for employment to adults on a
space available basis, with consideration given to occupations and
industries in demand, and establish reduced adult tuition rates for such
training. For the purposes of this section, training for employment for
adults shall be offered through state approved sequences or parts
thereof of secondary career education instruction. Adults may
participate in such instruction and be awarded certificates of
completion, but they may not earn credit based on their participation
towards a high school diploma. Pursuant to section forty-six hundred two
of this chapter, a board of cooperative educational services may
establish such reduced rates for participation of adults provided that
participation is limited to assigned instructional staff and currently
used facilities in scheduled secondary career education programs, and
provided further that such rates may not be less than fifty percent of
the tuition rates charged to school districts for the participation of
secondary students in the same programs, unless waived by the
commissioner based on application of the board of cooperative
educational services. This participation of adults at reduced tuition
rates shall be in accordance with terms agreed upon by the board of
cooperative educational services and the component school districts
receiving such services but in no case shall such rates result in
extraordinary costs assigned to such component school districts. Boards
of cooperative educational services which provide such training to
adults shall submit to the commissioner annually a report which shall
include but not be limited to the number of adults served, referral
source, training sequences or parts thereof taken by adult participants,
the tuition rates charged to them, and the gross revenues realized
therefrom. For the purpose of this paragraph, "adult" shall mean any
person under the age of twenty-one who has received a high school
diploma or any person twenty-one years of age or older, whether or not
they have received a high school diploma.
 hh. Provide for activities and services pertaining to environmental
education at the request of more than one school district. Such
activities and services each of which shall not exceed three weeks
duration to be eligible for aid and shall include programs with and
performances by individuals or organizations with special skills
essential to the activity or service, but not appropriate to full time
boards of cooperative educational services staff. Boards of cooperative
educational services are authorized to enter into contracts with
individuals, public agencies, and not-for-profit corporations to carry
out the provisions of this paragraph, subject to the approval of the
commissioner.
 ii. Enter into agreements with one or more financing agencies to
provide for the acceptance by such board of credit cards as a means of
payment of course fees or tuition when required for instructional
programs offered by such board of cooperative educational services. Any
such agreement shall govern the terms and conditions upon which a credit
card proffered as a means of payment of such fees or tuition shall be
accepted or declined and the manner in and conditions upon which the
financing agency shall pay to such board the amount of such fees or
tuition paid by means of a credit card pursuant to such agreement. Any
such agreement may provide for the payment by such board to such
financing agency of fees for the services provided by such financing
agency. For purposes of this paragraph, the following terms shall have
the following meanings:
 (1) "Credit card" means any credit card, credit plate, charge plate,
courtesy card, debit card or other identification card or device issued
by a person to another person which may be used to obtain a cash advance
or a loan or credit or to purchase a lease property or services on the
credit of the person issuing the credit card or a person who has agreed
with the issuer to pay obligations arising from the use of a credit card
issued to another person.
 (2) "Financing agency" means any agency defined as such in subdivision
eighteen of section four hundred one of the personal property law;
 (3) "Person" means an individual, partnership, corporation or any
other legal or commercial entity.
 jj. To contract to furnish any of the services provided for in this
section to component school districts of the board of cooperative
educational services, with the approval of the commissioner, for a
period not to exceed five years, upon such terms as may be agreed upon
pursuant to such contracts executed by the board of cooperative
educational services and the trustees or boards of education of such
school districts, provided that any such contract entered into, extended
or amended on or after July first, nineteen hundred ninety-six shall be
consistent with the requirements of paragraph d of this subdivision and
subdivision one of section nineteen hundred fifty-one of this article
regarding the allocation of costs to component school districts based
upon the local uniform unit cost of each such service.
 kk. For the nineteen hundred ninety-seven--ninety-eight school year
and thereafter, the board of cooperative educational services (BOCES)
shall prepare a BOCES report card, pursuant to regulations of the
commissioner, and shall make it publicly available by transmitting it to
local newspapers of general circulation, appending it to copies of the
proposed administrative budget made publicly available as required by
law, making it available for distribution at the annual meeting, and
otherwise disseminating it as required by the commissioner. Such report
card shall include measures of the academic performance of the board of
cooperative educational services, on a school by school or program by
program basis, and measures of the fiscal performance of the supervisory
district, as prescribed by the commissioner. Pursuant to regulations of
the commissioner, the report card shall also compare these measures to
statewide averages for all boards of cooperative educational services.
Such report card shall include any information required by the
commissioner.
 ll. a. Shall require, for purposes of a criminal history record check,
the fingerprinting of all prospective employees pursuant to section
three thousand thirty-five of this chapter, who do not hold valid
clearance pursuant to such section or pursuant to section three thousand
four-b of this chapter or section five hundred nine-cc or twelve hundred
twenty-nine-d of the vehicle and traffic law. Prior to initiating the
fingerprinting process, the prospective employer shall furnish the
applicant with the form described in paragraph (c) of subdivision thirty
of section three hundred five of this chapter and shall obtain the
applicant's consent to the criminal history records search. Every set of
fingerprints taken pursuant to this paragraph shall be promptly
submitted to the commissioner for purposes of clearance for employment.
 b. Upon the recommendation of the district superintendent, the board
may conditionally appoint a prospective employee. A request for
conditional clearance shall be forwarded to the commissioner along with
the prospective employee's fingerprints, as required by paragraph a of
this subdivision. Such appointment shall not commence until notification
by the commissioner that the prospective employee has been conditionally
cleared for employment and shall terminate forty-five days after such
notification of conditional clearance or when the prospective employer
is notified of a determination by the commissioner to grant or deny
clearance, whichever occurs earlier, and may not be extended or renewed
unless the commissioner issues a new conditional clearance after finding
that there was good cause for failing to obtain clearance within such
period, provided that if clearance is granted, the appointment shall
continue and the conditional status shall be removed. Prior to
commencement of such conditional appointment, the prospective employer
shall obtain a signed statement for conditional appointment from the
prospective employee, indicating whether, to the best of his or her
knowledge, he or she has a pending criminal charge or criminal
conviction in any jurisdiction outside the state.
 c. Upon the recommendation of the district superintendent, the board
may make an emergency conditional appointment when an unforeseen
emergency vacancy has occurred. When such appointment is made, the
process for conditional appointment pursuant to paragraph b of this
subdivision must also be initiated. Emergency conditional appointment
may commence prior to notification from the commissioner on conditional
clearance but shall terminate twenty business days from the date such
appointment commences or when the prospective employer is notified by
the commissioner regarding conditional clearance, whichever occurs
earlier, provided that if conditional clearance is granted, the
appointment shall continue as a conditional appointment. Prior to the
commencement of such appointment, the prospective employer must obtain a
signed statement for emergency conditional appointment from the
prospective employee, indicating whether, to the best of his or her
knowledge, he or she has a pending criminal charge or criminal
conviction in any jurisdiction. An unforeseen emergency vacancy shall be
defined as: (i) a vacancy that occurred less than ten business days
before the start of any school session, including summer school, or
during any school session, including summer school, without sufficient
notice to allow for clearance or conditional clearance; (ii) when no
other qualified person is available to fill the vacancy temporarily; and
(iii) when emergency conditional appointment is necessary to maintain
services which the district is legally required to provide or services
necessary to protect the health, education or safety of students or
staff. The provisions of subparagraph (i) of this paragraph shall not
apply if the board finds that the district has been unable to fill the
vacancy despite good faith efforts to fill such vacancy in a manner
which would have allowed sufficient time for clearance or conditional
clearance.
 d. Shall develop a policy for the safety of the children who have
contact with an employee holding conditional appointment or emergency
conditional appointment.
 mm. Shall upon commencement and termination of employment of an
employee by the board, provide the commissioner with the name of and
position held by such employee.
 nn. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section and with the
consent of the commissioner, the Madison-Oneida board of cooperative
educational services may enter into a contract or contracts not to
exceed a total period of two years with the Madison Cortland ARC to
provide transportation maintenance and repair services on buses owned
and operated by the Madison Cortland ARC. The Madison-Oneida board of
cooperative educational services shall not charge any portion of costs
incurred pursuant to this paragraph to its component school districts.
 oo. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a board of cooperative
educational services is authorized to enter into a memorandum of
understanding with the trustees or board of education of a non-component
school district, including city school districts of cities with one
hundred twenty-five thousand inhabitants or more, to participate in a
recovery high school program operated by the board of cooperative
educational services for a period not to exceed five years upon such
terms as such trustees or board of education and the board of
cooperative educational services may mutually agree, provided that such
agreement may provide for a charge for administration of the recovery
high school program including capital costs, but participating
non-component school districts shall not be liable for payment of
administrative expenses as defined in paragraph b of this subdivision.
Costs allocated to a participating non-component school district
pursuant to a memorandum of understanding shall be aidable pursuant to
subdivision five of this section to the same extent and on the same
basis as costs allocated to a component school district.
 4-a. The board of cooperative educational services shall develop a
plan to ensure that all instructional materials to be used in the
programs of the board of cooperative educational services are available
in a usable alternative format for each student with a disability, as
defined in section forty-four hundred one of this chapter, and for each
student who is a qualified individual with a disability as defined in
the rehabilitation act of nineteen hundred ninety-three (29 U.S.C. 701)
as amended, in accordance with his or her educational needs and course
selection, at the same time as such instructional materials are
available to non-disabled students. As part of such plan, the board of
cooperative educational services shall amend its procurement policies to
give a preference in the purchase of instructional materials to vendors
who agree to provide materials in alternative formats. For purposes of
this subdivision, "alternative format" shall mean any medium or format
for the presentation of instructional materials, other than a
traditional print textbook, that is needed as an accommodation for a
disabled student enrolled in a program of the board of cooperative
educational services, including but not limited to Braille, large print,
open and closed captioned, audio, or an electronic file in an approved
format, as defined in the regulations of the commissioner. When an
electronic file is provided, the plan shall specify how the format will
be accessed by students and/or how the district shall convert to an
accessible format. Such plan shall identify the needs of students
enrolled in a program of the board of cooperative educational services
for alternative format materials. Such plan shall also specify ordering
timelines to ensure that alternative format materials are available at
the same time as regular format materials. Such plans shall include
procedures to address the need to obtain materials in alternative format
without delay for disabled students who enroll in a program of a board
of cooperative educational services during the school year.
 5. a. Upon application by a board of cooperative educational services,
there shall be apportioned and paid from state funds to each board of
cooperative educational services an amount which shall be the product of
the approved cost of services actually incurred during the base year
multiplied by the sharing ratio for cooperative educational services aid
which shall equal the greater of: (i) an amount equal to one minus the
quotient expressed as a decimal to three places without rounding of
eight mills divided by the tax rate of the local district computed upon
the actual valuation of taxable property, as determined pursuant to
subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter and
notwithstanding section three thousand six hundred three, expressed in
mills to the nearest tenth as determined by the commissioner, provided,
however, that where services are provided to a school district which is
included within a central high school district or to a central high
school district, such amount shall equal one minus the quotient
expressed as a decimal to three places without rounding of three mills
divided by the tax rates, expressed in mills to the nearest tenth, of
such districts, as determined by the commissioner or (ii) the aid ratio
of each school district for the current year, which shall be such
component school district's board of cooperative educational services
aid ratio and which shall be not less than thirty-six percent converted
to decimals and shall be not more than ninety percent converted to
decimals. For the purposes of this paragraph, the tax rate of the local
district computed upon the actual valuation of taxable property shall be
the sum of the amount of tax raised by the school district plus any
payments in lieu of taxes received by the school district pursuant to
section four hundred eighty-five of the real property tax law, divided
by the actual valuation of the school district, provided, however that
the tax rate for a central high school district shall be the sum of the
amount of tax raised by the common and union free school districts
included within the central high school district for the support of the
central high school district plus any payments in lieu of taxes received
for the support of the central high school district pursuant to section
four hundred eighty-five of the real property tax law, divided by the
actual valuation of the central high school district. The tax rate for
each common or union free school district which is included within a
central high school district shall be the sum of the amount raised for
the support of such common or union free school district plus any
payments in lieu of taxes received for the support of the school
district pursuant to section four hundred eighty-five of the real
property tax law, exclusive of the amount raised for the central high
school district, divided by the actual valuation of such common or union
free school district.
 b. The cost of services herein referred to shall be the amount
allocated to each component school district by the board of cooperative
educational services to defray expenses of such board, including
approved expenses from the testing of potable water systems of occupied
school buildings under the board's jurisdiction as required pursuant to
section eleven hundred ten of the public health law provided that such
expenses for testing of potable water systems are not reimbursable from
another state or federal source, except that that part of the salary
paid any teacher, supervisor or other employee of the board of
cooperative educational services which is, (i) for aid payable in the
two thousand twenty-five--two thousand twenty-six school year and prior
school years in excess of thirty thousand dollars, (ii) for aid payable
in the two thousand twenty-six--two thousand twenty-seven school year in
excess of forty thousand dollars, (iii) for aid payable in the two
thousand twenty-seven--two thousand twenty-eight school year in excess
of fifty thousand dollars, and (iv) for aid payable in the two thousand
twenty-eight--two thousand twenty-nine school year and thereafter, in
excess of sixty thousand dollars, shall not be such an approved expense,
and except also that administrative and clerical expenses shall not
exceed ten percent of the total expenses for purposes of this
computation. Any gifts, donations or interest earned by the board of
cooperative educational services or on behalf of the board of
cooperative educational services by the dormitory authority or any other
source shall not be deducted in determining the cost of services
allocated to each component school district. Any payments made to a
component school district by the board of cooperative educational
services pursuant to subdivision eleven of section six-p of the general
municipal law attributable to an approved cost of service computed
pursuant to this subdivision shall be deducted from the cost of services
allocated to such component school district. The expense of
transportation provided by the board of cooperative educational services
pursuant to paragraph q of subdivision four of this section shall be
eligible for aid apportioned pursuant to subdivision seven of section
thirty-six hundred two of this chapter and no board of cooperative
educational services transportation expense shall be an approved cost of
services for the computation of aid under this subdivision.
Transportation expense pursuant to paragraph q of subdivision four of
this section shall be included in the computation of the ten percent
limitation on administrative and clerical expenses.
 c. The "tax rate" as herein referred to shall not include a special
tax levied for debt service in an existing district of a central school
district or a consolidated district.
 d. Nothing in this act shall prevent school districts or boards of
cooperative educational services with the approval of the commissioner
of education from providing cooperative educational services for which
no application for state aid is to be made.
 e. Any aid apportioned in accordance with section two hundred thirteen
of the education law to a board of cooperative educational services in
connection with the production of educational television materials and
programs, or the acquisition by purchase, lease or otherwise of
television facilities or operational expenses in connection therewith
shall not be utilized in connection with computing the apportionment to
such board of cooperative educational services. Any aid apportioned or
paid by the state to a board of cooperative educational services for
experimental or special programs shall not be utilized in connection
with computing the apportionment to such board of cooperative
educational services.
 f. The sum of the amounts determined for each component school
district as the apportionment to the board of cooperative educational
services pursuant to the provisions of this section shall not be less
than the amount which would have been apportioned during the nineteen
hundred sixty-seven--sixty-eight school year under the provisions of
this subdivision as in effect on December thirty-first, nineteen hundred
sixty-six to the board of cooperative educational services of which the
district was a component member for which such apportionment was made,
except that such minimum apportionment shall be reduced in any year in
which the expenditures of the component district for board of
cooperative educational purposes fall below the expenditure on which the
nineteen hundred sixty-seven--sixty-eight apportionment to the board of
cooperative educational services was based, such reduction to be made on
a proportionate basis.
 g. Any payment required by a board of cooperative educational services
to the dormitory authority or any payment required by a board of
cooperative educational services to acquire or construct a school
facility of the board of cooperative educational services, and any
payments for rental of facilities by a board of cooperative educational
services shall, for the purposes of apportionment of public moneys to
the board of cooperative educational services by the state of New York,
be deemed to be an administrative or capital expense, as designated by
the commissioner, but the entire amount of such payment shall be
utilized in making such apportionment and the limitation of ten percent
of the total expenses contained in this subdivision shall not be
applicable. Any expense designated by the commissioner as a capital
expense shall be included in the capital budget of the board of
cooperative educational services and, except as otherwise provided in
this paragraph, shall be aided in the same manner as an administrative
expense. Any such payment shall not be considered part of the total
expenses of the board for purposes of determining the administrative and
clerical expenses not to exceed ten percent otherwise eligible for aid
under this subdivision, and such payments shall be considered for the
purpose of apportionment during the current school year such payment is
made. The apportionment for such payments shall be determined by
multiplying the amount of such payment allocated to each component
school district in the board of cooperative educational services by the
aid ratio, and shall be not more than ninety percent converted to
decimals, of each such component computed pursuant to subdivision three
of section thirty-six hundred two and used to apportion aid to that
district in that current school year; provided, however, the
apportionment for the construction, acquisition, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, or improvement of board of cooperative educational
services facilities, including payments to the dormitory authority and
payments under any lease agreement, shall be based upon the cost of the
board of cooperative educational services school facilities but not to
exceed the cost allowance set forth in subdivision six of section
thirty-six hundred two of the education law and payments for rental
facilities shall be subject to the approval of the commissioner.
 h. Each board of cooperative educational services receiving a payment
pursuant to paragraph a of this subdivision and section thirty-six
hundred nine-d of this chapter shall be required to set aside from such
payment an amount not less than the amount of state aid received
pursuant to paragraph a of this subdivision in the base year that was
attributable to cooperative services agreements (CO-SERs) for career
education, as determined by the commissioner, and shall be required to
use such amount to support career education programs in the current
year.
 5-a. Financial assistance for school districts first joining a board
of cooperative educational services (BOCES). a. Eligibility. Any school
district first joining a BOCES on or after July first, nineteen hundred
ninety-five and prior to July second, nineteen hundred ninety-seven
shall be eligible to apply to the commissioner for financial assistance
pursuant to the provisions of this subdivision and subdivision five of
this section.
 b. Financial assistance. Financial assistance shall mean an interest
free loan available upon application in the current year which shall not
exceed the product of (i) the applicable percent defined in paragraph c
of this subdivision and (ii) the sum of the local share and any
repayment due for the prior year loan. Such local share shall equal the
positive remainder resulting when aid payable on behalf of the district
in the current year pursuant to subdivision five of this section is
subtracted from the district's BOCES expenses which are or would be
aidable in the current year or the next year pursuant to such
subdivision five. The annual application for such a loan shall be in a
form prescribed by the commissioner and shall accompany the submission
of the final set of state aid forms required of the BOCES each year and
shall be certified by the district superintendent of the BOCES. The
amount of the loan in any year shall be determined by the commissioner
and the payment and repayment of the loan shall be in accordance with
the provisions of paragraph d of this subdivision.
 c. Applicable percent. The applicable percent shall be determined by
the number of years that an eligible district has been a component
district of a BOCES. In the first year, such percent shall be equal to
the district's BOCES and building aid ratio for aid payable in the first
year in which the district joins the BOCES, each year thereafter, such
percent shall be reduced by ten percent until such percent would drop
below ten percent at which time it shall be deemed to be zero.
 d. Payment and repayment. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provisions
of section thirty-six hundred nine-a of this chapter, the loan amounts
determined by the commissioner pursuant to paragraph b of this
subdivision shall be paid to each eligible school district on or before
June fifteenth, commencing with the first year of eligibility, but only
to the extent that the repayment of the base year loan has been secured.
Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of law, the state comptroller
shall deduct the amount of any base year loan from any monies due such
school district in March of the current year. Should the amount of any
monies due such school district in March be insufficient to repay the
total amount of the base year loan to the school district, the state
comptroller shall deduct any balance due the state from any other monies
payable to such district. Should the total amount of monies due to or on
behalf of such school district be insufficient to repay the total amount
of the base year loan determined in paragraph b of this subdivision,
such school district shall make a direct payment to the state before
March first of the current year and such payment shall be credited to
the general fund local assistance account of the department.
 6. The board of cooperative educational services is hereby created a
body corporate. All property which is now vested in, or shall hereafter
be transferred to the board of cooperative educational services, shall
be held by them as a corporation.
 7. In the event that two or more entire supervisory districts for
which boards of cooperative educational services have been established
shall become a single supervisory district by the redistricting of
supervisory districts pursuant to section twenty-two hundred one of this
chapter, the boards of cooperative educational services theretofore
established shall nevertheless remain in existence until August first
next following such redistricting for the purpose of carrying out the
programs for the current school year. For all other purposes, from and
after the effective date of such redistricting such boards of
cooperative educational services shall constitute a single board of
cooperative educational services for the supervisory district as then
constituted in the same manner as though such board had been established
for such supervisory district pursuant to subdivision one of this
section, and shall have all of the powers and duties of such boards
under this chapter. The members of such boards shall continue to serve
until the expiration of the terms of office for which they were elected.
No election shall be held to fill vacancies on such board as the terms
of members expire until such date as the terms of sufficient members
have expired to cause the membership of such board to be not less than
five nor more than fifteen, such number to be determined at the annual
meeting of the trustees and members of boards of education of such
supervisory district held in the month of April following such
redistricting. Thereafter members of such board shall be elected
annually to fill vacancies occurring by expiration of term.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a board of cooperative
educational services may fill a vacancy on such board at the annual
board election immediately following such annual meeting and may accept
nominations pursuant to subdivision two-a of this section in
anticipation that one or more vacancies will exist once such annual
meeting so establishes the number of the membership of the board,
provided that the election ballot shall state that nominations have been
accepted in anticipation of possible vacancies and that the clerk of the
board of cooperative educational services will advise the component
boards in writing of the actual number of vacant offices to be filled at
the election, if any, no later than one business day after the annual
meeting. Should such a supervisory district for which a board of
cooperative educational services has been established be divided by the
commissioner in the redistricting thereof, on August first next
following such redistricting, after paying all outstanding obligations
of such board, any balance of funds remaining in the treasury of such
board shall be allocated to the credit of the component school districts
in accordance with the ratio which the proportion of the cost allocated
to each component school district bears to the total cost of services of
such board of cooperative educational services during the last full
school year of its operation. In the event that a board of cooperative
educational services shall have been established for the supervisory
district of which such component district is then a part, the amount of
such balance allocated to such district shall be paid to the board of
cooperative educational services established for such supervisory
district and any member of the board of cooperative educational services
for such divided district who resides in the territory so transferred
shall on and after the date of such redistricting become a member of the
board of cooperative educational services of the supervisory district to
which the school district in which he or she resides has been
transferred and shall serve as such member until the expiration of the
term of office for which he or she was elected. In the event that there
is no board of cooperative educational services for any component
district the amount of such balance allocated to such district shall be
paid to the treasurer of such district. In such event the state aid
authorized by subdivision five of this section for the last year of
operation of such board of cooperative educational services shall be
distributed to the component school districts in the amounts which would
have accrued to such board of cooperative educational services by reason
of their participation.
 8. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, with the
approval of the commissioner of education, at the request of boards of
education of union free school districts having a population of four
thousand five hundred or more and employing a superintendent of schools,
where such school districts lie within towns included in the supervisory
district or supervisory districts comprising the territory served by a
board of cooperative educational services, such union free school
districts may upon the consent of the board of cooperative educational
services be included as component districts for the purposes of this
section and shall have all of the rights and obligations of such
component districts under this section. Notwithstanding any other
provision of this chapter, and with the consent of the commissioner,
likewise, at the request of the board of education of any city school
district, having a population of less than one hundred twenty-five
thousand inhabitants, such city school district may, upon the consent of
the board of cooperative educational services, be included as a
component district for the purpose of this section and shall have all
the rights and obligations of such component districts under this
section.
 8-a. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section and with the
consent of the commissioner, the city school district of the city of
Syracuse may, upon consent of the board of cooperative educational
services for the sole supervisory district for Onondaga and Madison
counties, be included as a component district for the sole purpose of
operating a combined program and/or constructing a combined facility for
children with developmental disabilities in the city of Syracuse and the
county of Onondaga. Such city school district shall add an amount to its
budget and levy, collect and pay the same to such board of cooperative
educational services to defray the proportional expenses of constructing
and operating such facility for such children. Such city school district
shall not be liable for payment of administrative expenses as provided
for in paragraph b of subdivision four of this section nor shall such
city school district be eligible for the payment of state aid under this
section except such city school district shall receive state aid based
on its proportionate share of building expenses related to this program
as determined by the commissioner.
 Such city school district shall continue to receive aid under
subdivision five of section thirty-six hundred two for the attendance of
children in this program.
 8-b. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section and with the
consent of the commissioner, city school districts of cities in excess
of one hundred twenty-five thousand inhabitants but less than one
million inhabitants, upon consent of the board of cooperative
educational services approved by the commissioner may be included as a
component district of such board of cooperative educational services for
the sole purpose of purchasing student information system services
consistent with standards established by the commissioner from such
board of cooperative educational services. Each such city school
district shall add an amount to its budget and shall levy, collect and
pay the costs of such program to such board of cooperative educational
services to defray their portion of the expenses of such a program. Such
city school district shall not be liable for payment of administrative
expenses as provided for in paragraph b of subdivision four of this
section nor shall such city school district be eligible for payment of
state aid under this section.
 8-c. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any school
district not a component of the board of cooperative educational
services of the supervisory district serving its geographic area,
including a city school district in a city having a population in excess
of one hundred twenty-five thousand inhabitants, upon consent of the
board of cooperative educational services and with the approval of the
commissioner, may be treated in the same manner as a component school
district of the board of cooperative educational services of the
supervisory district serving its geographic area, or an adjoining board
of cooperative educational services in the case of a city school
district in a city having one million inhabitants or more, for the sole
purpose of purchasing instructional support services, as defined by the
commissioner. Each such school district shall add an amount to its
budget and shall levy, collect and pay the costs of such program to such
board of cooperative educational services to defray its portion of the
expenses of such program, including a charge for administration not to
exceed the restricted indirect cost rate, provided that the board of
cooperative educational services shall not charge any portion of the
administrative costs incurred pursuant to this subdivision to its
component school districts. Such school districts shall not be liable
for payment of administrative expenses as provided for in paragraph b of
subdivision four of this section and subdivision one of section nineteen
hundred fifty-one of this article. In the case of city school districts
in a city with a population in excess of one hundred twenty-five
thousand inhabitants, such participation shall be in addition to the
participation authorized by subdivisions eight-a and eight-b of this
section. In the case of a city school district in a city with a
population of one hundred twenty-five thousand inhabitants or more, in
lieu of participation as a component district of an adjoining board of
cooperative educational services, the city school district may opt to
provide such support services as shared services directly or in
collaboration with one or more institutions of higher education. The
approved costs of such services shall be eligible for state aid in
accordance with the provisions of subdivision twenty of section
thirty-six hundred two of this chapter, and shall not be eligible for
aid pursuant to subdivision five of this section.
 8-d. Notwithstanding the provision of any law, rule, or regulation to
the contrary, the city school district of the city of Rochester, upon
the consent of the board of cooperative educational services of the
supervisory district serving its geographic region, may purchase from
such board as a non-component school district, services required by
article nineteen of the education law.
 9. No person shall be eligible to be elected to the office of member
of a board of cooperative educational services who is an employee of a
school district in the supervisory district.
 9-a. No person shall be eligible to hold the office of member of a
board of cooperative educational services who does not reside within the
boundaries of a component school district of any such board.
 10. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter or of any
other general or special law to the contrary, if and when two or more
supervisory districts shall be combined into a new supervisory district
pursuant to the provisions of section twenty-two hundred one of this
chapter, as a result of which the boards of cooperative educational
services for such supervisory districts shall become a single board of
cooperative educational services for such redistricted supervisory
district, such single board of cooperative educational services for such
redistricted supervisory district shall, in such case, allocate the
appropriate amounts of payments required to be made to the dormitory
authority for rental of facilities or otherwise to the school districts
contained, respectively, in such former boards of cooperative
educational services for such supervisory districts, as if such boards
continued to exist in law for the sole purpose of making such payments.
 11. With the approval of the commissioner, one or more boards of
cooperative educational services and one or more school districts may
enter into an agreement or agreements to provide for sharing costs of
construction of or leases for facilities acquired for the purpose of
housing services to be provided by a board or boards of cooperative
educational services for provision of which services such facilities are
constructed or leased, provided, however that no new agreements for the
sharing of costs of construction or leases of facilities may be entered
into pursuant to this subdivision on or after July first, two thousand
three. No such agreement may be for a longer term than is required to
retire any obligations issued by one or more of the parties to such
agreement for the purpose of acquiring such facilities, or to pay the
dormitory authority in full for the acquisition of such facilities.
 13. a. A board of cooperative educational services and the component
school districts of such board of cooperative educational services may
enter into an agreement providing for the acquisition from the dormitory
authority of facilities designed to house services to be provided by
such board of cooperative educational services and for the sharing of
the cost of such acquisition. Such agreement in addition to providing
for all other matters deemed necessary and proper shall (i) set forth
the cost of such acquisition which shall be the amount certified by the
dormitory authority as sufficient to pay the principal of, the
redemption premium, if any, and interest to the earliest of either the
maturity date or the next redemption date on all obligations of the
dormitory authority issued in relation to providing such facilities,
including all incidental expenses in relation thereto, and (ii) provide
for an allocation and apportionment of the cost of such acquisition
among the component school districts on such equitable basis as the
parties thereto shall determine and agree, and the proportion of the
total cost to be provided by each such district in accordance with such
allocation and apportionment. In those cases where construction of such
facilities shall not have been completed, the amount so certified by the
dormitory authority shall include the amount estimated to be necessary
by the dormitory authority to complete such construction by it acting
for and on behalf of such board of cooperative educational services;
provided, however, that such agreement shall provide that such board
shall pay to the dormitory authority any additional amounts thereafter
determined and certified by the dormitory authority to be necessary in
order to complete the construction of such facilities. Existing
contracts awarded by the dormitory authority for the construction of
such facilities shall not be modified, nor shall any work not covered
thereby be authorized, without the prior consent of an officer of such
board authorized to so act by a resolution of such board. Such agreement
shall be executed by all the component school districts of such board of
cooperative educational services whose allocation of administrative
expenses would include a portion of the amounts required to be paid the
dormitory authority for the rental of such facilities.
 b. The acquisition of such facilities is hereby declared and
determined to be a school district purpose and an object or purpose for
which each such component school district is hereby authorized to expend
money and contract indebtedness. The period of probable usefulness of
such object or purpose is hereby determined to be thirty years. Each
such component school district is hereby authorized to finance its share
of the cost of the acquisition of such facilities together with costs
incidental to such financing, including, but not limited to legal fees,
printing, engraving and publication of notices, either from any current
funds legally available therefor, or by the issuance of obligations
pursuant to the local finance law; provided, however, that (i) no
approval of the voters of such component school district shall be
required, (ii) the voting of a special tax or a tax to be collected in
installments shall not be a condition precedent to the adoption of a
bond resolution for such object or purpose, (iii) a majority vote of the
entire voting strength of the board of education shall be sufficient for
adoption of such a bond resolution, which bond resolution may be adopted
at a regular meeting, or a special meeting of the board of education
called on not less than twelve hours oral or written notice, which may
be held either within or outside of such district, (iv) any such bond
resolution shall take effect immediately and shall not be subject either
to a mandatory or permissive referendum, and (v) no such bond resolution
shall be adopted prior to the execution by the board of cooperative
educational services and the component school districts of such board of
cooperative educational services of the agreement required by paragraph
a of this subdivision.
 c. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to permit any school
district in a city (as defined in paragraph two-b of section 2.00 of the
local finance law) to contract indebtedness for such object or purpose
in excess of the limitation prescribed by paragraph b of section 104.00
of such law, without a compliance with the provisions of paragraph c
thereof. A school district, other than a school district in a city, may
issue bonds or bond anticipation notes for such object or purpose in
excess of the limitation prescribed by paragraph d of such section
104.00, without complying with the requirements of subparagraphs one
through three of such paragraph. Notwithstanding any other provision of
law to the contrary, a special act school district, as defined in
subdivision eight of section four thousand one of this chapter, shall
not be deemed a component school district of the board of cooperative
educational services for purposes of this subdivision.
 d. Upon certification by the dormitory authority of the receipt by it
of the amount set forth in the agreement as the cost of the acquisition
of such facilities, title thereto shall vest in the board of cooperative
educational services without any further action or deed or conveyance,
which title shall be held by the board of cooperative educational
services for the benefit and on behalf of all the component school
districts of such board executing such agreement.
 e. The validity of any obligations issued by any school district in
accordance with this subdivision shall not be affected or impaired by
any omission, defect or irregularity in any previous acts or proceedings
by the board of cooperative educational services, or by any of the
component school districts of such board of cooperative educational
services in relation to the authorization of such facilities or the
construction and financing thereof by the dormitory authority.
 f. State aid on account of the acquisition of such facilities shall be
paid to each component school district based upon its respective debt
service or share thereof paid pursuant to the agreement herein provided
for, and upon its respective aid ratio.
 g. Notwithstanding any provision of law, the dormitory authority, any
board of cooperative educational services and any component school
district thereof, are all hereby authorized and empowered to perform any
and all acts and to enter into any and all agreements necessary or
desirable to effectuate the purposes of this subdivision.
 14. a. All provisions of this subdivision shall be applicable only if
any agreement or agreements referred to herein shall be entered into by
a board of cooperative educational services and all of the component
school districts of the board of cooperative educational services. A
board of cooperative educational services and the component school
districts of such board of cooperative educational services may enter
into an agreement providing for the acquisition or construction,
including new construction, additions or reconstruction of facilities
designed to house services to be provided by such board of cooperative
educational services and for the sharing of the cost of such acquisition
or construction. Such agreement in addition to providing for all other
matters deemed necessary and proper shall (i) set forth the cost of such
acquisition or construction and costs incidental thereto and (ii)
provide for an allocation and apportionment of the costs of such
acquisition or construction among the component school districts on such
equitable basis as the parties thereto shall determine and agree, and
the proportion of the total cost to be provided by each such district in
accordance with such allocation and apportionment. Such agreement shall
be executed by all the component school districts of such board of
cooperative educational services and such board of cooperative
educational services. Such agreement may provide that each component
school district of such a board of cooperative educational services
shall issue an agreed upon amount of its obligations in a total amount
sufficient to acquire or construct such facilities, or that all
component districts of such board shall together issue joint obligations
pledging the full faith and credit for all component districts jointly
and that each such district shall pay a specified share of annual debt
service on such joint obligations in accordance with the provisions of
article five-g of the general municipal law and applicable provisions of
the local finance law.
 b. The acquisition or construction of such facilities is hereby
declared and determined to be a public purpose and a school district
purpose and a specific object or purpose for which each such component
school district is hereby authorized to expend money and contract
indebtedness. The period of probable usefulness of such specific object
or purpose is hereby determined to be thirty years. Each such component
school district is hereby authorized to finance its share of the cost of
the acquisition or construction of such facilities, together with costs
incidental thereto, either from any current funds legally available
therefor or by the issuance of obligations pursuant to the local finance
law; provided, however, that (i) no approval of the voters of such
component school district shall be required, (ii) the voting of a
special tax or a tax to be collected in installments shall not be a
condition precedent to the adoption of a bond resolution for such
specific object or purpose, (iii) a majority vote of the entire voting
strength of the board of education shall be sufficient for adoption of
such a bond resolution, which bond resolution may be adopted at a
regular meeting, or a special meeting of the board of education called
on not less than twenty-four hours oral or written notice to the members
of such board as provided in section sixteen hundred six of the
education law, which meeting may be held either within or outside of
such district, (iv) any such bond resolution shall take effect
immediately and shall not be subject to either a mandatory or permissive
referendum, and (v) no such bond resolution shall be adopted prior to
the execution by the board of cooperative educational services and all
of the component school districts of such board of cooperative
educational services of the agreement required by paragraph a of this
subdivision.
 c. No further approval of the voters of such board of cooperative
educational services or any component district thereof shall be required
other than that required by paragraph t of subdivision four of this
section.
 d. Such agreement shall further provide that title to the facility
shall vest in the board of cooperative educational services which title
shall be held by the board of cooperative educational services for the
benefit and on behalf of all the component school districts of such
board executing such agreement.
 e. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to permit any school
district in a city (as defined in paragraph two-b of section 2.00 of the
local finance law) to contract indebtedness for such specific object or
purpose in excess of the limitation prescribed by paragraph b of section
104.00 of such law, without complying with the provisions of paragraph c
thereof. A school district, other than a school district in a city, may
not issue bonds or bond anticipation notes for such specific object or
purpose in excess of the limitation prescribed by paragraph d of such
section 104.00, without complying with the requirements of subparagraphs
one through three of such paragraph. Notwithstanding any other provision
of law to the contrary, a special act school district, as defined in
subdivision eight of section four thousand one of this chapter, shall
not be deemed a component school district of the board of cooperative
educational services for purposes of this subdivision.
 f. State aid on account of the acquisition or construction of such
facilities shall be paid to each component school district based upon
its respective debt service or share thereof paid pursuant to the
agreement herein provided for, and upon its respective aid ratio. Any
such computation of state aid shall further be based upon the cost of
such acquisition, or construction, and including incidental costs, to
the board of cooperative educational services but not to exceed the cost
allowance set forth in subdivision six of section thirty-six hundred two
of this chapter.
 18. Accountability of personal property. On or before January first,
nineteen hundred ninety-seven, each board of cooperative educational
services shall develop and adopt a formal policy on personal property
accountability, including the acquisition, sale and disposal of personal
property. Such policy shall be approved by the commissioner consistent
with regulations adopted for such purpose, which shall include but not
be limited to (a) procedures for the acquisition of personal property
both by purchase and by gift, (b) procedures for the periodic inventory
of personal property, and (c) procedures for the sale of valuable
personal property to the highest bidder, except however that vehicles
received at no cost for use in an authorized welfare to work program may
be transferred at no cost or at cost of repairs, where repairs have been
made to the vehicle at the board of cooperative education services, to
participants who have met all the program requirements. Each such board
shall periodically review and update such policy, provided that any
amendments of the policy shall be subject to approval of the
commissioner.
 19. Where the district has provided transportation to students
enrolled in such district to a school sponsored field trip,
extracurricular activity or any other similar event, it shall provide
transportation back to either the point of departure or to the
appropriate school in the district, unless the parent or legal guardian
of a student participating in such event has provided the school
district with written notice, consistent with district policy,
authorizing an alternative form of return transportation for such
student or unless intervening circumstances make such transportation
impractical. In cases where intervening circumstances make
transportation of a student back to the point of departure or to the
appropriate school in the district impractical, a representative of the
school district shall remain with the student until such student's
parent or legal guardian has been (a) contacted and informed of the
intervening circumstances which make such transportation impractical and
(b) such student had been delivered to his or her parent or legal
guardian.
 * 20. (a) The use of artificial intelligence systems, as defined by
section one hundred three-e of the state technology law, shall not
affect the: (i) existing rights of employees pursuant to an existing
collective bargaining agreement; or (ii) the existing representational
relationships among employee organizations or the bargaining
relationships between the employer and an employee organization.
 (b) The use of such artificial intelligence systems shall not result
in the: (i) discharge, displacement or loss of position, including
partial displacement such as a reduction in the hours of non-overtime
work, wages, or employment benefits, or result in the impairment of
existing collective bargaining agreements; or (ii) transfer of existing
duties and functions currently performed by employees of the board of
cooperative educational services to an artificial intelligence system.
 (c) The use of such artificial intelligence system shall not alter the
rights or benefits, and privileges, including but not limited to terms
and conditions of employment and civil service status. The collective
bargaining unit membership status of all existing employees of the board
of education shall be preserved and protected.
 * NB Repealed July 1, 2028
 § 1951. Budget of board of cooperative educational services. 1. The
final administrative and capital budgets of the board of cooperative
educational services as adopted shall be a charge against all of the
school districts contained in the board of cooperative educational
services, provided, however, that any component school district which
does not elect to participate in any specific educational service
authorized to be furnished by the board of cooperative educational
services shall not be required to pay any share of the moneys provided
in the program budget as salaries of teachers or other personnel
employed in providing such service, for equipment and supplies for such
service or for transportation of pupils to and from the place where such
service is maintained, provided, however, expenditures for the board of
cooperative educational services program, including office and central
administrative expenses, traveling expenses and salaries and benefits of
supervisors and all other central administrative personnel necessary to
carry out its program shall be deemed administrative expenses which
shall be a charge upon all component school districts notwithstanding
the fact that such a component school district elects to not participate
in any specific program offered by the board of cooperative educational
services. Each school district's proportionate share of administrative
and capital expenses shall be determined in accordance with subparagraph
seven of paragraph b of subdivision four of section nineteen hundred
fifty of this article. The board shall allocate the cost of other
services to participating component school districts in accordance with
terms agreed upon between such board and the boards of education and
trustees of each component school district using the local uniform unit
cost of each such service, based on (i) anticipated participation in the
ensuing school year, or (ii) participation in the current year, or (iii)
a two or three year average including participation in the current year,
which unit cost shall be the same for all participating component school
districts and shall be computed in accordance with a uniform methodology
approved annually by at least three-quarters of the participating
component school districts after consultation by local school officials
with their respective boards; provided, however, such unit cost shall be
subject to final adjustment for programs for students with disabilities
based on actual participation in accordance with regulations of the
commissioner. The school authorities of each school district in the
board of cooperative educational services shall add such amount to the
budget of such school district and shall pay such amount to the
treasurer of the board of cooperative educational services, and shall be
paid out by the treasurer upon orders of the board issued and executed
pursuant to the resolution of said board.
 2. a. If the board of cooperative educational services determines to
submit a proposition to authorize the purchase or acquisition of sites
or additions thereto and real property and to construct buildings
thereon and to purchase buildings and construct additions thereto, or to
authorize the sale of any real property the title to which is vested in
the board of cooperative educational services and buildings thereon and
appurtenances or any part thereof, or to authorize the exchange of real
property held by the board of cooperative educational services for the
purpose of improving or changing school sites, to the qualified voters
of the board of cooperative educational services, then the board shall
call a meeting and submit to the qualified voters of the board of
cooperative educational services such a proposition. The board shall
cause a notice of such meeting to be given by public notice of the time
and place of such meeting once in each week within the four weeks next
preceding such meeting, the first publication to be at least twenty-five
days before said meeting, in two newspapers if there shall be two, or in
one newspaper if there shall be but one, having general circulation
within the board of cooperative educational services, but if no
newspaper shall then have general circulation therein, the said notice
shall be posted in at least twenty of the most public places in said
board of cooperative educational services twenty-five days before the
time of such meeting. Such notice shall contain a statement of the
proposition or propositions to be submitted at such meeting.
 b. Such notice and all other notices and reports required to be
published in newspapers under the provisions of this chapter shall be
printed at the rates and for the fees prescribed in section eight
thousand seven of the civil practice law and rules. In the event that
the publishers of one or both of the newspapers having general
circulation in such district shall refuse to print and publish the
notices or reports at the rates and for the fees so prescribed,
publication in such newspaper or newspapers so refusing may be omitted,
in which case the notices or reports shall be posted as required by this
section in lieu of such publication.
 c. A person shall be entitled to vote at any meeting of the voters of
the board of cooperative educational services who is:
 (1) A citizen of the United States.
 (2) Eighteen years of age.
 (3) A resident within the board of cooperative educational services
for a period of thirty days next preceding the meeting at which he
offers to vote.
 No person shall be deemed to be ineligible to vote at any such
meeting, by reason of sex, who has the other qualifications required by
this paragraph.
 d. If a person offering to vote at any meeting of the voters of the
board of cooperative educational services shall be challenged as
unqualified by any legal voter of such board at such meeting, the
chairman presiding at such meeting shall require the person so offering
to make the following declaration: "I do declare and affirm that I am,
and have been, for the thirty days last past, an actual resident of this
board of cooperative educational services and that I am qualified to
vote at this meeting." Every person making such declaration shall be
permitted to vote on all questions proposed at such meeting; but if any
person shall refuse to make such declaration his vote shall be rejected.
 e. A person who shall wilfully make a false declaration of his right
to vote at a meeting of the voters of a board of cooperative educational
services after his right to vote thereat has been challenged, shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person not qualified to vote at such
meeting, who shall vote thereat, shall thereby forfeit ten dollars, to
be sued for by the supervisor for the benefit of the board.
 f. In all propositions arising at said meeting, the vote thereon shall
be by ballot.
 g. If the board of cooperative educational services shall so
determine, voting machines may be used for recording the vote at such
meeting. Before any such machine is used at any such meeting, the
inspectors of election shall examine it and see that all the counters
are set at zero (000) and that the ballot labels are properly placed,
and that the machine is in all respects in proper condition for use. The
use of such machine shall be deemed a compliance with any provision of
law requiring the vote to be by ballot. The board of cooperative
educational services may purchase the necessary voting machine or
machines; or if the county board of elections shall consent thereto,
such machines belonging to the county or belonging to the town in which
any part of said board of cooperative educational services shall be
located may be used at any such meeting, the expense of delivery and
returning and setting up, and any other expense connected therewith
shall be defrayed by the board of cooperative educational services; but
such machines belonging to the county shall not be so used at the time
or times when they may be required under the election law.
 h. The board of cooperative educational services shall appoint a
qualified voter of the board of cooperative educational services as the
chairman of any such meeting. The clerk of the board of cooperative
educational services shall give written notice of appointment to the
person so appointed. If the person appointed as chairman refuses to
accept such appointment, or fails to serve, the board of cooperative
educational services may appoint a qualified voter of the board of
cooperative educational services to fill the vacancy. The meeting shall
be called to order by the chairman.
 i. If the clerk of the board of cooperative educational services shall
not be present, the board may appoint a qualified voter of the board of
cooperative educational services to act as clerk of the meeting. The
board shall appoint qualified voters of the board of cooperative
educational services as assistant clerks of the meeting. The clerk of
the board of cooperative educational services shall give a written
notice of appointment to the persons so appointed as assistant clerks.
If a person appointed as assistant clerk refuses to accept such
appointment, or fails to serve, the board may appoint a qualified voter
of the board of cooperative educational services to fill the vacancy.
Each assistant clerk shall be entitled to compensation at a rate to be
fixed by the board for each day actually and necessarily spent upon the
duties of his office. The clerk and assistant clerk or clerks of the
meeting shall keep an accurate and true written record of all
proceedings of the meeting and shall file such written record with the
clerk of the board of cooperative educational services within
twenty-four hours after the meeting.
 j. The board shall appoint two qualified voters of the board of
cooperative educational services for each ballot box to be used to act
as inspectors of election at such meeting. The clerk of the board of
cooperative educational services shall give written notice of
appointment to the persons so appointed. If a person appointed as
inspector of election refuses to accept such appointment, or fails to
serve, the board may appoint a qualified voter of the board of
cooperative educational services to fill the vacancy. Additional
inspectors of election may be appointed in the same manner when, in the
opinion of the board, special circumstances exist requiring the services
of such additional inspectors. The inspectors of election shall, before
the polls are opened, organize by naming one of their number as chief
inspector of election. Each inspector of election shall be entitled to
compensation at a rate to be fixed by the board for each day actually
and necessarily spent upon the duties of his office.
 k. A poll list containing the name and legal residence of every person
whose vote shall be received shall be kept by the clerk and assistant
clerk or clerks of the meeting.
 l. The board shall at the expense of the board of cooperative
educational services provide a suitable box or boxes in which the
ballots, folded so as to conceal the marking thereon, shall be deposited
as they are received, and shall in like manner provide a voting booth or
booths and the voters shall be required to enter such booth or booths
for the purpose of marking their ballots.
 m. The board shall cause printed ballots to be prepared, setting forth
the proposition or propositions to be voted upon, in the form applicable
to the submission of a proposition to the meeting of a union free school
district.
 n. All qualified voters entitled to vote who are in the place where
the meeting is held at or before the time of closing the polls shall be
allowed to vote.
 o. Immediately upon the close of the polls the inspectors of election
shall canvass the ballots in the same manner as ballots are canvassed at
a meeting of a union free school district. The chairman of the meeting
shall declare to the meeting the result of each ballot as announced to
him by the inspectors of election, and those propositions receiving a
majority of the votes of the voters present and voting shall be deemed
approved.
 p. The meeting of the voters of the board of cooperative educational
services shall be conducted in the same manner as a meeting of the
voters of a union free school district.
 q. If the board shall so determine it may cause the board of
cooperative educational services to be divided into election districts
provided that in each such election district the number of qualified
voters shall at least equal seven hundred. If such resolution be adopted
it shall divide the board of cooperative educational services into such
number of election districts as the board may determine, provided that
if circumstances will permit there shall be a schoolhouse in each
election district or in as many such election districts as possible. The
election districts so formed shall continue in existence until modified
by resolution of the board. Such resolution shall accurately describe
the boundaries of each such district by street, alley and highway or
otherwise. Meetings of the voters of the board of cooperative
educational services shall be held thereafter in such election
districts. The board shall designate the place within each election
district where the meetings shall be held. When the board of cooperative
educational services is divided into election districts, the board shall
cause the meeting to be held in each election district pursuant to the
provisions of this subdivision and shall appoint a chairman of the
meeting, clerks and assistant clerks of the meeting and inspectors of
election for each election district. The board shall designate the
election district in which the clerk of the board of cooperative
educational services shall be present. Where the board of cooperative
educational services has been divided into election districts, the
inspectors of election shall make a written report of the results of the
ballot, signed by all such inspectors, to the chief inspector of
election of each election district. The chief inspector of election of
each election district shall within twenty-four hours file such written
report with the clerk of the board of cooperative educational services.
The board shall thereupon within twenty-four hours tabulate and declare
the results of the ballot.
 r. All disputes concerning the validity of any meeting of the voters
of a board of cooperative educational services or of any of the acts of
the officers of such meeting shall be referred to the commissioner of
education for determination and his decisions in the matter shall be
final and not subject to review. The commissioner may in his discretion
order a new meeting.
 s. The board of cooperative educational services shall provide
absentee ballots to qualified voters. The commissioner shall adopt
regulations for the purposes of implementing the provisions of this
paragraph which shall include, but not be limited to, creating the
procedure for which such absentee ballots shall be submitted; providing
that such absentee ballots shall be, as nearly as practicable, in the
same form as those voted at the district election; requiring that any
absentee ballot applicant is or will be, on the day of the vote, a
qualified voter of the board of cooperative educational services and
that he or she will be on such date over eighteen years of age, a
citizen of the United States and has or will have resided in said
district for thirty days next preceding such date; and providing
instructions as to the proper marking thereof.
 t. The board of cooperative educational services shall provide early
mail ballots to qualified voters. The commissioner shall adopt
regulations for the purposes of implementing the provisions of this
paragraph which shall include, but not be limited to, creating the
procedure for which such early mail ballots shall be submitted;
providing that such early mail ballots shall be, as nearly as
practicable, in the same form as those voted at the district election;
requiring that any early mail ballot applicant is or will be, on the day
of the vote, a qualified voter of the board of cooperative educational
services and that he or she will be on such date over eighteen years of
age, a citizen of the United States and has or will have resided in said
district for thirty days next preceding such date; and providing
instructions as to the proper marking thereof.
 3. a. For the nineteen hundred ninety-seven--ninety-eight school year
and thereafter, the commissioner shall prescribe, in consultation with
the comptroller of the state of New York and within the general taxonomy
of accounts established by the comptroller pursuant to section
thirty-six of the general municipal law, a uniform and specific taxonomy
for service programs and activities of boards of cooperative educational
services. In developing such prescribed taxonomy, the commissioner shall
consider the recommendations of an advisory panel of district
superintendents of schools or their representatives as appointed by the
commissioner for such purpose.
 b. In developing and adopting a budget for the nineteen hundred
ninety-seven--ninety-eight school year pursuant to this article, each
board of cooperative educational services may use the same locally
selected specific taxonomy for service programs and activities as used
for the nineteen hundred ninety-six--ninety-seven school year within the
general taxonomy of accounts established by the comptroller pursuant to
section thirty-six of the general municipal law, provided that all such
accounts shall be converted to the uniform and specific taxonomy
prescribed by the commissioner pursuant to paragraph a of this
subdivision by October first, nineteen hundred ninety-seven and provided
that copies of the approved program, capital and administrative budgets
as converted to such uniform and specific taxonomy shall be submitted to
the commissioner on or before October first, nineteen hundred
ninety-seven.
 c. In developing and adopting a budget pursuant to this article for
the nineteen hundred ninety-eight--ninety-nine school year and
thereafter, each board of cooperative educational services shall use the
uniform and specific taxonomy for service programs and activities
prescribed by the commissioner pursuant to paragraph a of this
subdivision.
 § 1952. Technologies network ties program. 1. There is hereby
established a model technologies network ties program to pilot
innovative uses of technology for interactive instruction and
administrative purposes, in order to determine the feasibility of
developing a statewide technologies network ties program.
 2. The commissioner shall develop a plan, subject to the approval of
the director of the budget, for the allocation of such funds as may be
made available for this program, including competitive grants to school
districts and boards of cooperative educational services for interactive
instruction. Such plan shall include a listing of the school districts,
boards of cooperative educational services and library network systems
selected to take part in the pilot program.
 3. Objectives of the program shall include the development of a
network consisting of a structure which will electronically link all
participating agencies and allow for the transfer of administrative and
instructional data between and among the participating sites. The
commissioner, in consultation with appropriate consultants and
representatives of participating districts and boards of cooperative
educational services, will be responsible for determining the
appropriate communication standards and protocols for the selection of
hardware and software to be used in all facets of the project.
 4. The commissioner shall adopt regulations to implement the
provisions of this section.
 ARTICLE 40-A
 SHARED PERSONNEL
Section 1980. Definitions.
 1981. Shared personnel between school districts.
 § 1980. Definitions. When used in this article, the following terms
shall mean:
 1. The term "board of education" shall mean the trustee, trustees or
board of education of any common, union free, central, central high or
city school district, or a board of cooperative educational services.
 2. The term "school district" shall mean any common, union free,
central, central high or city school district, or a board of cooperative
educational services.
 3. The term "district superintendent" shall mean the chief
administrative officer of a supervisory district as defined in article
forty-five of this chapter.
 § 1981. Shared personnel between school districts. 1. Notwithstanding
any other provision of law, school authorities of any school district
may arrange to share the services of a superintendent, associate
superintendent, assistant superintendent or any other employee with
districtwide administrative or supervisory responsibilities with one or
more other school districts.
 2. a. Any such shared personnel who are not in a position for which
tenure may be granted pursuant to this chapter shall be considered to be
employed by all participating school districts. Any decisions regarding
the appointment or compensation of such shared personnel shall be made
with the consent of a majority of each of the boards of education of
each participating school district. Compensation and benefits of such
shared personnel shall be provided by each participating school
district, based on an agreed-upon formula.
 b. Each agreement to share personnel who are in a position for which
tenure may be granted pursuant to this chapter shall designate a
participating district as the principal employing district. Any such
shared personnel shall be considered to be employed by the principal
employing district; provided that any decisions regarding the
probationary appointment and compensation package of such shared
personnel shall be made with the consent of a majority of each of the
boards of education of each participating district. Decisions regarding
the termination, discipline or tenure of such shared personnel shall be
made by the principal employing district in consultation with all other
participating districts, and services rendered by such shared personnel
under such agreement in any other participating district shall be deemed
to have been rendered in the principal employing district for all
purposes under this chapter, including tenure credit, seniority and
discipline.
 (i) The agreement to share personnel shall allow other participating
districts to be substituted as the principal employing district.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, upon substitution of a new
principal employing district, the shared employee shall be considered an
employee of the new principal employing district with the same tenure
status he or she maintained in such prior principal employing district.
For any such shared employee for salary, sick leave and any other
purposes, the length of service credited in such prior principal
employing district shall be credited as employment time with such new
principal employing district.
 (ii) Where the principal employing district abolishes the position of
a shared employee and creates a new position for the performance of
similar duties, in determining the right of the employee under
subdivision one of section three thousand thirteen or subdivision one of
section twenty-five hundred ten to appointment to such new position, the
new position shall be deemed similar if more than forty percent of the
functions of the new position were performed by the shared employee in
the shared position.
 (iii) Where a participating district other than the principal
employing district determines to discontinue the services of a shared
employee pursuant to the terms of the agreement to share personnel, the
employee shall retain his or her tenure rights in the principal
employing district only.
 3. School authorities of any school district sharing personnel
pursuant to this section shall retain the right to promulgate
educational or administrative policies pertaining to their respective
school district pursuant to law, rule or regulation.
 4. All agreements to share personnel pursuant to this section shall be
subject to the approval and oversight of the district superintendent, if
any, or by the commissioner or his designee if there is no local
district superintendent.
 5. The commissioner may promulgate rules and regulations to implement
the provisions of this article.
 ARTICLE 41
 DISTRICT MEETINGS
 PART I
 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 2001. Notice of first meeting of district.
 2002. Time and place of annual meeting.
 2003. Notice of annual meeting in common school district.
 2004. Notice of annual meeting in union free school
 district.
 2005. Special meeting to transact business of annual
 meeting.
 2006. Special meeting in common school district.
 2007. Special meeting in union free school district.
 2008. Call of special district meeting by district
 superintendent.
 2009. Additional requirements of notice where tax to be
 authorized to be levied in installments.
 2010. Effect of want of due notice of district meetings.
 2011. Duty to attend district meetings.
 2012. Qualifications of voters at district meetings.
 2014. Registration of voters.
 2015. Register to be filed; addition to and correction of
 register; challenges.
 2016. Review of registration procedure by supreme court or
 county judge.
 2017. Division of union free school district into election
 districts.
 2018. Nomination of candidates for the office of member of
 the board of education in all union free school
 districts or for the office of member of the board
 of trustees in all common school districts which
 have elected to vote for trustees at a time or place
 separate from the annual meeting.
 2018-a. Absentee ballots for school district elections.
 2018-b. Absentee ballots for school district elections by poll
 registration.
 2018-c. Additional voting procedures.
 2018-d. Military voters.
 2018-e. Early mail ballots for school district elections.
 2018-f. Early mail ballots for school district elections by
 poll registration.
 2019. Declaration in case of challenge of voter.
 2019-a. Voting by persons whose names are not in the
 registration poll ledgers.
 2020. Penalty for false declaration or unauthorized vote.
 2021. Powers of voters.
 2022. Vote on school district budgets and on the election of
 school district trustees and board of education
 members.
 2022-a. Disaster; additional day for voting.
 2023. Levy of tax for certain purposes without vote;
 contingency budget.
 2023-a. Limitations upon school district tax levies.
 2023-b. Certification of compliance with property tax freeze
 requirements.
 2023-b*2. Certification of compliance with tax levy limit.
 2024. Reference to commissioner of education.
 2025. Procedures at school district meetings.
 2029. Poll list.
 2030. Ballot box; voting booth.
 2031. Election of officers.
 2031-a. Electioneering within one hundred feet of polling
 place prohibited; distance markers.
 2032. Ballots for election of school district officers.
 2033. Voting after closing of polls.
 2034. Canvass of votes; declaration of result.
 2035. Use of voting machines at school district meetings or
 elections.
 2036. Effect of failure to appoint or elect qualified voters
 as district meeting or election officials.
 2037. Determination of meeting or election disputes.
 2038. Transmission of publicly available data to the New
 York voting and elections database.
 2039. Application of article.
 § 2001. Notice of first meeting of district. 1. Whenever any school
district shall be formed, or two or more common school districts are
consolidated as provided in section fifteen hundred twelve, the district
superintendent of schools, or any one or more of such district
superintendents within whose districts it may be, shall prepare a notice
describing such district and appointing a time and place for the first
district meeting, and deliver such notice to a taxable inhabitant of the
district.
 2. It shall be the duty of such inhabitant to notify every other
inhabitant of the district qualified to vote at the meeting, by
delivering to him a copy of the notice of such meeting, or in case of
his absence from home, by leaving a copy thereof, or so much thereof as
relates to the time, place and object of the meeting, at the place of
his abode, at least six days before the time of the meeting.
 3. In case such meeting shall not be held, and in the opinion of the
district superintendent or superintendents it shall be necessary to hold
such meeting before the time herein fixed for the first annual meeting,
he shall deliver another such notice to a taxable inhabitant of the
district, who shall serve it as provided in subdivision two of this
section.
 4. Every taxable inhabitant, to whom a notice of any district meeting
shall be delivered for service pursuant to any provision of part one of
this article, who shall refuse or neglect to serve the same, shall
forfeit five dollars to be sued for by the supervisor for the benefit of
the district.
 § 2002. Time and place of annual meeting. 1. The annual meeting and
election of each school district shall be held on the third Tuesday of
May in each year, provided, however that such annual meeting and
election shall be held on the second Tuesday in May if the commissioner
at the request of a local school board certifies no later than March
first that such election would conflict with religious observances.
Unless the hour and place thereof shall have been fixed by a vote of a
previous district meeting, the same shall be held in the schoolhouse, or
any building owned or leased by the district, at seven-thirty p.m. in
the case of a school district that is not divided into election
districts and conducts its election or vote by recording the ayes or
noes of the qualified voters attending, or, in the case of all other
districts, during at least six consecutive hours after six a.m., two of
which hours shall be after six p.m. as determined by resolution of the
trustees or board of education, provided, however, that the trustees or
board of education of any school district that conducted its annual
meeting at seven-thirty p.m. in nineteen hundred ninety-seven may
conduct its annual election and budget vote at such time in nineteen
hundred ninety-eight. If a district possesses more than one schoolhouse
or building, or leases more than one building, it shall be held in the
one usually employed for that purpose, unless the trustees or board of
education designate another, provided that if the school district is
divided into election districts such annual meeting and election shall
be held at such place in each election district as the board of
education may designate. If the district possesses no schoolhouse or
building, or does not lease a building, or if the schoolhouse or
building shall not be accessible or adequate, then the annual meeting
and election shall be held at such place as the trustees or board of
education, or the clerk, shall designate in the notice.
 2. The use of any building owned or leased by a school district, as
described in subdivision one of this section, shall comply with the
accessibility provisions set out in subdivisions one-a and one-b of
section 4-104 of the election law.
 § 2003. Notice of annual meeting in common school district. 1. The
district clerk of each common school district shall give notice of the
availability of the statement of expenditures pursuant to the provisions
of section sixteen hundred eight of this chapter and shall also give
notice of the time and place of the annual meeting by publishing a
notice four times within the seven weeks next preceding such annual
meeting, the first publication to be at least forty-five days before
said meeting, in two newspapers if there shall be two, or in one
newspaper if there shall be but one, having general circulation within
such district. But if no newspaper shall then have general circulation
therein, the said notice shall be posted in at least twenty of the most
public places in said district forty-five days before the time of such
meeting.
 2. Such notice shall also state that petitions nominating candidates
for the office of member of the board of trustees must be filed with the
clerk of the district between the hours of nine a.m. and five p.m., not
later than the thirtieth day preceding the school meeting or election at
which the candidates so nominated are to be elected.
 3. Such notice and all other notices and reports required to be
published in newspapers under the provisions of this chapter shall be
printed at the rates and for the fees prescribed in the civil practice
law and rules. In the event that the publishers of one or both of the
newspapers having general circulation in such district shall refuse to
print and publish the notices or reports at the rates and for the fees
so prescribed, publication in such newspaper or newspapers so refusing
may be omitted, in which case the notices or reports shall be posted as
required by this section in lieu of such publication.
 § 2004. Notice of annual meeting in union free school district. 1. The
clerk of each union free school district shall give notice of the
availability of the statement of expenditures pursuant to the provisions
of section seventeen hundred sixteen of this chapter and shall also give
notice of the time and place of the annual meeting and the notice
required by section seventeen hundred sixteen of this chapter by
publishing a notice four times within the seven weeks next preceding
such district meeting, the first publication to be at least forty-five
days before said meeting, in two newspapers if there shall be two, or in
one newspaper if there shall be but one, having general circulation
within such district. But if no newspaper shall then have general
circulation therein, the said notice shall be posted in at least twenty
of the most public places in said district forty-five days before the
time of such meeting.
 2. Such notice shall also state that petitions nominating candidates
for the office of member of the board of education must be filed in the
office of the clerk of the district between the hours of nine a.m. and
five p.m., not later than the thirtieth day preceding the school meeting
or election at which the candidates so nominated are to be elected.
 5. If the district has personal registration of voters pursuant to
section two thousand fourteen of this chapter, and has not been divided
into election districts pursuant to section two thousand seventeen of
this chapter, such notice shall also state:
 a. the place and hour or hours at which the board of registration
shall meet to prepare the register of the school district and any person
shall be entitled to have his name placed upon such register, provided
that at such meeting of the board of registration, he is known or proven
to the satisfaction of such board of registration, to be then or
thereafter entitled to vote at the school meeting or election for which
such register is prepared,
 b. that the register prepared pursuant to section two thousand
fourteen of this chapter will be filed in the office of the clerk of the
district; that such register will be open for inspection by any
qualified voter of the district and the hours during which such register
will be open for inspection on each of the five days prior to and the
day set for the meeting or election, except Sundays.
 6. If the district has been divided into election districts pursuant
to section two thousand seventeen of this chapter, such notice shall
also state:
 a. the place and hour or hours in each election district at which the
members of the board of registration shall meet to prepare the register
of the school district for each election district and any person shall
be entitled to have his name placed upon such register, provided that at
such meeting of the members of the board of registration he is known or
proven to the satisfaction of such members to be then or thereafter
entitled to vote at the school meeting or election for which such
register is prepared,
 b. the place in each election district where the meeting or election
shall be held,
 c. that the register prepared pursuant to section two thousand
fourteen of this chapter will be filed in the office of the clerk of the
district; that such register will be open for inspection by any
qualified voter of the district and the hours during which such register
will be open for inspection on each of the five days prior to and the
day set for the meeting or election, except Sundays,
 d. if the district is divided into election districts and voting
machines are used, that a statement of estimated expenses for the
ensuing year will be completed and copies made available at each
schoolhouse in the district in which school is maintained during certain
designated hours on each day other than a Saturday, Sunday or holiday
during the fourteen days immediately preceding such meeting, together
with the text of any resolution which will be presented to the voters.
 7. Such notice shall also state that applications for early mail and
absentee ballots for election of board members may be applied for at the
office of the clerk of the district. Such notice, in such case, shall
further state that a list of all persons to whom early mail and absentee
ballots shall have been issued, will be available in the said office of
the clerk on each of the five days prior to the day of the election
except Sundays, and that such list will also be posted at the polling
place or places at the election of members of the board of education.
 8. Such notice and all other notices and reports required to be
published in newspapers under the provisions of this chapter shall be
printed at the rates and for the fees prescribed in section fifteen
hundred fifty-one of the civil practice act. In the event that the
publishers of one or both of the newspapers having general circulation
in such district shall refuse to print and publish the notices or
reports at the rates and for the fees so prescribed, publication in such
newspaper or newspapers so refusing may be omitted, in which case the
notices or reports shall be posted as required by this section in lieu
of such publication.
 § 2005. Special meeting to transact business of annual meeting.
Whenever the time for holding the annual meeting in a school district
shall pass without such meeting being held, a special meeting, to be
held on the date specified for a school budget revote pursuant to
subdivision three of section two thousand seven of this part, shall
thereafter be called by the trustees or by the clerk of such district
for the purpose of transacting the business of the annual meeting; and
if no such meeting be called by the trustees or the clerk within ten
days after such time shall have passed, the district superintendent of
the supervisory district in which said school district is situated or
the commissioner of education may order any inhabitant of such district
to give notice of such meeting in the manner provided in section two
thousand one of this part, and the officers of the district shall make
to such meeting the reports required to be made at the annual meeting,
subject to the same penalty in case of neglect; and the officers elected
at such meeting shall hold their respective offices only until the next
annual meeting and until their successors are elected and shall have
qualified. Notice of such annual meeting shall comply with the
requirements of section two thousand three or section two thousand four
of this part by publishing such notices once in each week within the two
weeks next preceding such special meeting, the first publication to be
at least fourteen days before such meeting and any required posting to
be fourteen days before the time of such meeting. If the qualified
voters at such special district meeting defeat the school district
budget, the trustees or board of education shall adopt a contingency
budget pursuant to section two thousand twenty-three of this part.
Notwithstanding any other provision in law, the trustees or board of
education following the adoption of a contingency budget may call a
special district meeting for a second vote on the proposed budget
pursuant to the requirements of subdivision three of section two
thousand seven or subdivision three of section two thousand six of this
chapter.
 § 2006. Special meeting in common school district. 1. A special
district meeting of a common school district shall be held whenever
called by the trustees or whenever called for by petition of the voters
pursuant to subdivision three of this section. The notice thereof shall
state the purposes for which it is called, and no business shall be
transacted at such special meeting, except that which is specified in
the notice; and the district clerk, or, if the office be vacant, or the
clerk be sick or absent, or shall refuse to act, a trustee, or some
taxable inhabitant, by order of the trustees, shall serve the notice
upon each inhabitant of the district qualified to vote at district
meetings, at least six days before the day of the meeting, in the manner
prescribed in section two thousand one of this part or the trustees
shall give notice of the time and place of such special meeting, and the
notice shall be published once in each week within the four weeks next
preceding the special meeting, the first publication to be at least
twenty-two days before said meeting, in two newspapers if there shall be
two, or in one newspaper if there shall be but one, having general
circulation within such common school district. But if no newspaper
shall then have general circulation therein, the said notice shall be
posted in at least twenty public places in said district twenty-two days
but not more than twenty-eight days before the time of such meeting.
 2. The inhabitants of a district may, at any annual meeting, adopt a
resolution prescribing some other mode of giving notice of special
meetings, which resolution and the mode prescribed thereby shall
continue in force until rescinded or modified at some subsequent annual
meeting.
 3. Whenever the voters shall have defeated the budget of the school
district at the annual meeting and election, the trustees may call a
special district meeting for a school budget revote to be held on the
third Tuesday of June, provided, however that such budget revote shall
be held on the second Tuesday in June if the commissioner at the request
of a local school board certifies no later than March first that such
vote would conflict with religious observances. The trustees shall give
the notices required by subdivision one of section two thousand three of
this part and this section by publishing such notices once in each week
within the two weeks next preceding such special meeting, the first
publication to be at least fourteen days before such meeting, with any
required posting to be fourteen days before the time of such meeting.
 § 2007. Special meeting in union free school district. 1. The board of
education in a union free school district shall have power to call
special meetings of the inhabitants of the district whenever they shall
deem it necessary and proper, in the manner prescribed in section two
thousand four of this chapter. The notice of each special meeting shall
state the purposes for which it is called, and no business shall be
transacted at such special meeting, except that which is specified in
the notice.
 2. In a union free school district whose limits correspond with those
of any incorporated village, the board of education shall have power to
call special meetings of the inhabitants of the district for the
purposes mentioned in section four hundred sixteen in the manner
prescribed in said section two thousand four of this chapter.
 3. a. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivisions one and two of
this section, and of section two thousand four of this part, whenever
the voters of the district shall have defeated the budget of the
district, in whole or in part, or whenever the board of education shall
have rejected all bids for a contract or contracts for public work,
transportation or purchase, and whenever in either such case the board
of education shall deem it necessary and proper to call a special
meeting to take appropriate action, the board of education shall be
authorized to give the notices required by subdivision one of section
two thousand four of this part by publishing such notices once in each
week within the two weeks next preceding such special meeting, the first
publication to be at least fourteen days before such meeting and any
required posting to be fourteen days before the time of such meeting.
 b. A school budget revote called pursuant to paragraph a of this
subdivision shall be held on the third Tuesday of June, provided,
however that such budget revote shall be held on the second Tuesday in
June if the commissioner at the request of a local school board
certifies no later than March first that such vote would conflict with
religious observances.
 c. Notwithstanding the provisions of section two thousand fourteen of
this part, where a school district shall have adopted personal
registration, the board of registration shall meet on such day or days
as shall be fixed by the board of education, the last day of which,
however, shall not be more than seven nor less than two days preceding
any school district meeting notices for which shall have been given as
provided in this subdivision.
 4. The board of education in a union free school district shall, in
each case when a special district meeting is required or permitted to
elect members of such board of education, call such meeting for at least
six consecutive hours between the hours of seven o'clock in the forenoon
and nine o'clock in the afternoon, at least two of which hours shall be
after six o'clock in the afternoon, and notice shall be given in the
manner prescribed in section two thousand four of this chapter for
meetings held over the hours.
 § 2008. Call of special district meeting by district superintendent.
1. When the clerk and all the trustees of a school district shall have
removed from the district, or their offices shall be vacant, so that a
special meeting can not be called, as hereinbefore provided, the
district superintendent may in like manner give notice of, and call a
special district meeting.
 2. Upon the filing with the trustee or board of education of a
petition requesting such officers to call a special district meeting,
which petition shall state the purpose thereof and shall be signed by
twenty-five qualified voters or five percent of the number of voters who
voted in the previous annual election of the members of the board of
education or trustees, said number to be determined by the number of
persons recorded on the poll list as having voted at such election,
whichever shall be greater, such trustee or board of education shall
proceed to call such meeting by giving notice thereof within twenty days
thereafter unless it shall appear
 (a) that the purpose for which such meeting is sought to be called is
not within the power of the voters of the district, or
 (b) that such purpose is illegal, or
 (c) that a bond or note resolution has been adopted and such petition
is not filed within twenty days after publication of notice of such
resolution pursuant to section 81.00 of the local finance law, or
 (d) that other valid reason exists for refusing to call such meeting
which reason when appealed to the commissioner of education shall be
deemed by him to be sufficient cause for such refusal.
 3. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, any
proposition submitted by the voters that requires the expenditure of
money shall be subject to the requirements set forth in subdivision nine
of section two thousand twenty-three-a of this part.
 § 2009. Additional requirements of notice where tax to be authorized
to be levied in installments. Where any proposition is to be submitted
to an annual or special district meeting or election authorizing a tax
to be levied in installments as a condition precedent to the issuance of
obligations of the district the notice of the meeting shall, in addition
to complying with the requirements of this article, also comply with the
requirements of section four hundred sixteen of this chapter and
applicable provisions of the local finance law.
 § 2010. Effect of want of due notice of district meetings. The
proceedings of no district meeting, annual or special, shall be held
illegal for want of a due notice to all the persons qualified to vote
thereat, unless it shall appear that the omission to give such notice
was wilful and fraudulent.
 § 2011. Duty to attend district meetings. Whenever any district
meeting shall be duly called, it shall be the duty of the inhabitants
qualified to vote thereat, to assemble at the time and place fixed for
the meeting.
 § 2012. Qualifications of voters at district meetings. A person shall
be entitled to vote at any school meeting or election for the election
of school district officers, and upon all other matters which may be
brought before such meeting or election, who is: 1. A citizen of the
United States.
 2. Eighteen years of age.
 3. A resident within the district for a period of thirty days next
preceding the meeting or election at which he offers to vote.
 4. No person shall have the right to register for or vote at any
school meeting or election who would not be qualified to register for or
vote at an election in accordance with the provisions of section 5-106
of the election law.
 No person shall be deemed to be ineligible to vote at any such meeting
or election, by reason of sex, who has the other qualifications required
by this section; and notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this
section, no Indian eighteen years of age or over who, having been born
in the United States to a member of an Indian tribe, or having been
naturalized or otherwise acquired citizenship, shall have resided on an
Indian reservation in the state for a period of thirty days next
preceding the meeting or election at which he offers to vote or the
spouse of such Indian shall be deemed ineligible to vote at any such
meeting or election of the school district where the majority, as
determined by the commissioner, of the Indian children of such
reservation are being educated under a contract pursuant to subdivision
two of section forty-one hundred one of this chapter, except that the
parents or guardians of Indian children of such reservation who are
being educated in the schools of a district other than the district
which educates the majority of such children, shall be eligible to vote
only in the district where their children are being so educated.
 § 2014. Registration of voters. 1. In any union free school district,
the board of education may upon its own motion provide for the personal
registration of voters at school meetings or elections in such district
as provided in this section.
 In such event, the board of education in such district shall
immediately designate four qualified voters of such district to
constitute a board of registration for such district to serve until the
thirtieth day following the next annual meeting or election of such
district. Thereafter, the board of education of such district shall
annually designate, not later than the thirtieth day following the
annual meeting or election of such district, four qualified voters of
such district to constitute a board of registration for such district.
Such members of the board of registration so appointed shall serve until
the thirtieth day after the annual meeting or election of such district
in the following year. In the event that a vacancy shall occur on the
board of registration, the board of education at any time may designate
a qualified voter of such district as a member of the board of
registration for such district to fill the vacancy.
 Each member of the board of registration shall be entitled to
compensation at a rate to be fixed by the board of education for each
day actually and necessarily spent upon the duties of his office.
 2. The board of registration of such district shall meet during the
annual meeting or election of such district at the place where such
annual meeting or election is held for the purpose of preparing a
register for meetings or elections held subsequent to such annual
meeting or election. Such board of registration of such district shall,
in addition, meet on such day or days as shall be fixed by the board of
education, the last day of which, however, shall not be more than
fourteen nor less than five days preceding each school meeting or
election in such district at such place in the school district, and at
such hours, as the board of education shall by resolution designate,
which hours shall include at least four consecutive hours between seven
o'clock in the morning and eight o'clock in the evening, for the purpose
of preparing a register for such meeting or election provided, however,
that at any annual meeting the majority of the voters may adopt a
resolution authorizing the registration of voters during the hours for
enrollment of children for a school term; provided further, however,
that such voters may also authorize registration during certain
specified hours of the school day, at the office of the district clerk
or business office of the school district by the district clerk,
assistant district clerk or a member of the board of registration. Such
registration shall not take place less than five days preceding any
school meeting or election. Such registration shall be effective to
include the next annual meeting and shall take place at the school or
schools within the district designated in the resolution. The register
shall, so far as practical, be in the same form as the register of
voters in an election district for general elections in a city or
village having five thousand inhabitants or more, under the election
law. The register shall be arranged alphabetically by the surnames, and
the place of residence by street and number or otherwise of each person
named on the list shall be given, or if none, some description
accurately locating such place of residence shall be given on such
register. In addition, the register shall have a column or columns in
which the inspectors of election may indicate whether each person named
on the list shall have voted in any election or elections or at any
meeting or meetings. The district clerk of such district shall attend
with the board of registration. The board of registration and the
district clerk, shall, for the annual meeting or election of the school
district, prepare a register of the qualified voters of such school
district who shall present themselves personally for registration. Such
board of registration shall in like manner prepare a register for each
special school meeting or election within such school district, except
that the register prepared at the last annual meeting or election and
the register or registers for any subsequent special meeting, meetings,
election, or elections in such school district shall be used by them as
the basis therefor. The register so prepared shall include all persons
who shall have presented themselves personally for registration in
accordance herewith and may include all persons who shall have been
previously registered hereunder for any annual or special meeting or
election and who shall have voted at any annual or special meeting or
any election held or conducted during the four calendar years prior to
the year in which such register is being prepared; and the board of
registration shall remove from the register all persons who are known to
be deceased, who have moved out of the school district or who are
otherwise not qualified as school district electors. The district clerk
shall furnish the necessary blank books and blanks at the expense of
such school district. School meetings and elections in such school
district shall be thereafter conducted in the manner provided by this
chapter, except that no person shall be entitled to vote thereat whose
name does not appear upon the register of the school district in which
he claims to be entitled to vote. In all cases, the board of education
shall cause the district clerk to give the notice required by
subdivision four of section two thousand four of this chapter.
 3. The board of education may, upon its own motion and at least two
months prior to a school district meeting or election at which the same
is to be effective, revoke the provisions for personal registration
adopted as provided in this section. However, the board of education may
not thereafter provide for personal registration unless authorized by
the voters at a district meeting or election.
 4. Whenever any union free school district in which personal
registration of voters at school meetings or elections therein is
required as provided in subdivision one of this section shall have been
divided into election districts pursuant to section two thousand
seventeen of this chapter, the board of education shall appoint a board
of registration pursuant to the provisions of subdivision one of this
section consisting of as many members as shall provide two for each
election district, shall designate a place in each such election
district and shall designate two members of the board of registration to
attend thereat for the purpose of preparing a register for such election
district. At the same time, the board of education shall designate the
registration place at which the district clerk shall attend. The
provisions of subdivisions one, two and three of this section shall
apply with respect to the registration of voters in such union free
school districts, except as may be inconsistent with the foregoing
provisions of this subdivision, and except that the notice provided to
be given by the district clerk in subdivision two of this section and
subdivision five and six of section two thousand four of this chapter
shall describe each of the election districts as required in subdivision
two of section two thousand seventeen and subdivision six of section two
thousand four of this chapter.
 5. The provisions of this section shall not apply with respect to any
person registered to vote pursuant to the provisions of section three
hundred fifty-two of the election law.
 6. In any case where a union free school district has provided for the
registration of voters during specified hours of the school day at the
office of the district clerk, assistant clerk or a member of the board
of registration, such school district's board of registration, at the
discretion of the board of education, may not be required to meet prior
to the annual meeting or election, or prior to a special meeting or
special election pursuant to subdivision two of this section, solely for
the purposes of registering voters.
 § 2015. Register to be filed; addition to and correction of register;
challenges. 1. The register prepared as provided in section two
thousand fourteen of this chapter shall, immediately upon its completion
and not less than five days prior to the time set for the school meeting
or election at which it is to be used, be filed in the office of the
clerk of the district, and thereafter shall at all reasonable times be
open to inspection by any qualified voter of such school district on
each day up to and including the day set for the meeting or election,
except Sundays.
 2. The name of no voter may be placed upon a register unless such
voter appears before the board of registration except if a qualified
voter is a resident of a school district and his name appears on a
register as a resident of another district, a written sworn statement
may be filed by such voter with the clerk of the district showing his
correct residence and the name of such voter shall thereupon be stricken
from such register and placed upon the proper register.
 3. A qualified voter may, upon the examination of such list, file a
written challenge of the qualifications as a voter of any person whose
name appears on such list.
 4. Statements and challenges shall be received and preserved by the
clerk of the district or other person designated by the board of
education, and immediately upon receiving any such sworn statement of a
voter, applying to have his name placed upon the register or any
challenge as to a name already thereon, the clerk shall file such
statement or challenge or copy thereof, with the register and hold the
same open for inspection by any qualified voter of the district. Upon
the face of such statement or challenge, the clerk shall write clearly
what action was taken with reference thereto, immediately upon such
action being taken.
 5. The clerk of the district shall cause a copy of the register of
such school district to be delivered on the day of the meeting or
election before the opening of the polls to the inspectors of election
at each voting place within the district at the place or places where
the meeting or election is to be held. If there be not more than one
voting place, the clerk shall produce the register at the place of the
meeting or election, at the opening thereof. The inspectors of election
at each voting place shall indicate on the copy of the register
delivered to them, and opposite the name of each person so registered,
whether each such person did vote in such election or at such meeting.
 § 2016. Review of registration procedure by supreme court or county
judge. 1. The supreme court or a justice thereof, or the county judge
within the county in which the school district is wholly or partly
situated, in a proceeding instituted by any qualified voter who, at the
meeting of the board of registration provided for in section two
thousand fourteen, made to the board of registration satisfactory proof
that he was or would be entitled to vote at the meeting or election for
which the board of registration was at such meeting convened to prepare
a register, and to whom such registration had been refused by such board
of registration shall, by order, compel the registration of such voter;
and in a proceeding instituted by any qualified voter shall by order
direct to be stricken from the register any names unlawfully thereon,
and shall order such board of registration, if necessary, to reconvene
for such purposes not less than two nor more than four days before the
day of the meeting or election. Written notice of an application under
this section must be given to the board of registration, by service
thereof on two of the members thereof.
 2. Such court, justice or judge in a proceeding instituted by any
qualified voter whose application to vote has been denied by the
inspectors of election shall compel by order the reception of the vote
within the hours established by law.
 3. An affidavit by any officer or employee of the board of education
or any police officer, sheriff or deputy sheriff that he or she visited
the premises claimed by the applicant as his or her residence, and that
he or she interrogated an incarcerated individual, housedweller, keeper
or caretaker, owner, proprietor, or landlord thereof or therein, as to
the applicant's residence therein or thereat, and that he or she was
informed by one or more of such persons, naming them, that they knew the
persons residing upon such premises and that the applicant did not
reside upon such premises thirty days before the meeting or election
shall be presumptive evidence against the right of the voter to register
from such premises.
 § 2017. Division of union free school district into election
districts. 1. In any union free school district having personal
registration of voters pursuant to section two thousand fourteen of this
chapter, the board of education may upon its own motion divide the
school district into election districts, and shall upon the petition of
twenty-five qualified voters of the district, or five percent of the
voters who voted in the previous annual election of the members of the
board of education, whichever is greater, cause to be submitted at an
annual or special meeting, a proposition to divide such school district
into election districts provided, however, that in each election
district the number of qualified voters shall at least equal three
hundred.
 2. If it is determined to divide the district into election districts,
the board of education shall immediately thereafter and not less than
thirty days prior to an annual or special meeting or election, within
such district, adopt a resolution dividing the school district into such
number of election districts as the board of education may determine.
The school district shall be so divided that if circumstances will
permit, there shall be a schoolhouse in each election district or in as
many of such election districts as possible. The election districts so
formed shall continue in existence until modified by resolution of the
board of education. Such resolution shall accurately describe the
boundaries of each such district by streets, alleys and highways, or
otherwise. School meetings and elections shall thereafter be held so far
as may be possible in the public schoolhouses within any such school
election district. The board of education shall designate the place
within each election district where the meeting or election shall be
held.
 § 2018. Nomination of candidates for the office of member of the board
of education in all union free school districts or for the office of
member of the board of trustees in all common school districts which
have elected to vote for trustees at a time or place separate from the
annual meeting. a. In all union free school districts candidates for the
office of member of the board of education shall be nominated by
petition. Each vacancy upon the board of education to be filled shall be
considered a separate specific office. A separate petition shall be
required to nominate a candidate to each separate office. Each petition
shall be directed to the clerk of the school district, shall be signed
by at least twenty-five qualified voters of the district, or two percent
of the voters who voted in the previous annual election of the members
of the board of education, whichever is greater, such number to be
determined by the number of persons recorded on the poll list as having
voted at such election shall state the residence of each signer, shall
state the name and residence of the candidate and shall describe the
specific vacancy on the board of education for which the candidate is
nominated, which description shall include at least the length of the
term of office and the name of the last incumbent, if any. In the event
that any such nominee shall withdraw his candidacy prior to the
election, such person shall not be considered a candidate unless a new
petition nominating such person in the same manner and within the same
time limitations applicable to other candidates is filed with the clerk
of the district. Each petition shall be filed in the office of the clerk
of the district between the hours of nine a.m. and five p.m., not later
than the thirtieth day preceding the school meeting or election at which
the candidates nominated are to be elected. No person shall be nominated
by petition for more than one separate office.
 b. At any school election in such district, the electors may adopt a
proposition providing that, in all subsequent elections, vacancies upon
the board of education shall not be considered separate specific offices
and that the nominating petitions shall not describe any specific
vacancy upon the board of education for which the candidate is
nominated. Such procedure shall be followed with respect to all
nominations and elections in subsequent years until and unless such
proposition is repealed by the electors of the district at a regular
election by the adoption of a proposition to repeal the same.
 c. In all common school districts, candidates for the office of member
of the board of trustees shall be nominated by petition. Such petition
shall not describe any specific vacancy on the board of trustees. Each
petition shall be directed to the clerk of the school district and shall
be signed by at least twenty-five qualified voters of the district or
two percent of the voters who voted in the previous annual election of
the members of the board of trustees, whichever is greater. Such a
petition shall state the residence of each signer, and shall contain the
name and residence of the candidate.
 d. If a candidate for whom a nominating petition for the office of
member of a board of education has been duly filed withdraws such
petition, dies or becomes otherwise ineligible to hold such office at a
time which is later than fifteen days before the last day for the filing
of nominating petitions as provided in subdivision a of this section,
the time for filing nominating petitions for such office shall be
extended to five p.m. on the fifteenth day after the day on which such
candidate withdrew, died, or otherwise became ineligible to hold such
office, provided that no such nominating petition may be filed after
five p.m. on the seventh day preceding the date of the election.
 § 2018-a. Absentee ballots for school district elections. 1. The board
of education of any union free, central or central high school district
which elects school board members by ballot and provides for personal
registration of voters, shall provide for absentee ballots for the
election of members of the board of education and school district public
library trustees, the adoption of the annual budget and school district
public library budget and referenda, in accordance with the provisions
of this section.
 1-a. In counties with a population of one million or more, the board
of education of any union free, central or central high school district
which elects school board members by ballot and provides for personal
registration of voters shall provide for absentee ballots for the
election of members of the board of education and school district public
library trustees, the adoption of the annual budget and school district
public library budget and referenda, in accordance with the provisions
of this section.
 2. a. A qualified voter may vote as an absentee voter under this
section if on the occurrence of an election such voter expects to be:
 (1) absent from their county of residence; or
 (2) unable to appear personally at the polling place because of
illness or physical disability, or duties related to the primary care of
one or more individuals who are ill or physically disabled, or because
such voter will be or is a patient in a hospital; or
 (3) a resident or patient of a veteran's administration hospital; or
 (4) absent from such voter's voting residence because such voter is
detained in jail awaiting action by a grand jury or awaiting trial, or
confined in jail or prison after a conviction for an offense other than
a felony, provided that such voter is qualified to vote in the election
district of such voter's residence.
 b. Each person entitled to vote as an absentee voter pursuant to this
section and desirous of obtaining an absentee ballot shall make written
application therefor to the district clerk. Application forms for use
pursuant to this section shall be in a form prescribed by the state
board of elections. The use of any application which is on a form
prescribed by the state board of elections shall be acceptable.
 c. The application for an absentee ballot when filed must contain in
each instance the following information:
 (1) Applicant's full name, date of birth, and residence address,
including the street and number, if any, rural delivery route, if any,
mailing address if different from the residence address and an address
to which the ballot shall be mailed.
 (2) A statement that the applicant is a qualified and registered
voter.
 (3) A statement, as appropriate, that on the day of such election the
applicant expects in good faith to be in one of the following
categories:
 (a) absent from their county of residence; provided, however, if the
applicant expects to be absent from such county for a duration covering
more than one election and seeks an absentee ballot for each election,
such applicant shall state the dates when they expect to begin and end
such absence; or
 (b) unable to appear at a polling place because of illness or physical
disability or duties related to the primary care of one or more
individuals who are ill or physically disabled; or
 (c) a resident or patient of a veteran's administration hospital; or
 (d) detained in jail awaiting action by a grand jury or awaiting trial
or confined in jail or prison after a conviction for an offense other
than a felony and stating the place where such applicant is so detained
or confined.
 d. Such application shall include the following statement to be signed
by the voter.
 I hereby declare that the foregoing is a true statement to the best of
my knowledge and belief, and I understand that if I make any material
false statement in the foregoing statement of application for absentee
ballots, I shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
 Date.....................Signature of Voter ...........................
 e. An applicant whose ability to appear personally at the polling
place of the school district of which he or she is a qualified voter is
substantially impaired by reason of permanent illness or physical
disability and whose registration record has been marked "permanently
disabled" by the board of elections pursuant to the provisions of the
election law shall be entitled to receive an absentee ballot pursuant to
the provisions of this section without making separate application for
such absentee ballot, and the board of registration upon being advised
by the board of elections on or with the list of registered voters that
the registration record of a voter is marked "permanently disabled"
shall send an absentee ballot to such voter at his or her last known
address with a request to the postal authorities not to forward same but
to return same in five days in the event that it cannot be delivered to
the addressee. The board of education shall determine whether such
ballot shall be sent by first class or by certified mail. All such
ballots shall be mailed in the same manner as determined by the board of
education. The board of registration shall make an appropriate entry on
the registration indicating the fact that an absentee ballot has been
sent and the date of mailing.
 f. An application must be received by the district clerk no earlier
than the thirtieth day before the election for which an absentee ballot
is sought. If the application requests that the absentee ballot be
mailed, such application must be received not later than seven days
before the election. If the applicant or his or her agent delivers the
application to the district clerk in person, such application must be
received not later than the day before the election. The district clerk
shall examine each application and shall determine from the information
contained therein whether the applicant is qualified under this section
to receive an absentee ballot.
 g. No later than six days before the election for which an application
has been received and for which the district clerk has determined the
applicant to be qualified to vote by absentee ballot the district clerk
shall mail, by regular mail, an absentee ballot to each qualified
applicant who has applied before such day and who has requested that
such absentee ballot be mailed to him or her at the address set forth in
his or her application. If the applicant or his or her agent delivers
the application to the district clerk in person after the seventh day
before the election and not later than the day before the election, the
district clerk shall forthwith deliver such absentee ballots for those
applicants whom he or she determines are qualified to make such
applications and to receive such ballots to such applicants or the
agents named in the applications when such applicants or agents appear
in the district clerk's office.
 3. If, upon examining the application required under the provisions of
subdivision two of this section, and upon such inquiry as it deems
proper, the board of registration shall be satisfied that the applicant
is a qualified voter of the district, and entitled to vote by absentee
ballot, such board shall place his name upon the register, thereupon the
applicant shall be issued or mailed an absentee voter's ballot and the
board of registration shall make an appropriate entry on the register
indicating that an absentee ballot has been applied for by, and issued
to, the applicant.
 4. Ballots for absentee voters shall be, as nearly as practicable, in
the same form as those to be voted at the district election; if the vote
at such election shall be by ballot, the absentee ballot shall conform
to the regular ballot; if the vote of such election shall be by voting
machine, the absentee ballot shall conform as closely as possible to the
manner in which the names of the candidates, the questions and the
propositions appear on the voting machines, except that the absentee
ballot shall also contain a space for a write-in or write-ins. Such
absentee ballots shall also contain instructions as to the proper
marking thereof, in accordance with the provisions of sections two
thousand thirty-two and two thousand thirty-four of this chapter. On the
back of such absentee ballots shall be printed the words "Official
Ballot, Absentee Voter."
 5. a. The board of registration shall enclose each absentee voter's
ballot in an envelope which shall be labelled:
 ELECTION MATERIAL
 PLEASE EXPEDITE
 On one side of such envelope shall be printed:
 OFFICIAL BALLOT, ABSENTEE VOTER
 for
 School District Election
Name of Voter .......................................
Residence (street and number, if any) ...............
City (or Town) of ...................................
County of ...........................................
School district .....................................
School Election District (if applicable) ............
 The date of the election and name of the school district shall be
printed, and the name of the voter, residence, school district and
school election district (if applicable) shall be written in by the
board of registration.
 b. On the reverse side of such envelope shall be printed the following
statement:
 STATEMENT OF ABSENTEE VOTER
 I do declare that I am a citizen of the United States, and will be at
least eighteen years of age, on the date of the school district
election; that I will have been a resident of this state and of the
school district and school election district, if any, shown on the
reverse side of this envelope for thirty days next preceding the said
election and duly registered in the school district and school election
district, if any, shown on the reverse side of this envelope and that I
am or on such date will be, a qualified voter of said school district;
that I will be unable to appear personally on the day of said school
district election at the polling place of the said district in which I
am or will be a qualified voter because of the reason stated on my
application heretofore submitted; that I have not qualified, or do I
intend to vote, elsewhere than as set forth on the reverse side of this
envelope; that I have not received or offered, do not expect to receive,
have not paid, offered or promised to pay, contributed, offered or
promised to contribute to another to be paid or used, any money or other
valuable thing, as a compensation or reward for the giving or
withholding of a vote at this school district election, and have not
made any promise to influence the giving or withholding of any such
votes; that I have not made or become directly or indirectly interested
in any bet or wager depending upon the result of this school district
election; and that I have not been convicted of bribery or any infamous
crime, or, if so convicted, that I have been pardoned or restored to all
the rights of a citizen, without restriction as to the right of
suffrage, or received a certificate of relief from disabilities or a
certificate of good conduct pursuant to article twenty-three of the
correction law removing my disability to register and vote.
 I hereby declare that the foregoing is a true statement to the best of
my knowledge and belief, and I understand that if I make any material
false statement in the foregoing statement of absentee voter, I shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
 Date.....................Signature of Voter ..........................
 c. The envelope shall be gummed, ready for sealing, and shall have
printed thereon, on the side opposite the statement, instructions as to
the duties of the voter after the marking of the ballot, which
instructions shall include a specific direction stating that the
envelope must reach the office of the clerk of the school district not
later than five P.M. on the day of the election in order that his vote
may be canvassed.
 d. A person who shall make any material false statement in the
statement of absentee voter appearing on the reverse side of the
envelope as provided in this subdivision, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
 6. The board of registration shall make a list of all persons to whom
absentee voter's ballots shall have been issued and file such list in
the office of the clerk where it shall be available for public
inspection during regular office hours until the day of the election.
Any qualified voter may, upon examination of such list, file a written
challenge of the qualifications as a voter of any person whose name
appears on such list, stating the reasons for such challenge. A
challenge to an absentee ballot may not be made on the basis that the
voter should have applied for an early mail ballot. Such written
challenge shall be transmitted by the clerk to the inspectors of
election on election day.
 7. a. The board of registration shall be authorized to call upon the
commissioner of police and the officers and members of the police force
for such assistance in the enforcement of the provisions of this section
as such board shall require, and such commissioner and officers and
members of the police force shall be authorized to render such
assistance.
 b. The board of registration may require any person to attend before
it at the office of the clerk of the school district and be examined by
the board as to any matter in relation to which such board is charged
with a duty under this section, and may issue a subpoena therefor. Each
member of such board shall be authorized to administer any oath that may
be required or authorized by law in this connection.
 8. No absentee voter's ballot shall be canvassed, unless it shall have
been received in the office of the clerk of the school district not
later than five P.M. on the day of the election.
 9. The clerk of the district shall, on the day of the election,
transmit all absentee voters' envelopes, received by him in accordance
with subdivision eight of this section, to the inspectors of election.
 10. If, at the school district election, any absentee voters'
envelopes shall have been received at the polling place, the inspectors
of election immediately after the closing of the polls shall examine
them, and shall compare the signature, if any, on each envelope with the
signature, if any, on the register, of the person of the same name who
registered from the same address. If the signatures are found to
correspond, the inspectors shall certify thereto by signing their
initials opposite the name of the voter at the appropriate place in the
register. If a person whose name is on an envelope as a voter, shall
have already voted in person at such school district election, or if his
name, residence and signature, as stated on the envelope, are not on the
register, or if there is no signature on the envelope, this envelope
shall be laid aside unopened and be returned unopened to the clerk of
the district. If such person is found to be registered and has not so
voted in person, and if no objection is made, or if an objection made be
not sustained, the envelope shall be opened and the ballot withdrawn
without unfolding and deposited in the proper box or boxes. At the time
of the deposit of such ballot, the inspectors shall enter the words
"absentee vote" at an appropriate place in the register.
 11. During such examination any qualified voter present in the polling
place may object to the voting of the ballot contained in any envelope
upon the ground or grounds (a) that the person named thereon is not a
qualified voter of the school district, or school election district
(where applicable), or (b) that he was within the county or city while
the polls of the election were open, except where the applicant is a
patient in a hospital located within the county or city or detained or
confined in a jail located within the county or city and except where
the ballot was obtained upon the ground of inability to appear
personally at the polling place on the day of the school district
election because of illness or physical disability, or (c) that he was
able to appear personally while the polls were open, in cases where the
ballot was obtained upon the ground that the voter was a patient in a
hospital located within the county or city or detained or confined in a
jail located within the county or city or upon the ground of inability
to appear personally at the polling place on the day of the election
because of illness or physical disability, or (d) that he was not
entitled to cast such ballot. An inspector shall make such an objection
if he shall know or suspect that the person named on such envelope is
not such a qualified voter or was so within the school district or was
able so to appear personally, or was not entitled to cast such ballot.
The election inspectors shall forthwith proceed to determine each
objection including any written challenge transmitted to them by the
district clerk as provided in subdivision six of this section. Unless
the inspectors, by majority vote, shall sustain the objection, the
chairman, or if he refuses, another inspector shall endorse upon the
envelope the objection and the words "not sustained," shall sign such
endorsement, and shall open the envelope and deposit the ballot as
provided in this section. Should the inspectors, by majority vote,
sustain such objection, the objection and word "sustained" shall be
similarly endorsed upon the envelope, the envelope shall not be opened
nor the ballots therein canvassed, and such envelope shall be returned
unopened to the clerk of the district. If the inspectors of election
shall have received an envelope endorsed with the name of a person who
to the knowledge of the inspectors is deceased on the day of the
election, the inspectors shall return such envelope unopened to the
clerk of the district with the words "deceased--objection sustained"
endorsed on the envelope.
 12. If the inspectors of election shall have received an envelope, and
upon opening the same no ballot shall be found therein, the inspectors
shall make a memorandum showing that the ballot is missing. When the
casting of absentee voters' ballots shall have been completed, the
inspectors shall ascertain the number of such ballots which have been
deposited in the ballot box by deducting from the number of envelopes
opened the number of missing ballots, and shall make a separate return
thereof in duplicate. The number of absentee voters' ballots deposited
in the ballot box shall be added to the number of other ballots
deposited in the ballot box in order to determine the number of all
ballots to be accounted for in the ballot box. Such ballots shall then
be counted or canvassed by the inspectors of election along with the
other ballots cast at such school district election, or, where voting
machines are used, shall be added to the votes recorded on such
machines.
 13. Where the district shall have been divided into school election
districts pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of
this section shall be applicable, provided that any reference in this
section to the term "board of registration" shall in such case refer to
the board of registration appointed by the board of education for each
school election district, except that paragraph b of subdivision seven
of this section shall apply according to its terms.
 § 2018-b. Absentee ballots for school district elections by poll
registration. 1. Notwithstanding the provisions of sections two
thousand fourteen and two thousand eighteen-a of this article, the
trustees or the board of education of any common, union free, central or
central high school district which does not provide for the personal
registration of voters for school district meetings and elections but
which elects trustees or school board members by ballot, shall provide
for absentee ballots for the election of the trustees or members of the
board and school district public library trustees, the adoption of the
annual budget and school district public library budget and referenda.
 1-a. Notwithstanding the provisions of sections two thousand fourteen
and two thousand eighteen-a of this article, in any county with a
population of one million or more, the trustees or the board of
education of any common, union free, central or central high school
district which does not provide for the personal registration of voters
for school district meetings and elections but which elects trustees or
school board members by ballot shall provide for absentee ballots for
the election of the trustees or members of the board and school district
public library trustees, the adoption of the annual budget and school
district public library budget and referenda.
 2. a. An applicant for such an absentee ballot shall submit an
application setting forth:
 (1) such applicant's full name, date of birth and residence address,
including the street and number, if any, or town and rural delivery
route, if any, mailing address if different from the residence address
and an address to which the ballot shall be mailed;
 (2) that such applicant is or will be, on the day of the school
district election, a qualified voter of the school district;
 (3) a statement, as appropriate, that on the day of such election the
applicant expects in good faith to be in one of the following
categories:
 (a) a resident or patient in a hospital, including a veteran's
administration hospital, or unable to appear personally at the polling
place on such day because of illness or physical disability, or duties
related to the primary care of one or more individuals who are ill or
physically disabled; or
 (b) absent from the county of such applicant's residence; provided,
however, if the applicant expects to be absent from such county for a
duration covering more than one election and seeks an absentee ballot
for each election, such applicant shall state the dates when they expect
to begin and end such absence; or
 (c) detained in jail awaiting action by a grand jury or awaiting trial
or confined in jail or prison after a conviction for an offense other
than a felony and stating the place where such applicant is so detained
or confined.
 b. Such application must be received by the district clerk or designee
of the trustees or school board at least seven days before the election
if the ballot is to be mailed to the voter, or the day before the
election, if the ballot is to be delivered personally to the voter.
 c. Such application shall include the following statement to be signed
by the voter.
 I hereby declare that the foregoing is a true statement to the best of
my knowledge and belief, and I understand that if I make any material
false statement in the foregoing statement of application for absentee
ballots, I shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Date................... Signature of Voter ...........................
 d. The clerk of the school district or a designee of the trustees or
school board shall request registration lists from the board of
elections pursuant to subdivision three of section 5-612 of the election
law for those voters whose registration record has been marked
"permanently disabled". An applicant whose ability to appear personally
at the polling place of the school district of which such applicant is a
qualified voter is substantially impaired by reason of permanent illness
or physical disability and whose registration record has been marked
"permanently disabled" as determined by the board of elections pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter and who has previously applied for an
absentee ballot shall be entitled to receive subsequent absentee ballots
pursuant to the provisions of this section without making separate
application for such absentee ballot, and the clerk of the school
district or a designee of the trustees or school board shall send an
absentee ballot to such voter at such voter's last known address with a
request to the postal authorities not to forward same but to return same
in five days in the event that it cannot be delivered to the addressee.
The clerk of the school district or a designee of the trustees or school
board shall determine whether such ballot shall be sent by first class
or by certified mail. All such ballots shall be mailed in the same
manner as determined by the trustees or the board of education.
 3. If, upon examining the application required under the provisions of
subdivision two of this section, and upon such inquiry as it deems
proper, the clerk of the school district or designee of the trustees or
school board shall be satisfied that the applicant is a qualified voter
of the district, and entitled to vote by absentee ballot, such clerk of
the school district or designee of the trustees or school board shall
cause to be issued or mailed to the applicant an absentee voter's ballot
and the clerk of the school district or designee of the trustees or
school board shall make an appropriate entry on the poll list pursuant
to section two thousand twenty-nine of this part.
 4. The clerk of the school district or a designee of the trustees or
school board shall also mail an absentee ballot to every qualified voter
otherwise eligible for such ballot, who requests an absentee ballot from
such clerk or trustees or school board designee in a letter which is
signed by the voter and received by the clerk or trustees or school
board designee not earlier than the thirtieth day nor later than the
seventh day before the election for which the ballot is first requested
and which states the address where the voter resides and to which the
ballot is to be mailed. The clerk or designee of the trustees or school
board shall enclose with such ballot a form of application for absentee
ballot. The absentee ballot of a voter who requested such ballot by
letter, rather than application, shall not be counted unless a valid
application form, signed by such voter, is received by the clerk of the
school district or designee of the trustees or school board with such
ballot.
 5. Ballots for absentee voters shall be, as nearly as practicable, in
the same form as those to be voted at the district election; if the vote
at such election shall be by ballot, the absentee ballot shall conform
to the regular ballot; if the vote of such election shall be by voting
machine, the absentee ballot shall conform as closely as possible to the
manner in which the names of the candidates, the questions and the
propositions appear on the voting machines, except that the absentee
ballot shall also contain a space for a write-in or write-ins. On the
back of such absentee ballots shall be printed words "Official Ballot,
Absentee Voter."
 6. a. The clerk of the school district or designee of the trustees or
school board shall enclose each absentee voter's ballot in an envelope
which shall be labelled:
 ELECTION MATERIAL
 PLEASE EXPEDITE
 On one side of such envelope shall be printed:
 OFFICIAL BALLOT, ABSENTEE VOTER
 for
 School District Election
Name of Voter ..........................................................
Residence (street and number, if any) ..................................
City (or Town) of ......................................................
County of ..............................................................
School District ........................................................
School Election District (if applicable) ...............................
 The date of the election and name of the school district shall be
printed, and the name of the voter, residence, school district and
school election district (if applicable) shall be included.
 b. On the reverse side of such envelope shall be printed the following
statement:
 STATEMENT OF ABSENTEE VOTER
 I do declare that I am a citizen of the United States, and will be at
least eighteen years of age on the date of the school district election;
that I will have been a resident of this state and of the school
district and school election district, if any, shown on the reverse side
of this envelope for thirty days next preceding the said election and
that I am or on such date will be, a qualified voter of said school
district; that I will be unable to appear personally on the day of said
school district election at the polling place of the said district in
which I am or will be a qualified voter because of the reason stated on
my application heretofore submitted; that I have not qualified, or do I
intend to vote, elsewhere than as set forth on the reverse side of this
envelope; that I have not received or offered, do not expect to receive,
have not paid, offered or promised to pay, contributed, offered or
promised to contribute to another to be paid or used, any money or other
valuable thing, as a compensation or reward for the giving or
withholding of a vote at this school district election, and have not
made any promise to influence the giving or withholding of any such
votes; that I have not made or become directly or indirectly interested
in any bet or wager depending upon the result of this school district
election; and that I have not been convicted of bribery or any infamous
crime, or, if so convicted, that I have been pardoned or restored to all
the rights of a citizen, without restriction as to the right of
suffrage, or have received a certificate of relief from disabilities or
a certificate of good conduct pursuant to article twenty-three of the
correction law removing my disability to vote.
 I hereby declare that the foregoing is a true statement to the best of
my knowledge and belief, and I understand that if I make any material
false statement in the foregoing statement of absentee voter, I shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
 Date....................Signature of Voter ...........................
 c. The envelope shall be gummed, ready for sealing, and shall have
printed thereon, on the side opposite the statement, instructions as to
the duties of the voter after the marking of the ballot, which
instructions shall include a specific direction stating that the
envelope must reach the office of the clerk of the school district or
designee of the trustees or school board not later than five P.M. on the
day of the election in order that his vote may be canvassed.
 d. A person who shall make any material false statement in the
statement of the absentee voter appearing on the reverse side of the
envelope as provided in this subdivision, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
 7. The clerk of the school district or designee of the trustees or
school board shall make a list of all persons to whom absentee voter's
ballots shall have been issued and maintain such list where it shall be
available for public inspection during regular office hours until the
day of the election. Any qualified voter may, upon examination of such
list, file a written challenge of the qualifications as a voter of any
person whose name appears on such list, stating the reasons for such
challenge. A challenge to an absentee ballot may not be made on the
basis that the voter should have applied for an early mail ballot. Such
written challenge shall be transmitted by the clerk or the designee of
the trustees or school board to the inspectors of election on election
day.
 8. a. The clerk of the school district or designee of the trustees or
school board shall be authorized to call upon the commissioner of police
and the officers and members of the police force for such assistance in
the enforcement of the provisions of this section as such trustees or
board shall require, and such commissioner and officers and members of
the police force shall be authorized to render such assistance.
 b. The clerk of the school district or designee of the trustees or
school board may require any person to attend before it at the office of
the clerk of the school district or the office of the designee of the
trustees or school board and be examined by the trustees or board as to
any matter in relation to which such trustees or board is charged with a
duty under this section, and may issue a subpoena therefor. Each member
of such trustees or board shall be authorized to administer any oath
that may be required or authorized by law in this connection.
 9. No absentee voter's ballot shall be canvassed, unless it shall have
been received in the office of the clerk of the school district or
designee of the trustees or school board not later than five P.M. on the
day of the election.
 10. The clerk of the district or designee of the trustees or school
board shall, on the day of the election, transmit all absentee voters'
envelopes, received by him in accordance with subdivision eight of this
section, to the inspectors of election.
 11. If a person whose name is on an envelope as a voter shall have
already voted in person at such school district election, or if there is
no signature on the envelope, this envelope shall be laid aside unopened
and be returned unopened to the clerk of the district or designee of the
trustees or school board. If such person has not so voted in person, and
if no objection is made, or if an objection made be not sustained, the
envelope shall be opened and the ballot withdrawn without unfolding and
deposited in the proper box or boxes.
 12. If the inspectors of election shall have received an envelope, and
upon opening the same no ballot shall be found therein, the inspectors
shall make a memorandum showing that the ballot is missing. When the
casting of absentee voters' ballots shall have been completed, the
inspectors shall ascertain the number of such ballots which have been
deposited in the ballot box by deducting from the number of envelopes
opened the number of missing ballots, and shall make a separate return
thereof in duplicate. The number of absentee voters' ballots deposited
in the ballot box shall be added to the number of other ballots to be
accounted for in the ballot box. Such ballots shall then be counted or
canvassed by the inspectors of election along with the other ballots
cast at such school district election, or, where voting machines are
used, shall be added to the votes recorded on such machines.
 § 2018-c. Additional voting procedures. a. A school district may
require all persons offering to vote at any school district meeting or
election for which registration is not required, to provide one form of
proof of residency. Such form, to be determined by the school district,
may include, but is not limited to, a driver's license, a non-driver
identification card, a utility bill, or a voter registration card. Upon
offer of proof of residency, a school district may also require all
persons offering to vote to provide their signature, printed name, and
address.
 b. As an alternative to voting procedures provided for in section
twenty hundred fourteen of this article and subdivision a of this
section, a school district may require all persons offering to vote at
any school district meeting or election to provide their signature,
printed name, and address.
 § 2018-d. Military voters. 1. As used in this section, the following
terms shall have the following meanings:
 (a) "Military service" means the military service of the state, or of
the United States, including the army, navy, marine corps, air force,
coast guard, space force, merchant marine and all components thereof,
and the coast and geodetic survey, the public health service, the
national guard when in the service of the United States pursuant to call
as provided by law, and the cadets or midshipmen of the United States
Military Academy, United States Naval Academy, United States Air Force
Academy, United States Merchant Marine Academy and United States Coast
Guard Academy.
 (b) "Military voter" means a qualified voter of the state of New York
who is in actual military service, as defined in paragraph (a) of this
subdivision, and by reason of such military service is absent from his
or her district on the day of registration or election, or a voter who
is discharged from such military service within thirty days of an
election and the spouse, parent, child or dependent of such voter
accompanying or being with him or her, if a qualified voter and a
resident of the same school district.
 (c) "Military ballot" means the ballot prepared, printed and supplied
for use by the military for the election of members of the board of
education and school district public library trustees, the adoption of
the annual budget and school district public library budget and
referenda.
 (d) "Military address" means the mailing address of a military voter
other than his or her residence address in his or her school district.
 (e) "Appropriate school board of education" means the board of
education in whose jurisdiction the military voter resides as a
qualified voter.
 2. A military voter may designate a preference to receive a military
ballot by mail, facsimile transmission or electronic mail. Such
designation shall remain in effect until revoked or changed by the
military voter. If a military voter does not designate a preference, the
board of education shall transmit the military ballot application or
military ballot by mail. If a military voter designates a preference for
facsimile transmission or electronic mail but does not provide the
necessary facsimile number or e-mail address, the board of education
shall transmit the voter registration application, military ballot
application or military ballot by mail and request the omitted
information. All communications to the military voter shall include the
mailing address of the board of education.
 3. Irrespective of the preferred method of transmission designated by
a military voter, a military voter's original military ballot
application and military ballot must be returned by mail or in person.
 4. Ballots for military voters shall be mailed or otherwise
distributed by the board of education, in accordance with the preferred
method of transmission, as soon as practicable, but not later than
twenty-five days before any election as provided in this article, and
fourteen days before any election as provided in article fifty-three of
this title.
 5. The military voter shall mark the military ballot provided for in
this article in the same manner as an absentee ballot. After marking the
ballot, he or she shall fold such ballot and enclose it in the inner
affirmation envelope bearing the military voter's affirmation on the
outside of the envelope and seal the envelope. He or she shall then sign
the affirmation, with the blanks properly filled in. The inner
affirmation envelope containing the military ballot shall then be
inserted in the outer envelope addressed to the appropriate board of
education, which shall be mailed or personally delivered to the
appropriate board of education within the time limits provided by this
article.
 6. The board of education shall cause all military ballots received by
it before the close of the polls on election day and showing a
cancellation mark of the United States postal service or a foreign
country's postal service, or showing a dated endorsement of receipt by
another agency of the United States government or are signed and dated
by the voter and one witness thereto, with a date which is ascertained
to be not later than the day before election and which must be received
in the office of the clerk of the school district not later than five
p.m. on the day of the election in order to be canvassed.
 7. The board of inspectors shall thereafter process such ballots in
the same manner as provided in sections two thousand eighteen-a and two
thousand eighteen-b of this article for the canvassing of absentee
ballots.
 8. The board of education shall determine, three days before the first
day for distribution of military ballots, the names of all candidates
duly nominated for public office and the amendments, referenda,
propositions and questions to be voted for on such ballots. If at a
later date the nomination of any candidate named on a military ballot is
found invalid, the ballot shall still be valid, but no vote cast for any
such candidate on such ballot shall be counted at the election. The
failure of any school board to include the name of any candidate or any
proposition or question on the military ballot shall in no way affect
the validity of the election with respect to the office for which the
nomination was made or the validity of the military ballot as to any
other matter.
 9. The department is authorized to take such steps and do such things
as, in its opinion, are necessary to make effective the provisions of
any other section, in order to utilize fully any federal or other
facilities in the distribution of military ballots.
 10. The provisions of this section shall be liberally construed for
the purpose of providing military voters the opportunity to vote. The
department shall have power to adopt and promulgate regulations to
effectuate the provisions of this section.
 § 2018-e. Early mail ballots for school district elections. 1. The
board of education of any union free, central or central high school
district which elects school board members by ballot and provides for
personal registration of voters, shall provide for early mail ballots
for the election of members of the board of education and school
district public library trustees, the adoption of the annual budget and
school district public library budget and referenda, in accordance with
the provisions of this section.
 1-a. In counties with a population of one million or more, the board
of education of any union free, central or central high school district
which elects school board members by ballot and provides for personal
registration of voters shall provide for early mail ballots for the
election of members of the board of education and school district public
library trustees, the adoption of the annual budget and school district
public library budget and referenda, in accordance with the provisions
of this section.
 2. a. A qualified voter may vote as an early mail voter under this
section.
 b. Each person entitled to vote as an early mail voter pursuant to
this section and desirous of obtaining an early mail ballot shall make
written application therefor to the district clerk. Application forms
for use pursuant to this section shall be in a form prescribed by the
state board of elections. The use of any application which is on a form
prescribed by the state board of elections shall be acceptable.
 c. The application for an early mail ballot when filed must contain in
each instance the following information:
 (1) Applicant's full name, date of birth, and residence address,
including the street and number, if any, rural delivery route, if any,
mailing address if different from the residence address and an address
to which the ballot shall be mailed.
 (2) A statement that the applicant is a qualified and registered
voter.
 d. Such application shall include the following statement to be signed
by the voter:
 I hereby declare that the foregoing is a true statement to the best of
my knowledge and belief, and I understand that if I make any material
false statement in the foregoing statement of application for early mail
ballot, I shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Date.....................Signature of Voter............................
 e. An application must be received by the district clerk no earlier
than the thirtieth day before the election for which an early mail
ballot is sought. If the application requests that the early mail ballot
be mailed, such application must be received not later than seven days
before the election. If the applicant or their agent delivers the
application to the district clerk in person, such application must be
received not later than the day before the election. The district clerk
shall examine each application and shall determine from the information
contained therein whether the applicant is qualified under this section
to receive an early mail ballot.
 f. No later than six days before the election for which an application
has been received and for which the district clerk has determined the
applicant to be qualified to vote by early mail ballot the district
clerk shall mail, by regular mail, an early mail ballot to each
qualified applicant who has applied before such day and who has
requested that such early mail ballot be mailed to him or her at the
address set forth in their application. If the applicant or their agent
delivers the application to the district clerk in person after the
seventh day before the election and not later than the day before the
election, the district clerk shall forthwith deliver such early mail
ballots for those applicants whom he or she determines are qualified to
make such applications and to receive such ballots to such applicants or
the agents named in the applications when such applicants or agents
appear in the district clerk's office.
 3. If, upon examining the application required under the provisions of
subdivision two of this section, and upon such inquiry as it deems
proper, the board of registration shall be satisfied that the applicant
is a qualified voter of the district entitled to vote by early mail
ballot, such board shall place their name upon the register, thereupon
the applicant shall be issued or mailed an early mail voter's ballot and
the board of registration shall make an appropriate entry on the
register indicating that an early mail ballot has been applied for by,
and issued to, the applicant.
 4. Ballots for early mail voters shall be, as nearly as practicable,
in the same form as those to be voted at the district election; if the
vote at such election shall be by ballot, the early mail ballot shall
conform to the regular ballot; if the vote of such election shall be by
voting machine, the early mail ballot shall conform as closely as
possible to the manner in which the names of the candidates, the
questions and the propositions appear on the voting machines, except
that the early mail ballot shall also contain a space for a write-in or
write-ins. Such early mail ballots shall also contain instructions as to
the proper marking thereof, in accordance with the provisions of
sections two thousand thirty-two and two thousand thirty-four of this
part. On the back of such early mail ballots shall be printed the words
"Official Ballot, Early Mail Voter".
 5. a. The board of registration shall enclose each early mail voter's
ballot in an envelope which shall be labelled:
 ELECTION MATERIAL
 PLEASE EXPEDITE
 On one side of such envelope shall be printed:
 OFFICIAL BALLOT, EARLY MAIL VOTER
 for
 School District Election
Name of Voter ..............
Residence (street and number, if any) ......
City (or Town) of .............
County of .................
School District ..............
School Election District (if applicable) ......
 The date of the election and name of the school district shall be
printed, and the name of the voter, residence, school district and
school election district (if applicable) shall be written in by the
board of registration.
 b. On the reverse side of such envelope shall be printed the following
statement:
 STATEMENT OF EARLY MAIL VOTER
 I do declare that I am a citizen of the United States, and will be at
least eighteen years of age, on the date of the school district
election; that I will have been a resident of this state and of the
school district and school election district, if any, shown on the
reverse side of this envelope for thirty days next preceding the said
election and duly registered in the school district and school election
district, if any, shown on the reverse side of this envelope and that I
am or on such date will be, a qualified voter of said school district;
that I have not qualified, or do I intend to vote, elsewhere than as set
forth on the reverse side of this envelope; that I have not received or
offered, do not expect to receive, have not paid, offered or promised to
pay, contributed, offered or promised to contribute to another to be
paid or used, any money or other valuable thing, as a compensation or
reward for the giving or withholding of a vote at this school district
election, and have not made any promise to influence the giving or
withholding of any such votes; that I have not made or become directly
or indirectly interested in any bet or wager depending upon the result
of this school district election; and that I have not been convicted of
bribery or any infamous crime, or, if so convicted, that I have been
pardoned or restored to all the rights of a citizen, without restriction
as to the right of suffrage, or received a certificate of relief from
disabilities or a certificate of good conduct pursuant to article
twenty-three of the correction law removing my disability to register
and vote.
 I hereby declare that the foregoing is a true statement to the best of
my knowledge and belief, and I understand that if I make any material
false statement in the foregoing statement of early mail voter, I shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Date................... Signature of Voter............................
 c. The envelope shall be gummed, ready for sealing, and shall have
printed thereon, on the side opposite the statement, instructions as to
the duties of the voter after the marking of the ballot, which
instructions shall include a specific direction stating that the
envelope must reach the office of the clerk of the school district not
later than five P.M. on the day of the election in order that their vote
may be canvassed.
 d. A person who shall make any material false statement in the
statement of early mail voter appearing on the reverse side of the
envelope as provided in this subdivision, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
 6. The board of registration shall make a list of all persons to whom
early mail voter's ballots shall have been issued and file such list in
the office of the clerk where it shall be available for public
inspection during regular office hours until the day of the election.
Any qualified voter may, upon examination of such list, file a written
challenge of the qualifications as a voter of any person whose name
appears on such list, stating the reasons for such challenge. A
challenge to an early mail voter may not be made on the basis that the
voter should have applied for an absentee ballot. Such written challenge
shall be transmitted by the clerk to the inspectors of election on
election day.
 7. a. The board of registration shall be authorized to call upon the
commissioner of police and the officers and members of the police force
for such assistance in the enforcement of the provisions of this section
as such board shall require, and such commissioner and officers and
members of the police force shall be authorized to render such
assistance.
 b. The board of registration may require any person to attend before
it at the office of the clerk of the school district and be examined by
the board as to any matter in relation to which such board is charged
with a duty under this section, and may issue a subpoena therefor. Each
member of such board shall be authorized to administer any oath that may
be required or authorized by law in this connection.
 8. No early mail voter's ballot shall be canvassed, unless it shall
have been received in the office of the clerk of the school district not
later than five P.M. on the day of the election.
 9. The clerk of the district shall, on the day of the election,
transmit all early mail voters' envelopes, received by them in
accordance with subdivision eight of this section, to the inspectors of
election.
 10. If, at the school district election, any early mail voters'
envelopes shall have been received at the polling place, the inspectors
of election immediately after the closing of the polls shall examine
them, and shall compare the signature, if any, on each envelope with the
signature, if any, on the register, of the person of the same name who
registered from the same address. If the signatures are found to
correspond, the inspectors shall certify thereto by signing their
initials opposite the name of the voter at the appropriate place in the
register. If a person whose name is on an envelope as a voter, shall
have already voted in person at such school district election, or if
their name, residence and signature, as stated on the envelope, are not
on the register, or if there is no signature on the envelope, this
envelope shall be laid aside unopened and be returned unopened to the
clerk of the district. If such person is found to be registered and has
not so voted in person, and if no objection is made, or if an objection
made be not sustained, the envelope shall be opened and the ballot
withdrawn without unfolding and deposited in the proper box or boxes. At
the time of the deposit of such ballot, the inspectors shall enter the
words "early mail vote" at an appropriate place in the register.
 11. During such examination any qualified voter present in the polling
place may object to the voting of the ballot contained in any envelope
upon the ground or grounds that the person named thereon is not a
qualified voter of the school district, or school election district
(where applicable). An inspector shall make such an objection if he
shall know or suspect that the person named on such envelope is not such
a qualified voter. The inspectors of election shall forthwith proceed to
determine each objection including any written challenge transmitted to
them by the district clerk as provided in subdivision six of this
section. Unless the inspectors, by majority vote, shall sustain the
objection, the chairman, or if he refuses, another inspector shall
endorse upon the envelope the objection and the words "not sustained,"
shall sign such endorsement, and shall open the envelope and deposit the
ballot as provided in this section. Should the inspectors, by majority
vote, sustain such objection, the objection and word "sustained" shall
be similarly endorsed upon the envelope, the envelope shall not be
opened nor the ballots therein canvassed, and such envelope shall be
returned unopened to the clerk of the district. If the inspectors of
election shall have received an envelope endorsed with the name of a
person who to the knowledge of the inspectors is deceased on the day of
the election, the inspectors shall return such envelope unopened to the
clerk of the district with the words "deceased--objection sustained"
endorsed on the envelope.
 12. If the inspectors of election shall have received an envelope, and
upon opening the same no ballot shall be found therein, the inspectors
shall make a memorandum showing that the ballot is missing. When the
casting of early mail voters' ballots shall have been completed, the
inspectors shall ascertain the number of such ballots which have been
deposited in the ballot box by deducting from the number of envelopes
opened the number of missing ballots, and shall make a separate return
thereof in duplicate. The number of early mail voters' ballots deposited
in the ballot box shall be added to the number of other ballots
deposited in the ballot box in order to determine the number of all
ballots to be accounted for in the ballot box. Such ballots shall then
be counted or canvassed by the inspectors of election along with the
other ballots cast at such school district election, or, where voting
machines are used, shall be added to the votes recorded on such
machines.
 13. Where the district shall have been divided into school election
districts pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of
this section shall be applicable, provided that any reference in this
section to the term "board of registration" shall in such case refer to
the board of registration appointed by the board of education for each
school election district, except that paragraph b of subdivision seven
of this section shall apply according to its terms.
 § 2018-f. Early mail ballots for school district elections by poll
registration. 1. Notwithstanding the provisions of sections two thousand
fourteen and two thousand eighteen-e of this part, the trustees or the
board of education of any common, union free, central or central high
school district which does not provide for the personal registration of
voters for school district meetings and elections but which elects
trustees or school board members by ballot, shall provide for early mail
ballots for the election of the trustees or members of the board and
school district public library trustees, the adoption of the annual
budget and school district public library budget and referenda.
 1-a. Notwithstanding the provisions of sections two thousand fourteen
and two thousand eighteen-e of this part, in any county with a
population of one million or more, the trustees or the board of
education of any common, union free, central or central high school
district which does not provide for the personal registration of voters
for school district meetings and elections but which elects trustees or
school board members by ballot shall provide for early mail ballots for
the election of the trustees or members of the board and school district
public library trustees, the adoption of the annual budget and school
district public library budget and referenda.
 2. a. An applicant for such an early mail ballot shall submit an
application setting forth (1) their name and residence address,
including the street and number, if any, or town and rural delivery
route, if any; (2) that they are or will be, on the day of the school
district election, a qualified voter of the school district in which he
resides in that he is or will be, on such date, over eighteen years of
age, a citizen of the United States and has or will have resided in the
district for thirty days next preceding such date. Such application must
be received by the district clerk or designee of the trustees or school
board at least seven days before the election if the ballot is to be
mailed to the voter, or the day before the election, if the ballot is to
be delivered personally to the voter.
 b. Such application shall include the following statement to be signed
by the voter.
 I hereby declare that the foregoing is a true statement to the best of
my knowledge and belief, and I understand that if I make any material
false statement in the foregoing statement of application for early mail
ballot, I shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Date ................... Signature of Voter ............................
 3. If, upon examining the application required under the provisions of
subdivision two of this section, and upon such inquiry as it deems
proper, the clerk of the school district or designee of the trustees or
school board shall be satisfied that the applicant is a qualified voter
of the district, and entitled to vote by early mail ballot, such clerk
of the school district or designee of the trustees or school board shall
cause to be issued or mailed to the applicant an early mail voter's
ballot and the clerk of the school district or designee of the trustees
or school board shall make an appropriate entry on the poll list
pursuant to section two thousand twenty-nine of this part.
 4. The clerk of the school district or a designee of the trustees or
school board shall also mail an early mail ballot to every qualified
voter otherwise eligible for such ballot, who requests an early mail
ballot from such clerk or trustees or school board designee in a letter
which is signed by the voter and received by the clerk or trustees or
school board designee not earlier than the thirtieth day nor later than
the seventh day before the election for which the ballot is first
requested and which states the address where the voter resides and to
which the ballot is to be mailed. The clerk or designee of the trustees
or school board shall enclose with such ballot a form of application for
early mail ballot. The early mail ballot of a voter who requested such
ballot by letter, rather than application, shall not be counted unless a
valid application form, signed by such voter, is received by the clerk
of the school district or designee of the trustees or school board with
such ballot.
 5. Ballots for early mail voters shall be, as nearly as practicable,
in the same form as those to be voted at the district election; if the
vote at such election shall be by ballot, the early mail ballot shall
conform to the regular ballot; if the vote of such election shall be by
voting machine, the early mail ballot shall conform as closely as
possible to the manner in which the names of the candidates, the
questions and the propositions appear on the voting machines, except
that the early mail ballot shall also contain a space for a write-in or
write-ins. On the back of such early mail ballots shall be printed words
"Official Ballot, Early Mail Voter".
 6. a. The clerk of the school district or designee of the trustees or
school board shall enclose each early mail voter's ballot in an envelope
which shall be labelled:
 ELECTION MATERIAL
 PLEASE EXPEDITE
 On one side of such envelope shall be printed:
 OFFICIAL BALLOT, EARLY MAIL VOTER
 for
 School District Election
Name of Voter ............
Residence (street and number, if any) ...............
City (or Town) of .....................
County of ....................
School District ...................
School Election District (if applicable) ................
 The date of the election and name of the school district shall be
printed, and the name of the voter, residence, school district and
school election district (if applicable) shall be included.
 b. On the reverse side of such envelope shall be printed the following
statement:
 STATEMENT OF EARLY MAIL VOTER
 I do declare that I am a citizen of the United States, and will be at
least eighteen years of age on the date of the school district election;
that I will have been a resident of this state and of the school
district and school election district, if any, shown on the reverse side
of this envelope for thirty days next preceding the said election and
that I am or on such date will be, a qualified voter of said school
district; that I have not qualified, or do I intend to vote, elsewhere
than as set forth on the reverse side of this envelope; that I have not
received or offered, do not expect to receive, have not paid, offered or
promised to pay, contributed, offered or promised to contribute to
another to be paid or used, any money or other valuable thing, as a
compensation or reward for the giving or withholding of a vote at this
school district election, and have not made any promise to influence the
giving or withholding of any such votes; that I have not made or become
directly or indirectly interested in any bet or wager depending upon the
result of this school district election; and that I have not been
convicted of bribery or any infamous crime, or, if so convicted, that I
have been pardoned or restored to all the rights of a citizen, without
restriction as to the right of suffrage, or have received a certificate
of relief from disabilities or a certificate of good conduct pursuant to
article twenty-three of the correction law removing my disability to
vote.
 I hereby declare that the foregoing is a true statement to the best of
my knowledge and belief, and I understand that if I make any material
false statement in the foregoing statement of early mail voter, I shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Date .................. Signature of Voter .............................
 c. The envelope shall be gummed, ready for sealing, and shall have
printed thereon, on the side opposite the statement, instructions as to
the duties of the voter after the marking of the ballot, which
instructions shall include a specific direction stating that the
envelope must reach the office of the clerk of the school district or
designee of the trustees or school board not later than five P.M. on the
day of the election in order that their vote may be canvassed.
 d. A person who shall make any material false statement in the
statement of the early mail voter appearing on the reverse side of the
envelope as provided in this subdivision, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
 7. The clerk of the school district or designee of the trustees or
school board shall make a list of all persons to whom early mail voter's
ballots shall have been issued and maintain such list where it shall be
available for public inspection during regular office hours until the
day of the election. Any qualified voter may, upon examination of such
list, file a written challenge of the qualifications as a voter of any
person whose name appears on such list, stating the reasons for such
challenge. A challenge to an early mail ballot may not be made on the
basis that the voter should have applied for an absentee ballot. Such
written challenge shall be transmitted by the clerk or the designee of
the trustees or school board to the inspectors of election on election
day.
 8. a. The clerk of the school district or designee of the trustees or
school board shall be authorized to call upon the commissioner of police
and the officers and members of the police force for such assistance in
the enforcement of the provisions of this section as such trustees or
board shall require, and such commissioner and officers and members of
the police force shall be authorized to render such assistance.
 b. The clerk of the school district or designee of the trustees or
school board may require any person to attend before it at the office of
the clerk of the school district or the office of the designee of the
trustees or school board and be examined by the trustees or board as to
any matter in relation to which such trustees or board is charged with a
duty under this section, and may issue a subpoena therefor. Each member
of such trustees or board shall be authorized to administer any oath
that may be required or authorized by law in this connection.
 9. No early mail voter's ballot shall be canvassed, unless it shall
have been received in the office of the clerk of the school district or
designee of the trustees or school board not later than five P.M. on the
day of the election.
 10. The clerk of the district or designee of the trustees or school
board shall, on the day of the election, transmit all early mail voters'
envelopes, received by him in accordance with subdivision eight of this
section, to the inspectors of election.
 11. If a person whose name is on an envelope as a voter shall have
already voted in person at such school district election, or if there is
no signature on the envelope, this envelope shall be laid aside unopened
and be returned unopened to the clerk of the district or designee of the
trustees or school board. If such person has not so voted in person, and
if no objection is made, or if an objection made be not sustained, the
envelope shall be opened and the ballot withdrawn without unfolding and
deposited in the proper box or boxes.
 12. If the inspectors of election shall have received an envelope, and
upon opening the same no ballot shall be found therein, the inspectors
shall make a memorandum showing that the ballot is missing. When the
casting of early mail voters' ballots shall have been completed, the
inspectors shall ascertain the number of such ballots which have been
deposited in the ballot box by deducting from the number of envelopes
opened the number of missing ballots, and shall make a separate return
thereof in duplicate. The number of early mail voters' ballots deposited
in the ballot box shall be added to the number of other ballots to be
accounted for in the ballot box. Such ballots shall then be counted or
canvassed by the inspectors of election along with the other ballots
cast at such school district election, or, where voting machines are
used, shall be added to the votes recorded on such machines.
 § 2019. Declaration in case of challenge of voter. If a person
offering to vote at any school district meeting or election shall be
challenged as unqualified, by any legal voter in such district, either
at such meeting or election, or by the filing of a challenge pursuant to
section two thousand fifteen of this chapter, the chairman presiding at
such meeting or election shall require the person so offering, to make
the following declaration: "I do declare and affirm that I am, and have
been, for the thirty days last past, an actual resident of this school
district and that I am qualified to vote at this meeting." Every person
making such declaration shall be permitted to vote on all questions
proposed at such meeting or election; but if any person shall refuse to
make such declaration, his vote shall be rejected.
 § 2019-a. Voting by persons whose names are not in the registration
poll ledgers. 1. Whenever a voter presents himself and offers to cast a
ballot at any school district meeting or election, and the address at
which he claims to live is in the election district in which he seeks to
vote but his name cannot be found on the list of registered voters or in
the registration poll ledger, he shall be permitted to vote only as
hereinafter provided:
 a. He may present a court order requiring that he be permitted to
vote. He shall be required to sign his full name on top of the first
page of such order, together with his registration serial number, if
any. The voter shall then be permitted to vote in the manner otherwise
prescribed for voters whose names are found on the registration lists,
whose registration poll records are found in the ledger; or
 b. He may request, swear to and subscribe an affidavit stating that he
has duly registered to vote, the address in such election district from
which he registered, that he remains a duly qualified voter in such
election district and that his registration poll record appears to be
lost or misplaced, or that his name has been incorrectly omitted from
the list of registered voters. Such affidavit shall be printed on an
envelope and shall contain an acknowledgement that the affiant
understands that any false statement made therein is perjury punishable
according to law. The voter shall then be permitted to vote a paper
ballot. Such ballot shall thereupon be placed in the envelope containing
his affidavit, and the envelope sealed and returned to the board of
education with other records of the meeting or election.
 2. a. Before certifying the result of any school district meeting or
election at which voters are required to sign their registration poll
records or the list of registered voters before voting, the board of
education shall proceed in the manner hereinafter prescribed to cast and
canvass any ballots voted by voters whose registration poll records were
missing or whose names did not appear on the list of registered voters
on the day of such meeting or election. Each such ballot shall be
retained in the original envelope containing the voter's affidavit and
signature, in which it is delivered to the board of education until such
time as it is to be cast and canvassed.
 b. The board of education shall designate itself or such of its
employees as it shall deem appropriate as a set of poll clerks to cast
and canvass such ballots, and fix a time and place for their meeting for
such purposes, provided that such meeting shall be no more than ten days
after any election at which such ballots are voted. The board may
designate additional sets of poll clerks and if it designates more than
one such set, shall apportion among all such sets the election districts
from which such ballots have been received, provided that all such
ballots from a single election district shall be assigned to a single
set of clerks. Each such set of clerks shall be deemed a central board
of inspectors for purposes of this section.
 c. At least five days prior to the time fixed for such meeting, the
board shall send notice by first class mail to each candidate entitled
to have had watchers or challengers present at the polls in any election
district from which any such ballot has been received, or, if such
notice is sent prior to the day of the election, to each such candidate
so entitled for each election district in the board's jurisdiction. Such
notice shall state the time and place fixed by the board for such
canvass.
 d. Each such candidate shall be entitled to appoint such number of
watchers or challengers to attend upon each central board of inspectors
as such candidate was entitled to appoint at such election in any one
election district for which such central board of inspectors is
designated to act.
 3. Upon assembling at the time and place fixed for such meeting, each
central board of inspectors shall consider each affidavit envelope and
ballot from the election districts assigned to it.
 a. First, the central board of inspectors shall reject any ballot not
found sealed in the envelope in which it was placed at the polling
place, second the ballot of any voter for whom there is no registration
poll record or central registration record in the office of the board of
elections.
 b. The central board of inspectors shall then proceed to consider,
cast, and canvass the remaining envelopes and the ballots therein
contained as nearly as practicable in the manner provided by this
chapter for a board of inspectors to consider, cast, and canvass paper
ballots at school district meetings or elections.
 c. Any person lawfully present may object to the refusal to cast or
canvass any ballot on the grounds that the voter is a properly qualified
voter of the election district, or to the casting or canvassing of any
ballot on the grounds that the voter is not a properly qualified voter
of the election district, or otherwise not entitled to cast such ballot.
When any such objection is made, the board of education shall forthwith
proceed to determine such objection and reject or cast such ballot
according to such determination.
 d. Upon completing the casting and canvassing of ballots as
hereinabove provided for any election district, the central board of
inspectors shall thereupon, as nearly as practicable in the manner
provided in this section, verify the number of ballots so cast, tally
the votes so cast, add such tally to the previous tally of all votes
cast in such election district, and announce the result.
 4. Whenever the ballot of any person, voted in an affidavit envelope
in the manner prescribed by this section, is rejected under the
provisions of this section on the grounds that such person is not a
qualified voter of the election district wherein he sought to vote, the
board of education shall immediately notify such person by first class
mail directed to the address given in his affidavit, of the rejection of
his ballot, together with the reason therefor and the appropriate
information on the times and places where he may register or reregister.
Where appropriate, a form of application for personal registration by
mail pursuant to the election law shall be included with such notice.
 § 2020. Penalty for false declaration or unauthorized vote. 1. A
person who shall wilfully make a false statement to a board of
registration, or to any member or members thereof, or the clerk of the
district, for the purpose of having his name placed upon the register,
as provided for in section two thousand fifteen, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
 2. A person who shall wilfully make a false declaration of his right
to vote at a school district meeting or election after his right to vote
thereat has been challenged, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
 3. Any person not qualified to vote at such meeting or election, who
shall vote thereat, shall thereby forfeit ten dollars, to be sued for by
the supervisor for the benefit of the district.
 § 2021. Powers of voters. The inhabitants entitled to vote, when duly
assembled in any district meeting, shall have power, by a majority of
the votes of those present and voting:
 1. In common school districts, to appoint a chairman.
 2. To appoint a clerk for the time if the district clerk is absent.
 3. To adjourn from time to time as occasion may require, except that
where a special district meeting shall have been called by a board of
education for the purpose of voting upon an appropriation and the hours
of voting shall have been fixed by the board as provided in subdivision
three of section four hundred sixteen of this chapter, the meeting shall
not be adjourned until after the vote shall have been taken and
canvassed upon the proposition submitted.
 4. To elect one or three trustees as provided in section sixteen
hundred two and a district collector, and in any district which shall so
determine, as hereinafter provided, to elect a treasurer, at their first
meeting, and so often as such offices or any of them become vacated,
except as hereinafter provided.
 5. To adopt by a vote of a majority of such voters present and voting
at the first meeting, or at any subsequent annual meeting, or at any
special meeting duly called for that purpose, such vote to be
ascertained by taking and recording the ayes and noes, a resolution to
elect a treasurer of said district. If such resolution shall be adopted,
such voters shall thereupon elect by ballot a treasurer for said
district. Any person elected treasurer at any meeting other than an
annual meeting, shall hold office until the next annual meeting after
such election, and until his successor shall be elected or appointed,
and thereafter a treasurer shall be elected at each annual meeting for
the term of one year.
 6. To fix the amount in which the collector and treasurer shall give
bonds for the due and faithful performance of the duties of their
offices.
 7. To designate a site for a schoolhouse, or for grounds to be used
for playgrounds, or for agricultural, athletic center and social center
purposes, or, with the consent of the district superintendent of schools
within whose district the school district lies, to designate sites for
two or more schoolhouses for the district. Such designation of a site
for a schoolhouse, or for such grounds, can be made only at a special
meeting of the district, duly called for such purpose by a written
resolution in which the proposed site shall be described by metes and
bounds, and which resolution must receive the assent of a majority of
the qualified voters present and voting, to be ascertained by taking and
recording the ayes and noes, or by ballot.
 8. To vote a tax upon the taxable property of the district, to
purchase, lease and improve such sites or an addition to such sites and
grounds for the purposes specified in the preceding subdivision, to hire
or purchase rooms or buildings for school rooms or schoolhouses, or to
build schoolhouses; to keep in repair and furnish the same with
necessary fuel, furniture and appurtenances, and to purchase such
implements, apparatus and supplies as may be necessary to provide
instruction in agriculture and other subjects, and for the organization
and conduct of athletic, playground and other social center work.
 9. To designate any former schoolhouse and appurtenances, or any part
thereof, the title to which is vested in the board, as a public library
building, and to vote a tax on the taxable property of the district,
pursuant to section two hundred fifty-five of this chapter, to pay the
cost of necessary alterations and equipment to convert such schoolhouse
or part thereof to library use.
 10. To vote a tax, not exceeding twenty-five dollars in any one year,
for the purchase of maps, globes, reproductions of standard works of
art, blackboards and other school apparatus, and for the purchase of
text-books and other school necessaries for the use of needy pupils of
the district.
 11. To vote a tax for the establishment of a school library and the
maintenance thereof, or for the support of any school library already
owned by said district, and for the purchase of books therefor, and such
sum as they may deem necessary for the purchase of a bookcase or
bookcases.
 12. To vote a tax to supply a deficiency in any former tax arising
from such tax being, in whole or in part, uncollectible.
 13. To authorize the trustees to cause the schoolhouses, and their
furniture, appurtenances and school apparatus to be insured by any
insurance company created by or under the laws of this state, or any
other insurance company authorized by law to transact business in this
state.
 14. To alter, repeal and modify their proceedings, from time to time,
as occasion may require.
 15. To vote a tax for the purchase of a book for the purpose of
recording their proceedings.
 16. To vote a tax to replace moneys of the district, lost or embezzled
by district officers; and to pay the reasonable expenses incurred by
district officers in defending suits or appeals brought against them for
their official acts, or in prosecuting suits or appeals by direction of
the district against other parties.
 17. To vote a tax to pay whatever deficiency there may be in teachers'
salaries after the public money apportioned to the district shall have
been applied thereto.
 18. To vote a tax to pay and satisfy of record any judgments of a
competent court which may have been or shall hereafter be obtained in an
action against the trustees of the district for unpaid teachers'
salaries, where the time to appeal from said judgments shall have
lapsed, or there shall be no intent to appeal on the part of such
district, or the said judgments are or shall be of the court of last
resort.
 19. To provide, by tax or otherwise, for the conveyance of pupils
residing in a school district, (a) to the elementary or high schools, or
both, maintained in such district and/or (b) to the elementary or high
schools, or both, in any city or district with which an education
contract shall have been made, and/or (c) to the elementary or high
schools, or both, other than public, situated within the district or an
adjacent district or city, whenever such district shall have contracted
with the school authorities of any city, or with another school
district, for the education therein of the pupils residing in such
school district, or whenever in any school district pupils of school age
shall reside so remote from the schoolhouse therein or the elementary or
high school they legally attend, within or without the district, that
they are practically deprived of school advantages during any portion of
the school year.
 20. To authorize the trustees or board of education, with the consent
of the commissioner of transportation, to furnish lighting facilities
and janitorial care for any highway underpass located within their
distrct and supervision thereof during the time the same is used by
pupils in arriving at or leaving the school premises, whenever such
highway underpass has been constructed by the state and the use thereof
is essential for the safety of pupils.
 21. To vote a tax to provide funds which may be utilized to meet
expenses during the first one hundred twenty days of the fiscal year
following the fiscal year in which such tax is collected.
 § 2022. Vote on school district budgets and on the election of school
district trustees and board of education members. 1. Notwithstanding any
law, rule or regulation to the contrary, the election of trustees or
members of the board of education, and the vote upon the appropriation
of the necessary funds to meet the estimated expenditures, in any common
school district, union free school district, central school district or
central high school district shall be held at the annual meeting and
election on the third Tuesday in May, provided, however, that such
election shall be held on the second Tuesday in May if the commissioner
at the request of a local school board certifies no later than March
first that such election would conflict with religious observances. The
sole trustee, board of trustees or board of education of every common,
union free, central or central high school district and every city
school district to which this article applies shall hold a budget
hearing not less than seven nor more than fourteen days prior to the
annual meeting and election or special district meeting at which a
school budget vote will occur, and shall prepare and present to the
voters at such budget hearing a proposed school district budget for the
ensuing school year.
 2. Except as provided in subdivision four of this section, nothing in
this section shall preclude the trustees or board of education, in their
discretion, from submitting additional items of expenditure to the
voters for approval as separate propositions or the voters from
submitting propositions pursuant to sections two thousand eight and two
thousand thirty-five of this part; provided however that such
propositions shall be subject to the requirements set forth in
subdivision nine of section two thousand twenty-three-a of this part.
 2-a. Every common, union free, central, central high school district
and city school district to which this article applies shall mail a
school budget notice to all qualified voters of the school district
after the date of the budget hearing, but no later than six days prior
to the annual meeting and election or special district meeting at which
a school budget vote will occur. The school budget notice shall compare
the percentage increase or decrease in total spending under the proposed
budget over total spending under the school district budget adopted for
the current school year, with the percentage increase or decrease in the
consumer price index, from January first of the prior school year to
January first of the current school year, and shall also include the
information required by paragraphs a and b of this subdivision. The
notice shall also set forth the date, time and place of the school
budget vote, in the same manner as in the notice of annual meeting, and
shall also include the district's tax levy limit pursuant to section two
thousand twenty-three-a of this part, and the estimated school tax levy,
excluding any levy necessary to support the expenditures pursuant to
subparagraphs (i) through (iv) of paragraph i of subdivision two of
section two thousand twenty-three-a of this part, that would result from
adoption of the proposed budget. Such notice shall be in a form
prescribed by the commissioner.
 a. Commencing with the proposed budget for the two thousand one--two
thousand two school year, such notice shall also include a description
of how total spending and the tax levy resulting from the proposed
budget would compare with a projected contingency budget adopted
pursuant to section two thousand twenty-three of this article, assuming
that such contingency budget is adopted on the same day as the vote on
the proposed budget. Such comparison shall be in total and by component
(program, capital and administrative), and shall include a statement of
the assumptions made in estimating the projected contingency budget.
 b. Commencing with the proposed budget for the two thousand eight--two
thousand nine school year, such notice shall also include, in a format
prescribed by the commissioner, an estimate of the tax savings that
would be available to an eligible homeowner under the basic school tax
relief (STAR) exemption authorized by section four hundred twenty-five
of the real property tax law if the proposed budget were adopted. Such
estimate shall be made in the manner prescribed by the commissioner, in
consultation with the office of real property services.
 3. In all elections for trustees or members of boards of education or
votes involving the expenditure of money, or authorizing the levy of
taxes, the vote thereon shall be by ballot, or, in school districts that
prior to nineteen hundred ninety-eight conducted their vote at the
annual meeting, may be ascertained by taking and recording the ayes and
noes of such qualified voters attending and voting at such district
meetings.
 4. The budget adoption process shall conform to the requirements set
forth in section two thousand twenty-three-a of this part. In the event
that the original proposed budget is not approved by the voters, the
sole trustee, trustees or board of education may adopt a final budget
pursuant to subdivision five of this section or resubmit to the voters
the original or a revised budget pursuant to subdivision three of
section two thousand seven of this part. Upon one defeat of such
resubmitted budget, the sole trustee, trustees or board of education
shall adopt a final budget pursuant to subdivision five of this section.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the school
district budget for any school year, or any part of such budget or any
propositions involving the expenditure of money for such school year
shall not be submitted for a vote of the qualified voters more than
twice.
 5. If the qualified voters fail to approve the proposed school
district budget upon resubmission or upon a determination not to
resubmit for a second vote pursuant to subdivision four of this section,
the sole trustee, trustees or board of education, after applying thereto
the public school moneys and other moneys received or to be received for
that purpose, shall levy a tax for the sum necessary for teachers'
salaries and other ordinary contingent expenses in accordance with the
provisions of this subdivision and sections two thousand twenty-three
and two thousand twenty-three-a of this article.
 6. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision four of section
eighteen hundred four and subdivision five of section nineteen hundred
six of this title, subdivision one of section two thousand two of this
article, subdivision one of this section, subdivision two of section
twenty-six hundred one-a of this title and any other provision of law to
the contrary, the annual district meeting and election of every common,
union free, central and central high school district and the annual
meeting of every city school district in a city having a population of
less than one hundred twenty-five thousand inhabitants that is scheduled
to be held on the third Tuesday of May, two thousand three is hereby
adjourned until the first Tuesday in June, two thousand three. The
trustees or board of education of each such school district shall
provide notice of such adjourned meeting to the qualified voters in the
manner prescribed for notice of the annual meeting, and such notice
shall provide for an adjourned budget hearing. The adjourned district
meeting or district meeting and election shall be deemed the annual
meeting or annual meeting and election of the district for all purposes
under this title and the date of the adjourned meeting shall be deemed
the statewide uniform voting day for all purposes under this title.
Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision seven of section sixteen
hundred eight or subdivision seven of section seventeen hundred sixteen
of this title or any other provision of law, rule or regulation to the
contrary, in two thousand three the property tax report card shall be
submitted to the department no later than twenty days prior to the date
of the adjourned meeting and the department shall make its compilation
available electronically at least seven days prior to such date.
 7. Each school district shall post on its website, if any, a final
annual budget and any multi-year financial plan adopted by the board of
education or trustees.
 * § 2022-a. Disaster; additional day for voting. 1. Upon request of a
school district, or upon the determination of the commissioner, the
commissioner may provide for an additional day of voting for the annual
meeting and election if they determine that less than eight percent of
qualified voters voted as a direct consequence of a disaster. For the
purposes of this section, "disaster" shall include events such as a
fire, earthquake, tornado, explosion, power failure, act of sabotage,
enemy attack or other event that results in substantial damage to
property or the possible or actual loss of life. The procedures
applicable to a school's annual meeting and election shall thereafter be
followed as far as applicable and practicable.
 2. Such additional day of voting shall be held between seven and
fourteen days after the original annual meeting and election, provided
that when the commissioner determines it would not be feasible to hold
the additional day of voting within fourteen days, they may authorize
the district to schedule such additional day of voting as soon as may be
feasible; provided, further, that where a disaster occurs on the date of
a school budget revote pursuant to either section two thousand
twenty-three-a or two thousand seven of this part, the district shall
hold an additional day of voting no sooner than five days after the
school budget revote, but no later than the last day of the month of
June. The board of education shall determine the hours during which the
polls shall remain open on such additional day for voting; provided,
however, that in any event the polls shall remain open for not less than
eleven hours.
 3. The commissioner shall notify the board of education and county
board of elections of such date. The clerk of the school district shall
publish notice of the date of the additional day of voting not less than
twice in each week preceding the date for the additional day for voting,
in two newspapers having general circulation within such district if
there are two, or in one newspaper if there is only one and notify all
qualified voters by mail. Such notice shall also direct attention to any
change of polling places, the original notice of disaster determination
from the commissioner, and contain such other and additional information
as in the judgment of the board of education shall be necessary and
proper. The notice of the date of the additional day of voting shall be
made available on the school district's website, if one exists.
 4. Official ballots shall be provided at public expense at each
polling place for such additional day of voting. In any election
district in which voting machines were used upon the original day of
voting, they shall be used for the additional day for voting. The
original seal on such machines shall not be removed nor shall the
machines be unlocked until the opening of the polls on the additional
day for voting and the board of elections shall provide an additional
seal to be used as soon as the polls are closed on such day. County
boards of elections which have provided voting machines to school
districts for original days of voting shall continue to provide such
voting machines until the additional day of voting is complete.
 5. Only those persons qualified to vote upon the original date of the
school district's annual meeting and election who did not vote on such
date shall be entitled to vote on the additional day for voting. Voting
on the additional day provided for in this section shall be accomplished
solely by physically appearing at the polling place, and nothing
contained in this section shall be construed to extend the time set by
law for casting or canvassing an absentee, military, or special ballot;
provided, however, that nothing contained herein shall be deemed to
invalidate any absentee, military, or special ballot duly received on
the original date of the annual meeting and election. Such additional
day of voting shall not be considered a resubmission of such item to the
voters.
 * NB Effective July 1, 2026
 § 2023. Levy of tax for certain purposes without vote; contingency
budget. 1. If the qualified voters shall neglect or refuse to vote the
sum estimated necessary for teachers' salaries, after applying thereto
the public school moneys, and other moneys received or to be received
for that purpose, or if they shall neglect or refuse to vote the sum
estimated necessary for ordinary contingent expenses, including the
purchase of library books and other instructional materials associated
with a library and expenses incurred for interschool athletics, field
trips and other extracurricular activities and the expenses for
cafeteria or restaurant services, the sole trustee, board of trustees,
or board of education shall adopt a contingency budget including such
expenses and shall levy a tax, subject to the restrictions as set forth
in subdivision four of this section and subdivision eight of section two
thousand twenty-three-a of this part, for the same, in like manner as if
the same had been voted by the qualified voters, subject to the
limitations contained in subdivisions three and four of this section.
 2. Notwithstanding the defeat of a school budget, school districts
shall continue to transport students to and from the regular school
program in accordance with the mileage limitations previously adopted by
the qualified voters of the school district. Such mileage limits shall
change only when amended by a special proposition passed by a majority
of the qualified voters of the school district. In cases where the
school budget is defeated by such qualified voters of the school
district, appropriations for transportation costs for purposes other
than for transportation to and from the regular school program, and
transportation that would constitute an ordinary contingent expense
pursuant to subdivision one of this section, shall be authorized in the
budget only after approval by the qualified voters of the district.
 3. The administrative component of a contingency budget shall not
comprise a greater percentage of the contingency budget exclusive of the
capital component than the lesser of (1) the percentage the
administrative component had comprised in the prior year budget
exclusive of the capital component; or (2) the percentage the
administrative component had comprised in the last proposed defeated
budget exclusive of the capital component.
 4. a. The contingency budget shall not result in a tax levy greater
than the tax levied for the prior school year.
 b. The resolution of the trustee, board of trustees, or board of
education adopting a contingency budget shall incorporate by reference a
statement specifying the projected percentage increase or decrease in
total spending for the school year, and explaining the reasons for
disregarding any portion of an increase in spending in formulating the
contingency budget.
 c. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the
trustees or board of education shall not be authorized to amend or
revise a final contingency budget where such amendment or revision would
result in total spending in excess of the spending limitation in
paragraph (a) of this subdivision; provided that the trustees or board
of education shall be authorized to add appropriations for the
expenditure of gifts, grants in aid for specific purposes or for general
use or insurance proceeds authorized pursuant to subdivision two of
section seventeen hundred eighteen of this chapter in addition to that
which has been previously budgeted.
 § 2023-a. Limitations upon school district tax levies. 1. Generally.
Unless otherwise provided by law, the amount of taxes that may be levied
by or on behalf of any school district, other than a city school
district of a city with one hundred twenty-five thousand inhabitants or
more, shall not exceed the tax levy limit established pursuant to this
section, not including any tax levy necessary to support the
expenditures pursuant to subparagraphs (i) through (iv) of paragraph i
of subdivision two of this section.
 2. Definitions. As used in this section:
 a. "Allowable levy growth factor" shall be the lesser of: (i) one and
two one-hundredths; or (ii) the sum of one plus the inflation factor;
provided, however, that in no case shall the levy growth factor be less
than one.
 b. "Available carryover" means the amount by which the tax levy for
the prior school year was below the applicable tax levy limit for such
school year, if any, but no more than an amount that equals one and
one-half percent of the tax levy limit for such school year.
 c. "Capital local expenditures" means the taxes associated with
budgeted expenditures resulting from the financing, refinancing,
acquisition, design, construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
improvement, furnishing and equipping of, or otherwise providing for
school district capital facilities or school district capital equipment,
including debt service and lease expenditures, and transportation
capital debt service, subject to the approval of the qualified voters
where required by law. The commissioner of taxation and finance shall,
as appropriate, promulgate rules and regulations which may provide for
adjustment of capital local expenditures to reflect a school district's
share of additional budgeted capital expenditures made by a board of
cooperative educational services.
 d. "Capital tax levy" means the tax levy necessary to support capital
local expenditures, if any.
 e. "Coming school year" means the school year for which tax levy
limits are being determined pursuant to this section.
 f. "Inflation factor" means the quotient of: (i) the average of the
national consumer price indexes determined by the United States
department of labor for the twelve-month period preceding January first
of the current year minus the average of the national consumer price
indexes determined by the United States department of labor for the
twelve-month period preceding January first of the prior year, divided
by: (ii) the average of the national consumer price indexes determined
by the United States department of labor for the twelve-month period
preceding January first of the prior year, with the result expressed as
a decimal to four places.
 g. "Prior school year" means the school year immediately preceding the
coming school year.
 h. "School district" means a common school district, union free school
district, central school district, central high school district or a
city school district in a city with less than one hundred twenty-five
thousand inhabitants.
 i. "Tax levy limit" means the amount of taxes a school district is
authorized to levy pursuant to this section, provided, however, that the
tax levy limit shall not include the following:
 (i) a tax levy necessary for expenditures resulting from court orders
or judgments against the school district arising out of tort actions for
any amount that exceeds five percent of the total tax levied in the
prior school year;
 (ii) in years in which the system average actuarial contribution rate
of the New York state and local employees' retirement system, as defined
by paragraph ten of subdivision a of section nineteen-a of the
retirement and social security law, increases by more than two
percentage points from the previous year, a tax levy necessary for
expenditures for the coming fiscal year for school district employer
contributions to the New York state and local employees' retirement
system caused by growth in the system average actuarial contribution
rate minus two percentage points;
 (iii) in years in which the normal contribution rate of the New York
state teachers' retirement system, as defined by paragraph a of
subdivision two of section five hundred seventeen of this chapter,
increases by more than two percentage points from the previous year, a
tax levy necessary for expenditures for the coming fiscal year for
school district employer contributions to the New York state teachers'
retirement system caused by growth in the normal contribution rate minus
two percentage points; and
 (iv) a capital tax levy.
 2-a. Tax base growth factor. a. No later than February fifteenth of
each year, the commissioner of taxation and finance shall identify those
school districts for which tax base growth factors must be determined
for the coming school year, and shall notify the commissioner of the tax
base growth factors so determined, if any.
 b. The commissioner of taxation and finance shall calculate a quantity
change factor for the coming school year for each school district based
upon the physical or quantity change, as defined by section twelve
hundred twenty of the real property tax law, reported to the
commissioner of taxation and finance by the assessor or assessors
pursuant to section five hundred seventy-five of the real property tax
law. The quantity change factor shall show the percentage by which the
full value of the taxable real property in the school district has
changed due to physical or quantity change between the second final
assessment roll or rolls preceding the final assessment roll or rolls
upon which taxes are to be levied, and the final assessment roll or
rolls immediately preceding the final assessment roll or rolls upon
which taxes are to be levied. The commissioner of taxation and finance
shall, as appropriate, promulgate rules and regulations regarding the
calculation of the quantity change factor which may adjust the
calculation based on the development on tax exempt land.
 c. After determining the quantity change factor for a school district,
the commissioner of taxation and finance shall proceed as follows:
 (i) If the quantity change factor is negative, the commissioner of
taxation and finance shall not determine a tax base growth factor for
the school district.
 (ii) If the quantity change factor is positive, the commissioner of
taxation and finance shall determine a tax base growth factor for the
school district which is equal to one plus the quantity change factor.
 3. Computation of tax levy limits. a. Each school district shall
calculate the tax levy limit for each school year which shall be
determined as follows:
 (1) Ascertain the total amount of taxes levied for the prior school
year.
 (2) Multiply the result by the tax base growth factor, if any.
 (3) Add any payments in lieu of taxes that were receivable in the
prior school year.
 (4) Subtract the tax levy necessary to support the expenditures
pursuant to subparagraphs (i) and (iv) of paragraph i of subdivision two
of this section for the prior school year, if any.
 (5) Multiply the result by the allowable levy growth factor.
 (6) Subtract any payments in lieu of taxes receivable in the coming
fiscal year.
 (7) Add the available carryover, if any.
 b. On or before March first of each year, any school district subject
to the provisions of this section shall submit to the state comptroller,
the commissioner, and the commissioner of taxation and finance, in a
form and manner prescribed by the state comptroller, any information
necessary for the calculation of the tax levy limit; and the school
district's determination of the tax levy limit pursuant to this section
shall be subject to review by the commissioner and the commissioner of
taxation and finance.
 4. Reorganized school districts. When two or more school districts
reorganize, the commissioner shall determine the tax levy limit for the
reorganized school district for the first school year following the
reorganization based on the respective tax levy limits of the school
districts that formed the reorganized district from the last school year
in which they were separate districts, provided that in the event of
formation of a new central high school district, the tax levy limits for
the new central high school district and its component school districts
shall be determined in accordance with a methodology prescribed by the
commissioner.
 5. Erroneous levies. In the event a school district's actual tax levy
for a given school year exceeds the maximum allowable levy as
established pursuant to this section due to clerical or technical
errors, the school district shall place the excess amount of the levy in
reserve in accordance with such requirements as the state comptroller
may prescribe, and shall use such funds and any interest earned thereon
to offset the tax levy for the ensuing school year.
 6. (a) Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, in
the event the trustee, trustees or board of education of a school
district that is subject to the provisions of this section proposes a
budget that will require a tax levy that exceeds the tax levy limit for
the corresponding school year, not including any levy necessary to
support the expenditures pursuant to subparagraphs (i) through (iv) of
paragraph i of subdivision two of this section, then such budget shall
be approved if sixty percent of the votes cast thereon are in the
affirmative.
 (b) Where the trustee, trustees or board of education proposes a
budget subject to the requirements of paragraph (a) of this subdivision,
the ballot for such budget shall include the following statement in
substantially the same form: "Adoption of this budget requires a tax
levy increase of which exceeds the statutory tax levy increase
limit of for this school fiscal year and therefore exceeds the
state tax cap and must be approved by sixty percent of the qualified
voters present and voting."
 7. In the event that the original proposed budget is not approved by
the voters, the sole trustee, trustees or board of education may adopt a
final budget pursuant to subdivision eight of this section or resubmit
to the voters the original or a revised budget at a special district
meeting in accordance with subdivision three of section two thousand
seven of this part. Upon one defeat of such resubmitted budget, the sole
trustee, trustees or board of education shall adopt a final budget
pursuant to subdivision eight of this section.
 8. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, if the
qualified voters fail to approve the proposed school district budget
upon resubmission or upon a determination not to resubmit for a second
vote pursuant to subdivision seven of this section, the sole trustee,
trustees or board of education shall levy a tax no greater than the tax
that was levied for the prior school year.
 9. Nothing in this section shall preclude the trustee, trustees, or
board of education of a school district, in their discretion, from
submitting additional items of expenditures to the voters for approval
as separate propositions or the voters from submitting propositions
pursuant to sections two thousand eight and two thousand thirty-five of
this part; provided however, except in the case of a proposition
submitted for any expenditure contained within subparagraphs (i) through
(iv) of paragraph i of subdivision two of this section, if any
proposition, or propositions collectively that are subject to a vote on
the same date, would require an expenditure of money that would require
a tax levy and would result in the tax levy limit being exceeded for the
corresponding school year then such proposition shall be approved if
sixty percent of the votes cast thereon are in the affirmative.
 § 2023-b. Certification of compliance with tax levy limit. 1. Upon the
adoption of the budget of an eligible school district, the chief
executive officer of such school district shall certify to the state
comptroller, the commissioner of taxation and finance and the
commissioner that the budget so adopted does not exceed the tax levy
limit prescribed by section two thousand twenty-three-a of this part.
Such certification shall be made in a form and manner prescribed by the
state comptroller in consultation with the commissioner of taxation and
finance and the commissioner.
 2. If such a certification has been made and the actual tax levy of
the school district exceeds the applicable tax levy limit, the excess
amount shall be placed in reserve and used in the manner prescribed by
subdivision five of section two thousand twenty-three-a of this part,
even if a tax levy in excess of the tax levy limit had been duly
authorized for the applicable fiscal year by the school district voters.
 3. Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, every school
district that is subject to the provisions of section two thousand
twenty-three-a of this part shall report both its proposed budget and
its adopted budget to the office of the state comptroller and the
commissioner at the time and in the manner as they may prescribe,
whether or not such budget has been or will be certified as provided by
this subdivision.
 § 2024. Reference to commissioner of education. If any question shall
arise as to what are ordinary contingent expenses the same may be
referred to the commissioner of education, by a statement in writing,
signed by one or more of each of the opposing parties upon the question,
and the decision of the commissioner shall be conclusive.
 § 2025. Procedures at school district meetings. 1. District meetings
in common school districts shall be called to order by the trustee or
the chairman of the board of trustees or by a person chosen by the
trustee or trustees. The qualified voters present and voting shall
nominate and elect a qualified voter of the district as permanent
chairman.
 2. In union free and central school districts the board of education
shall appoint a qualified voter of the district as permanent chairman of
each meeting or election to call such meeting or election to order. When
hours have been set for voting in the notice of meeting or election, the
chairman shall declare the polls open and closed at the appropriate
time. No motions shall be in order during the hours specified in the
notice for voting. In districts divided into election districts, the
chief election inspector in each district shall declare the polls open
and closed at the appropriate time.
 3. The clerk of the district shall serve as clerk of all meetings and
elections.
 a. In common school districts the voters present and voting may elect
a clerk of the meeting if the district clerk is not present. The voters
may also elect assistant clerks and election inspectors as required. At
least two election inspectors shall be elected for each ballot box or
voting machine used. The inspectors shall choose a chief inspector of
election.
 b. In union free and central school districts the board of education
shall appoint a qualified voter as acting clerk in the absence or
inability to act of the district clerk. The board of education shall
also appoint assistant clerks and election inspectors as required. At
least two election inspectors shall be appointed for each ballot box or
voting machine. The board of education shall designate a chief election
inspector, and if the district is divided into election districts the
board of education shall appoint a chief election inspector for each
election district.
 4. The clerk and assistant clerk or clerks of the meeting or election
shall keep a true and accurate written record of all of the proceedings
of the meeting or election and shall file such written record with the
clerk of the district within twenty-four hours after the meeting or
election.
 5. Each assistant clerk and election inspector appointed by a board of
education shall be entitled to compensation at a rate fixed by such
board of education.
 6. A person seventeen years of age who is enrolled in a school
district and fulfilling the requirements of section thirty-two hundred
seven-a of this chapter shall be eligible to be appointed as, and to
perform the duties of, an election inspector or poll clerk as provided
in this part.
 § 2029. Poll list. A poll list containing the name and legal
residence of every person whose vote shall be received shall be kept by
the clerk and the assistant clerk or clerks of the meeting or election.
 § 2030. Ballot box; voting booth. 1. The trustee, board of trustees,
or board of education, shall, at the expense of the district, provide a
suitable box, or boxes, in which the ballots, folded so as to conceal
the marking thereon, shall be deposited as they are received.
 2. In all union free school districts the board of education, shall,
at the expense of the district, provide a voting booth, or booths, and
voters shall be required to enter such booth, or booths, for the purpose
of marking their ballots.
 § 2031. Election of officers. All district officers shall be elected
by ballot.
 § 2031-a. Electioneering within one hundred feet of polling place
prohibited; distance markers. 1. At every election held for the office
of trustee or member of a board of education and at every vote upon any
proposition or issue in a school district where the election or vote is
held at a different time from, and not during, the annual meeting of the
district, there shall be conspicuously placed, by the inspectors of
election, distance markers at a distance of one hundred feet from the
polling place. Such distance markers shall indicate the prohibition
contained herein and shall be so placed at least one-half hour before
the opening of the polls and shall remain until the polls are closed.
 2. At such elections or voting held at a different time from, and not
during, the annual meeting of the district, while the polls are open no
person shall do any electioneering within the polling place, or within
one hundred feet therefrom in any public street, or within such distance
in any place in a public manner and no banner, poster or placard on
behalf of or in opposition to any candidate or issue to be voted upon
shall be allowed in or upon the polling place or within one hundred feet
therefrom during the election. For the purposes of this section, the
one hundred foot distance shall be deemed to include a one hundred foot
radial measured from the entrances, designated by the inspectors of
election, to a building where such election is being held. This section
shall not be deemed to prohibit the board of trustees or board of
education from displaying within any polling place a copy or copies of
any budget or proposition to be voted upon.
 3. Any person who wilfully violates the provisions of this section
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
 § 2032. Ballots for election of school district officers. 1. In common
school districts the ballots for the election of district officers shall
be written or printed, typed or mimeographed, or partly written and
partly printed, typed or mineographed, containing the name of the person
voted for and designating the office for which each is voted.
 2. a. In union free school districts the board of education shall
cause ballots containing the names of all candidates nominated for
election to the board of education to be printed, typed or mimeographed.
 b. The names of all candidates for each separate specific office shall
be grouped together and at the top of each group shall be placed a
description of the separate specific office for which such candidates
are nominated, which description shall include at least the length of
the term of office and the name of the last incumbent, if any, and in
addition a direction that only one vote may be cast in each separate
group. The names of the candidates for each separate specific office
shall be listed in the order as determined by a drawing by lot. Such
drawing shall be conducted by the clerk of the board of education and
shall be held the day after the last possible date for candidates to
file a petition. In the event that any candidate is not present in
person or by a person designated in a written proxy to accomplish the
drawing, the district clerk shall be authorized to act as proxy. In any
district where a proposition has been adopted pursuant to paragraph b of
section two thousand eighteen, the names of all candidates for vacancies
upon the board of education shall be arranged according to lot as
prescribed in this section, and a direction shall be made that as many
candidates may be voted for as there are vacancies to be filled.
 c. A voting square shall be provided to the left of the name of each
candidate upon the ballot.
 d. A single cross X mark in pen or pencil, or a single check * mark,
in pen or pencil, in the voting square shall indicate a vote.
 * NB There should be a check mark in this space.
 e. One blank space shall be provided under the name of the last
candidate for each separate specific office so that voters may vote for
candidates who have not been nominated for the offices to be filled at
such election and the writing in, with a pencil having black lead, by a
voter, of a name in the blank space so provided, shall indicate a vote.
 f. Such ballot shall have placed thereon the name of the district and
instructions explaining in substance the provisions of paragraphs d and
e of subdivision two of this section and subdivisions three and four of
section two thousand thirty-four of this chapter.
 3. All spoiled or defective ballots shall be sealed in an envelope and
so endorsed by the inspectors of election. Such envelope shall be placed
in the ballot box as provided in subdivision six of section two thousand
thirty-three of this chapter.
 4. The clerk of the district shall cause to be delivered to the
inspectors of election, on the day of the meeting or election and not
before, a sufficient supply of the ballots for the use of the qualified
voters. Such ballots shall be prepared at the expense of the school
district.
 5. The ballot shall be folded by the voter so as to conceal his
marking or writing thereon before the ballot is deposited in a ballot
box.
 6. If official ballots are not furnished as provided in subdivision
two of this section, an election of members of a board of education in a
union free school district shall not be declared invalid or illegal
because of the use of ballots which do not conform to the requirements
of subdivision two of this section, provided the intent of the voter may
be ascertained from the use of such irregular or defective ballots and
such use was not fraudulent and did not substantially affect the result
of the meeting or election.
 § 2033. Voting after closing of polls. All qualified voters entitled
to vote who are in the place where the meeting or election is held at or
before the time of closing the polls shall be allowed to vote.
 § 2034. Canvass of votes; declaration of result. 1. Immediately upon
the close of the polls the inspectors of election shall count the
ballots found in the ballot box without unfolding them, except so far as
is necessary to ascertain that each ballot is single. They shall compare
the number of ballots found in the ballot box with the number of persons
recorded on the poll list as having voted at the meeting or election. If
the number of ballots found in the ballot box shall exceed the number of
names on such poll list, such ballots shall be replaced without being
unfolded in the box from which they were taken and shall be thoroughly
mingled in such box and the chief inspector of election shall then
publicly draw out as many ballots as shall be equal to the number of
excess ballots. The ballots so drawn out shall be enclosed without
unfolding in an envelope which shall be sealed and endorsed with a
statement of the number of such excess ballots withdrawn from the box
and shall be signed by the chief inspector. Such envelope with the
excess ballots therein shall be placed in the ballot box as provided in
subdivision six of this section.
 2. The ballots shall be counted or canvassed by the inspectors of
election and the votes cast for each candidate shall be tallied and
counted by the inspectors of election.
 3. The whole ballot is void if the voter
 a. does any act extrinsic to the ballot such as enclosing any paper or
other article in the folded ballot, or
 b. defaces or tears the ballot, or
 c. makes an erasure thereon, or
 d. in a union free school district meeting or election, makes any mark
thereon other than a single cross X mark in pen or pencil, or a single
check * mark, in pen or pencil, in a voting square, or other than the
writing in a name for the purpose of voting; provided, however, that an
erasure or a mark other than a single cross X mark in pen or pencil, or
a single check * mark, in pen or pencil, made in a voting square shall
not make the ballot void, but shall render it blank as to the office in
connection with which it is made. No ballot shall be declared void or
partially blank because a cross X mark or check * mark thereon is
irregular in form.
 * NB There should be a check mark in this space.
 4. In a union free school district meeting or election, if the voter
marks more than one name in a group for a separate specific office or if
for any reason it is impossible to determine the voter's choice of
candidate for an office his vote shall not be counted for such office
but shall be returned as a blank vote thereon.
 5. The inspectors of election shall announce to the chairman the
results of the ballot. The ballots that were declared void or wholly
blank shall be sealed in an envelope and so endorsed by the inspectors
of election. Such envelope shall be placed in the ballot box as
provided in subdivision six of this section.
 6. After the ballots are counted and the statements have been made as
required in this section, the ballots, together with the envelopes
containing the defective or spoiled ballots, the excess ballots and the
void or wholly blank ballots, shall be placed in the ballot box or
boxes. Each box shall be securely locked and sealed by the inspectors of
election and deposited by the chief inspector with the clerk of the
district. The unused ballots shall be placed in a sealed package by the
inspectors of election and returned to such clerk by the chief inspector
at the same time that such ballot box, or boxes, are delivered to him.
The ballot box, or boxes, and the package of unused ballots, after being
sealed by the inspectors of election, shall not thereafter be opened,
except:
 a. upon the order of the commissioner of education in the manner
specified in such order, or
 b. when a period of six months from the date of the meeting or
election has elapsed without any proceeding being commenced in regard to
such meeting or election, the board of education may, notwithstanding
any provision of this chapter or of the public officers law to the
contrary, by written resolution order the unsealing and opening of the
ballot box, or boxes, and the destruction of all ballots contained
therein, together with the unused ballots.
 7. a. Except as provided in paragraph c of this subdivision, the
chairman shall declare to the meeting or election the result of each
ballot, as announced to him by the inspectors of election, and the
persons having a plurality of the votes cast, respectively, for the
several offices shall be elected except as provided in paragraphs b and
d of this subdivision.
 b. If the school district shall have been divided into election
districts pursuant to section two thousand seventeen of this chapter the
inspectors of election shall make a written report of the results of the
ballot, signed by all such inspectors, to the chief inspector of
election of each election district. The chief inspector of election of
each election district shall within twenty-four hours file such written
report with the clerk of the district. The board of education shall
thereupon within twenty-four hours tabulate and declare the result of
the ballot.
 c. If the school district shall have adopted a proposition pursuant to
paragraph b of section two thousand eighteen, the candidates receiving a
plurality of the votes cast respectively for the several offices shall
be declared elected. Where more than one office is to be filled by such
election and there is a variance in the length of the terms for which
such offices are to be filled as authorized by this chapter, or where
one or more persons are to be elected for a full term or terms and one
or more persons are to be elected for the unexpired portion of a term or
terms, or both, the candidate receiving the largest number of votes
shall be entitled to the longest term and the candidates receiving the
next highest number of votes shall be entitled, in decreasing order of
the respective numbers of votes, to the several offices, in decreasing
order of the length of such terms or unexpired portions of terms.
 8. The clerk of the meeting or election shall record the result of
each ballot as declared by the chairman.
 9. The clerk of the district shall serve a written notice either
personally or by mail upon each person declared elected as provided in
subdivision five of section twenty-one hundred twenty-one of this
chapter.
 10. In the event that more eligible persons than the number remaining
to be elected receive, for the same office or offices, an equal number
of votes sufficient that fewer persons receiving such number of votes
would be elected, the board of education shall call a special run-off
election to be held within forty-five days following the general or
special election at which such tie vote was cast to determine which of
such candidates shall be elected to such office. The only persons who
shall be deemed nominated for such run-off election shall be the
candidates who have received such equal number of votes.
 § 2035. Use of voting machines at school district meetings or
elections. 1. If the trustees or board of education of any school
district shall so determine, voting machines may be used for recording
the vote on elections and questions, or either, at the school district
meetings or elections, annual and special, or either, in such district.
Before any such machine is used at any such meeting or election, the
inspectors of election shall examine it and see that all the counters
are set at zero (000) and that the ballot labels are properly placed,
and that the machine is in all respects in proper condition for use. The
use of such machine shall be deemed a compliance with any provision of
law requiring the vote to be by ballot. Such trustees or board of
education, with district funds available, may purchase the necessary
voting machine or machines; or, if the county board of elections shall
consent thereto, such machines belonging to the county or belonging to
the town in which any part of said school district shall be located, may
be used at any such meeting, the expense of delivery and returning and
setting up, and any other expense connected therewith, to be defrayed by
the school district; but such machines belonging to the county shall not
be so used at the time or times when they may be required under the
election law.
 2. In common school districts the manner of making nominations or
submitting propositions by anyone other than the trustees and in union
free school districts the manner of submitting propositions by anyone
other than the board of education for the purpose of preparing ballots
for the machine shall be prescribed by a rule previously adopted by the
trustees or board of education; provided, however, that the petition,
certificate, declaration, notice or other paper required by such rule,
for the making of any such nomination or submission, except as to a
question or proposition required by law to be stated in the published or
posted notice of the meeting shall be filed with the trustees or board
of education not later than thirty days before the meeting or election.
Any nomination may be rejected by the trustees if the candidate is
ineligible for the office or has declared his unwillingness to serve;
any proposition may be rejected by the trustees or board of education if
the purpose of the proposition is not within the power of the voters, or
where the expenditure of moneys is required by the proposition, if the
proposition fails to include the necessary specific appropriation. Any
such rule may be amended from time to time and may state that a
reasonable minimum number of signatures shall be required for
submission. The trustees or board of education shall cause such rule,
and amendments from time to time, to be printed for general distribution
in the district. Provided, however, that the provisions of any special
law relating to nominations and elections in any union free school
district shall continue to remain in force, and the manner of making
nominations and the conduct of meetings and elections, shall conform to
such special law.
 3. Any proposition submitted pursuant to this section shall be subject
to the requirements set forth in subdivision nine of section two
thousand twenty-three-a of this part.
 § 2036. Effect of failure to appoint or elect qualified voters as
district meeting or election officials. The proceedings of no annual or
special school district meeting or election shall be held illegal for
failure to appoint or elect a qualified voter (or a person satisfying
the requirements of subdivision eight of section 3-400 of the election
law) as an official at such district meeting or election, unless it
shall appear that the acts of such official or officials were improper
or that the action of such meeting or election was prejudiced thereby.
 § 2037. Determination of meeting or election disputes. All disputes
concerning the validity of any district meeting or election or of any of
the acts of the officers of such meeting or election shall be referred
to the commissioner of education for determination and his decisions in
the matter shall be final and not subject to review. The commissioner
may in his discretion order a new meeting or election.
 § 2038. Transmission of publicly available data to the New York voting
and elections database. Upon the certification of election results and
the completion of the voter history file after each election, each
school district that holds school board elections pursuant to this
article shall transmit copies of the records required to be transmitted
pursuant to section 3-112 of the election law in a manner and time
provided for in such section.
 § 2039. Application of article. The provisions of part one of this
article shall apply to all school districts except as otherwise provided
by article fifty-three of this chapter, and except to city school
districts of cities with one hundred twenty-five thousand inhabitants or
more.
 PART II
 CONTRACT SYSTEM
Section 2040. District meeting to authorize contract system.
 2040-a. Contributions to school districts containing migrant
 labor camps.
 2041. Trustees or boards of education may contract to receive
 such children.
 2042. Form and validity of contract.
 2044. Report of pupils from other districts.
 2045. Non-resident attendance.
 § 2040. District meeting to authorize contract system. 1. Any school
district may decide by a majority vote of the qualified voters present
and voting at a district meeting:
 a. To contract for the education of all the elementary pupils of such
district in another school district in this state or in any adjoining
state, instead of maintaining a home school.
 b. To contract for the education of part of the elementary pupils of
such district in another school district in this state or in an
adjoining state and maintain a home school;
 c. To contract for a period of not less than two and not more than
five years for the education of all the high school pupils of grades
seven to twelve, inclusive, of such district in another school district
in this state or in an adjoining state, instead of maintaining a home
high school for such grades.
 d. To contract for a period of not less than two and not more than
five years for the education of some of the pupils of grades seven to
twelve, inclusive, of such district in another school district in this
state or in an adjoining state provided that such district maintains a
home high school for such grades. Nothing herein shall require a
district to enter into a written contract for the education of its high
school pupils where the term is for a period of less than two years.
 2. Such contract may be made with one or more school districts. The
designation of the school districts with which such contracts may be
made shall be made pursuant to the commissioner's regulations.
 § 2040-a. Contributions to school districts containing migrant labor
camps. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, and for the purpose
of sharing the extra expense incurred by a school district in providing
temporary educational facilities for children living in a migrant labor
camp located therein which supplies labor to employers residing in other
school districts, the board of education, trustee, or trustees of any
adjoining school district, or other school district in the same town,
where employers residing therein are supplied with labor from such
migrant labor camp, may contribute not more than three hundred dollars
annually to the school district in which such migrant labor camp is
located. The moneys so contributed shall be used only for the purposes
hereinbefore stated.
 § 2041. Trustees or boards of education may contract to receive such
children. The trustees or board of education of any district or city
may enter into a contract to receive and educate in the schools of such
district or city the children of any district which shall authorize its
trustees or board of education to contract for the education of its
children as provided by section two thousand thirty of this chapter.
 § 2042. Form and validity of contract. Every contract for the
education of school children shall be in writing and in the form
prescribed by the commissioner of education, and before such contract is
executed the same shall be submitted for approval to the superintendent
of schools having jurisdiction over said district and such contract
shall not become effective until approved by such superintendent. Such
contract shall not be valid or binding upon either party thereto until a
copy thereof is filed with the commissioner of education and approved by
him.
 § 2044. Report of pupils from other districts. The children attending
a school under any contract for the education of elementary pupils shall
be reported to the commissioner of education by the trustees or board of
education of the district or city wherein such children attend school as
though they were residents of such city or school district.
 § 2045. Non-resident attendance. 1. No charge for the instruction of
nonresident pupils in excess of the difference between the cost of
educating such pupils and the apportionment of public moneys on account
of the attendance of such pupils shall be made by any district. The
tuition charged, if any, in excess of such apportionment is hereby
declared a charge upon the district from which such nonresident pupil
attends, subject, however, to the right of such district to designate
the academic school or schools where instruction shall be given at the
district's expense, and provided that no tuition shall be payable by the
district of residence for the education, by another district, of an
elementary pupil, unless a contract has been entered into between such
districts pursuant to part two of this article. Such designations shall
be made by each school district pursuant to commissioner's regulations.
Such designation may be reviewed upon appeal to the commissioner of
education in the event the parents or guardians of such pupils deem
themselves aggrieved thereby. In case any school district shall fail to
make a timely designation, the district superintendent of schools in the
supervisory district in which such district is located may make such
designation, subject to review on appeal by the commissioner of
education. Districts shall not refuse to receive nonresident academic
pupils for instruction without valid and sufficient reasons therefor.
All acts of the board of education or other district officers relating
to such pupils and the tuition charged for their instruction are hereby
declared subject to review by the commissioner of education. Where a
district is so situated that its academic pupils can be more
conveniently instructed in the academic department of a school located
in another state, the commissioner of education is hereby authorized to
make the same apportionment, annually, to the school district educating
such academic pupils so instructed outside the state, as he shall be
authorized by law to make for the instruction of academic pupils within
the state, and upon the same conditions.
 2. If a pupil resides in a district wherein high school courses are
offered, but no vocational high school is available therein, or if
vocational high school courses are not available in the academic school
or schools designated as herein provided, such pupil may select and
attend any other academic school within the state in which vocational
courses are available, and the tuition charged, if any, in excess of the
difference between the cost of educating such pupil and the
apportionment of public moneys on account of the attendance of such
pupil, is hereby declared a charge upon the district in which such pupil
resides, except however, the cost of transportation of such pupil need
not be paid by such district.
 3. Any academic pupils attending school in a school district in this
state, but residing on military reservations within the boundaries of
the state of New York, jurisdiction over which has been ceded to the
United States, shall be deemed to be pupils of the school district of
attendance within the meaning of section thirty-six hundred two of this
chapter.
 4. Each district which does not maintain a high school shall provide
transportation when necessary for its pupils who have completed the work
of the sixth grade and are receiving instruction in another district.
 PART III
 PROFESSIONAL SERVICES PROVIDERS
Section 2050. Definition.
 2051. Charging for professional services.
 2052. Enforcement.
 2053. Reports regarding lawyers.
 2054. Non-exclusivity of rights or remedies.
 § 2050. Definition. As used in this part, a "lawyer" shall mean an
attorney or counselor governed by article fifteen of the judiciary law,
who receives remuneration or other compensation from a school district
or board of cooperative educational services in exchange for legal
services provided to such district or board.
 § 2051. Charging for professional services. 1. A lawyer shall not
simultaneously be an independent contractor and an employee of a school
district or board of cooperative educational services for the purpose of
providing legal services to such school district or board of cooperative
educational services.
 2. A lawyer who is not an employee of a school district or board of
cooperative educational services, shall not seek to be or be considered,
treated or otherwise reported by the school district, or board of
cooperative educational services as an employee thereof for purposes of
compensation, remuneration, health insurance, pension and all
employment-related benefits and emoluments associated therewith.
 § 2052. Enforcement. 1. Any lawyer who violates section two thousand
fifty-one of this part, shall be liable for a civil penalty not to
exceed three times the charges and fees for contracted services or
salary received by the lawyer and paid by such school district or board
of cooperative educational services for legal services, and in addition,
may be enjoined from continuing such violation. Civil penalties and
injunctive relief provided in this section shall be recoverable in an
action brought by the attorney general.
 2. Any person who shall knowingly:
 (a) violate subdivision two of section two thousand fifty-one of this
part;
 (b) make a false statement of material fact; or
 (c) falsify or permit to be falsified any record or records of the
retirement system established in this chapter
in an attempt to defraud the retirement system established in this
chapter as a result of such act for the purpose of obtaining a credit
towards pension benefits, or a benefit or payment in excess of one
thousand dollars from such retirement system for a professional services
provider to which such professional services provider would not be
entitled, shall be guilty of a class E felony.
 § 2053. Reports regarding lawyers. Every school district and board of
cooperative educational services shall, on or before the forty-fifth day
after the commencement of its fiscal year, file with the department, the
comptroller and the attorney general a report specifying: (a) all
lawyers who provide legal services to such district or board; (b)
whether such district or board hired such lawyers as employees; and (c)
all remuneration and compensation paid for legal services.
 § 2054. Non-exclusivity of rights or remedies. Nothing in this part
shall be construed to limit, in any matter, any rights or remedies
otherwise available under law against any party or to any person or
entity, including, but not limited to, the attorney general or the
comptroller of the state of New York.
 ARTICLE 43
 SCHOOL DISTRICT OFFICERS--TOWN AND COUNTY OFFICIALS
 PART I
 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 2101. Officers of district.
 2102. Qualifications of officers.
 2102-a. Required training for school district officers.
 2103. Ineligibility to office.
 2103-a. Police officers and firefighters on boards of education.
 2105. Terms of office.
 2106. Terms of officers of newly created district.
 2108. Notice and acceptance of election.
 2109. Refusal of trustee to serve.
 2110. Penalty for refusal to serve or perform duty.
 2111. Resignation of district officers.
 2112. Vacating office.
 2113. Filling vacancy in office of trustee.
 2114. Filling vacancy in office of clerk, collector or
 treasurer.
 2115. Notice of appointment to fill vacancy and filing
 thereof.
 2116. District records, books, etc., are district property.
 2116-a. Books and records to be kept by school districts.
 2116-b. Internal audit function.
 2116-c. Audit committees.
 2117. Reports.
 2118. Expenses of school district officers.
 2119. School district trustee not to draw draft on county
 treasurer in certain cases.
 § 2101. Officers of district. 1. Each common school district shall
have one or three trustees as the district determines, a collector
except in first class towns and except as may be otherwise provided by
law, and if the district so decides a treasurer.
 2. Each union free school district shall have a board of education
consisting of from three to nine trustees as the district shall
determine.
 § 2102. Qualifications of officers. Every school district officer
must be able to read and write and must be a qualified voter of the
district; and each member of a board of education of a union free school
district, common school district or a central school district shall have
been a resident of the school district, or in the case of a person
qualified by subdivision three of section twenty hundred twelve of this
chapter to vote in a district election, a resident of the district or
reservation, for at least one year prior to the election.
Notwithstanding the provisions of any other general or special law to
the contrary, a school district treasurer, collector or clerk need not
be a resident of the school district to hold such office in such
district.
 § 2102-a. Required training for school district officers. 1. a. Every
trustee or voting member of a board of education of a school district or
a board of cooperative educational services, elected or appointed for a
term beginning on or after July first, two thousand five, shall, within
the first year of his or her term, complete a minimum of six hours of
training on the financial oversight, accountability and fiduciary
responsibilities of a school board member.
 b. In addition to the training required by paragraph a of this
subdivision, every trustee or voting member of a board of education of a
school district or a board of cooperative educational services, elected
or appointed for a first term beginning on or after the first of July
next succeeding the effective date of this paragraph, shall, within the
first year of his or her term, complete a training course to acquaint
him or her with the powers, functions and duties of boards of education,
as well as the powers and duties of other governing and administrative
authorities affecting public education.
 c. Upon demonstration of compliance, no trustee or member of a board
of education or a board of cooperative educational services shall be
required to repeat the training requirements provided for in paragraphs
a and b of this subdivision. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to
require a member of a central high school district board or a member of
a board of cooperative educational services to complete such
requirements if such member has already completed such requirements as a
member of a board of a component school district. Nothing in this
section shall be deemed to require trustees or voting members of a board
of education of a school district or a board of cooperative educational
services to complete the requirements of paragraph b of this subdivision
if such trustee or member is seated or appointed on or before the
effective date of the chapter of the laws of two thousand ten that
amended this subdivision.
 2. The curriculum used for training on financial oversight,
accountability and fiduciary responsibilities shall be approved by the
commissioner in consultation with the comptroller and the curriculum
used for the general training shall be approved by the commissioner.
These curricula may be offered together as a single course or
separately. The training required by this section may be offered by
providers approved by the commissioner. In approving other providers for
these trainings, the commissioner shall consider the potential
provider's understanding of the educational environment, the roles of
trustees and boards of education and boards of cooperative educational
services, and the experience of the provider in delivering such
training.
 3. Each trustee or member shall demonstrate compliance with these
requirements by filing with the district clerk a certificate of
completion of such course or courses issued by the provider. Actual and
necessary expenses incurred by a trustee or member in complying with the
foregoing requirements shall be a charge against the school district.
 4. As long as the chancellor of a school district in a city having a
population of one million or more inhabitants shall annually certify to
the commissioner that such district has a training program that meets or
exceeds the requirements of this section, the provisions of this section
shall not apply to such school district.
 § 2103. Ineligibility to office. 1. No district superintendent or
supervisor is eligible to the office of trustee or member of a board of
education, and no trustee or member of a board of education can hold the
office of district clerk, collector, treasurer or librarian, except as
otherwise provided by section twenty-one hundred thirty.
 2. A person removed from a school district office shall be ineligible
to appointment or election to any district office for a period of one
year from the date of such removal.
 3. Not more than one member of a family shall be a member of the same
board of education in any school district.
 4. No employee of a board of education may be a member of such board;
provided, however, that in a city with a population of one million or
more nothing herein shall prohibit an employee of the board of education
of a community school board from being a member of a community school
board except that such employee may not be a member of any community
school board that directly employs him.
 § 2103-a. Police officers and firefighters on boards of education.
Notwithstanding any general, special or local law, ordinance or charter
provision to the contrary, or any rule or regulation, police officers
and firefighters employed by any municipal subdivision of the state or
police district provided they are otherwise eligible, may be candidates
for election and serve as members of boards of education in school
districts located: (1) other than in the municipality where they perform
their duties as police officers and firefighters on a regular basis, or
(2) unless prohibited by the legislative body for whom they are
employed, in school districts located in the locality where they perform
their duties as police officers and firefighters.
 § 2105. Terms of office. 1. In a common school district having a sole
trustee the term of office of trustee shall be one year.
 2. In a common school district having three trustees the full term of
office of trustee shall be three years.
 3. In a central school district or a union-free school district, the
full term of office of trustee shall be three, four or five years. Any
such school district may decrease the full term of a school trustee to
three or four years or increase the full term of a school trustee to
four or five years by adopting a proposition at any annual meeting or
election to do so; provided, however, that the term of office of each
incumbent trustee shall not be increased or decreased thereby; and
provided, further, that whenever a proposition shall be adopted to
increase the term of office from three or four years to five years, or
to decrease the term of office from four or five years to three years,
such proposition shall provide that one or more of the vacancies to be
filled, during each of the three years next succeeding the adoption of
such proposition, shall be for three or four years only in order that,
as nearly as possible, an equal number of trustees shall be elected to
the board each year.
 4. Trustees may be elected for shorter periods as otherwise provided
in this chapter.
 5. The term of office of a trustee elected at the first meeting of a
newly created common school district having a sole trustee shall expire
on the first Tuesday of May next thereafter.
 6. The term of office of all other district officers shall be one
year.
 7. One year, within the meaning of this section, is a school year.
 8. When a new union free school district is formed, the meeting, after
determining the number of members of the board of education to be
elected, shall proceed to elect members of the board of education for
various terms not in excess of five years so that as nearly as possible
an equal number of vacancies shall occur on the board of education each
year.
 9. When the number of members of the board of education of a union
free school district is increased, the additional members shall be
elected for such terms not in excess of five years so that thereafter as
nearly as possible an equal number of terms shall expire each year.
 10. When the number of members of the board of education of a union
free school district is decreased, no election shall be held until the
number of members of the board of education shall be equal to or be less
than the number of members to which the board of education is decreased.
At elections thereafter, the members of the board of education shall be
elected for such terms not in excess of five years so that as nearly as
possible an equal number of members shall be elected to the board each
year.
 11. a. Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary,
in any union free school district whose boundaries are not coterminous
with those of an incorporated village, except a central school district,
which under the provisions of law in effect on May first, nineteen
hundred fifty-seven, elected members to the board of education for a
term of three years, the qualified voters of the district present and
voting at the annual meeting of such district held during the year
nineteen hundred fifty-eight, may adopt a resolution determining that
members of the board of education of such district shall be elected for
a term of three years. A certified copy of such resolution shall be
filed with the commissioner of education on or before August first,
nineteen hundred fifty-eight. The voters of any such district may
rescind such resolution by a majority vote of the voters present and
voting at a special or annual meeting of the district.
 b. Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, in
any central school district whose boundaries are not coterminous with
those of an incorporated village, the qualified voters of the district
present and voting at the annual meeting of such district held during
the year nineteen hundred fifty-nine may adopt a resolution determining
that members of the board of education of such district shall be elected
for a term of three years. A certified copy of such resolution shall be
filed with the commissioner of education on or before August first,
nineteen hundred fifty-nine. The voters of any such district may
rescind any such resolution by a majority vote of the voters present and
voting at a special or annual meeting of the district.
 c. Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, in
any union free school district, the boundaries of which are coterminous
with those of an incorporated village, which under the provisions of law
in effect on April twenty-first, nineteen hundred fifty-nine, elected
members of the board of education for terms of three years, the
qualified voters of the district present and voting at the annual
meeting of such district held during the year nineteen hundred
sixty-one, may adopt a resolution determining that members of the board
of education of such district shall be elected for a term of three
years. A certified copy of such resolution shall be filed with the
commissioner of education on or before August first, nineteen hundred
sixty-one. The voters of any such district may rescind such resolution
by a majority vote of the voters present and voting at a special or
annual meeting of the district.
 12. The term of office of trustees of union free school district
number one of the town of Tonawanda, Erie county, shall be three years.
 13. Until the terms of all members of the board of education of a
union free school district, have become five years, or three years when
a resolution pursuant to subdivision three or subdivision eleven of this
section has been adopted, members of such board of education shall be
elected in such numbers and for such terms not in excess of five years,
or three years when a resolution pursuant to subdivision three or
subdivision eleven of this section has been adopted, so that as soon as
practicable an equal number of members of such board of education will
be elected each year.
 14. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the
contrary, where a term of office expires at the end of a school year and
such position is or becomes vacant at the time of the annual meeting or
election, the person elected to fill the full term vacancy shall also be
deemed elected to fill the remainder of the term preceding the
commencement of the full term.
 § 2106. Terms of officers of newly created district. The terms of all
officers other than trustees elected at the first meeting of a newly
created district shall expire on the first Tuesday of May, next
thereafter.
 § 2108. Notice and acceptance of election. 1. The district clerk
shall forthwith notify in writing each person elected to office of his
election and the date thereof.
 2. Such person shall be deemed to have accepted the office, unless
within five days after the service of such notice, he shall file his
written refusal with the clerk. The presence of any such person at the
meeting which elects him to office, shall be deemed a sufficient notice
to him of his election.
 § 2109. Refusal of trustee to serve. A trustee of a common school or
union free school district who publicly declares that he will not accept
or serve in the office of trustee, or refuses or neglects to attend
three successive meetings of the board, of which he is duly notified,
without rendering a good and valid excuse therefor to the other trustees
vacates his office by refusal to serve.
 § 2110. Penalty for refusal to serve or perform duty. 1. Every person
elected or appointed to a school district office and being duly
qualified to fill the same who shall refuse to serve therein shall
forfeit the sum of five dollars.
 2. Every person elected or appointed to a school district office and
not refusing to accept the same who shall wilfully neglect or refuse to
perform any duty thereof shall by such neglect or refusal vacate his
office and also forfeit the sum of ten dollars.
 3. The district superintendent of the supervisory district wherein any
such person resides may accept his written resignation of the office,
and the filing of such resignation and acceptance in the office of the
district clerk shall be a bar to the recovery of either penalty under
this section.
 4. These penalties shall be for the benefit of the district for which
such officer was appointed or elected.
 § 2111. Resignation of district officers. A school district officer
may resign to a district meeting. Such officer shall also be deemed to
have resigned if he filed a written resignation with the district
superintendent of his district and such superintendent endorses thereon
his approval and files the same with the district clerk.
 § 2112. Vacating office. 1. A school district office becomes vacant
by death, resignation, refusal to serve, incapacity, or removal from the
district or from office.
 2. The collector or treasurer vacates his office by not executing a
bond to the trustees, as herein required.
 3. A trustee or a member of a board of education vacates his office by
the acceptance of either the office of district superintendent or of
supervisor.
 § 2113. Filling vacancy in office of trustee. 1. A vacancy in the
office of trustee in any school district may be filled by election
within ninety days after it occurs. If not so filled, the district
superintendent of the supervisory district, within which the schoolhouse
or principal schoolhouse of the district is situated, may appoint a
competent person to fill it.
 2. If a vacancy in the office of trustee in a union free school
district exists, the commissioner of education may order a special
election for filling such vacancy. When such special election is ordered
the vacancy shall not be filled otherwise.
 3. If such vacancy is filled by a district meeting, it shall be for
the balance of the unexpired term; but when such vacancy is filled by
appointment by a district superintendent, it shall be only until the
next annual meeting of the district.
 4. A vacancy in the office of trustee in union free school district
number one of the town of Tonawanda, Erie county, shall be filled by
appointment by the remaining members of the board to serve until the
next annual election at which the vacancy may be filled.
 § 2114. Filling vacancy in office of clerk, collector or treasurer. A
vacancy in the office of clerk, collector or treasurer, may be filled by
appointment by the trustees of the district, and the appointees shall
hold their respective offices until the next annual meeting of the
district, and until their successors are elected and have qualified.
 § 2115. Notice of appointment to fill vacancy and filing thereof.
Every appointment to fill a vacancy shall be forthwith filed, by the
district superintendent or trustees making it, in the office of the
district clerk, who shall immediately give notice of the appointment to
the person appointed.
 § 2116. District records, books, etc., are district property. The
records, books and papers belonging or appertaining to the office of any
officer of a school district are hereby declared to be the property of
such district and shall be open for inspection by any qualified voter of
the district at all reasonable hours, and any such voter may make copies
thereof.
 § 2116-a. Books and records to be kept by school districts. Unless
otherwise prescribed by the state comptroller pursuant to section
thirty-six of the general municipal law:
 1. All school districts shall be required to maintain books and
records in such form as the commissioner of education shall approve.
 2. All school districts, except those employing fewer than eight
teachers, shall be required to use a double entry bookkeeping system
incorporating the fund method of accounting in accordance with a uniform
system of accounts approved by the commissioner of education and any
school district under the jurisdiction of a district superintendent may
at its option request the district superintendent to provide such
accounting service. The cost of accounting service so requested shall be
allocated by the district superintendent to and be paid by the school
district receiving such service.
 3. (a) The school authorities of each school district, except those
employing fewer than eight teachers, but including the city school
districts of the cities of Buffalo and Rochester, shall obtain an annual
audit of its records by an independent certified public accountant or an
independent public accountant. The report of such annual audit shall be
presented to the trustees or board of education by such accountant. The
board of education of the city school district of the city of New York,
districts of such city shall obtain an annual audit by the comptroller
of the city of New York, or by an independent certified public
accountant or an independent public accountant. Such city school
district audit shall include, but not be limited to, transactions
processed at the level of the central administrative office, the
district, and the individual school. The community districts of such
city school district shall obtain an annual audit by the bureau of audit
of the board of education of the city school district of the city of New
York or by an independent certified public accountant or an independent
public accountant. A copy of the audit report in form prescribed by the
commissioner and certified by the accountant, or, in the city school
district of the city of New York or the community districts therein, by
the accountant, or the comptroller or bureau of audit, as the case may
be, shall be furnished to the commissioner on or before October
fifteenth following the end of the fiscal year audited, except that such
report shall be furnished to the commissioner on or before January first
following the end of the fiscal year audited for the city school
districts of the cities of Buffalo, Rochester, Syracuse, Yonkers, and
New York and for the community school districts of the city of New York.
 (b) On or after July first, two thousand five, all school districts,
except the city school district of the city of New York, shall utilize a
competitive request for proposal process when contracting for such
annual audit. In addition, on or after July first, two thousand five,
and applicable to all school districts, no audit engagement shall be for
a term longer than five consecutive years; provided, however, that
nothing in this subdivision shall preclude a district, in its
discretion, from permitting an independent certified public accountant
or an independent public accountant engaged under an existing contract
for such services to (i) submit a proposal for such services in response
to a request for competitive proposals, or (ii) be awarded a contract to
provide such services under a request for proposal process. School
district procurement policies and procedures adopted pursuant to section
one hundred four-b of the general municipal law shall be amended, if
necessary, to be consistent with this requirement.
 (c) Notwithstanding the provisions of subparagraph one of paragraph
(b) of subdivision four of section thirty-five of the general municipal
law, each school district shall (i) prepare a corrective action plan in
response to any findings contained in the annual external audit report
or management letter, or any final audit report issued by the state
comptroller, within ninety days of receipt of such report or letter, and
(ii) to the extent practicable, begin implementation of such corrective
action plan no later than the end of the next fiscal year.
 3-a. In addition to the annual audit required by subdivision three of
this section, each school district and board of cooperative educational
services within the state shall be subject to audits of the state
conducted by the comptroller as set forth in section thirty-three of the
general municipal law.
 3-b. Each school district shall in a timely fashion post on its
website, if any, the annual external audit report and the corrective
action plan prepared in response to any findings contained in the annual
external audit report or management letter, or any final audit report
issued by the state comptroller.
 4. The school authorities of each school district may employ or
contract for the preparation of payrolls, accounts and records by
persons, firms or corporations using electronic computer systems.
 § 2116-b. Internal audit function. 1. No later than July first, two
thousand six, each school district shall establish an internal audit
function to be in operation no later than the following December
thirty-first. Such function shall include: (a) development of a risk
assessment of district operations, including but not limited to, a
review of financial policies and procedures and the testing and
evaluation of district internal controls; (b) an annual review and
update of such risk assessment; and (c) preparation of reports, at least
annually or more frequently as the trustees or board of education may
direct, which analyze significant risk assessment findings, recommend
changes for strengthening controls and reducing identified risks, and
specify timeframes for implementation of such recommendations.
 2. School districts of less than eight teachers, school districts with
actual general fund expenditures totaling less than five million dollars
in the previous school year, or school districts with actual enrollment
of less than one thousand five hundred students in the previous school
year shall be exempt from this requirement. Any school district claiming
such exemption shall annually certify to the commissioner that such
school district meets the requirements set forth in this subdivision.
 3. The commissioner, in consultation with the comptroller, is
authorized to promulgate regulations with respect to the internal audit
function as is necessary for the proper performance of its duties,
including standards, qualifications and training for audit personnel. In
developing such regulations, the commissioner shall consider the
differing needs, capabilities and environments of school districts of
varying sizes across the state.
 4. A district shall be permitted to utilize existing district
personnel to fulfill this function, but such persons shall not have any
responsibility for other business operations of the district while
performing such function.
 5. A district shall be permitted to use (a) inter-municipal
cooperative agreements, (b) shared services to the extent authorized by
section nineteen hundred fifty of this title, or (c) independent
contractors, to fulfill this function as long as personnel or entities
performing the internal audit function comply with any regulations
issued by the commissioner and meet professional auditing standards for
independence between the auditor and the district.
 6. Personnel or entities performing the internal audit function shall
report directly to the trustees or board of education of each district.
The district audit committee established under section twenty-one
hundred sixteen-c of this article shall assist in the oversight of the
internal audit function on behalf of the trustees or board.
 7. Nothing in this section shall be construed as requiring a school
district in any city with a population of one hundred twenty-five
thousand or more to replace or modify an existing internal audit
function where such function already exists by special or local law, so
long as the superintendent of the district annually certifies to the
commissioner that the existing internal audit function meets or exceeds
the requirements of this section.
 § 2116-c. Audit committees. 1. Every school district, except those
employing fewer than eight teachers, shall establish by a resolution of
the trustees or board of education an audit committee to oversee and
report to the trustees or board on the annual audit of the district
records as required by section twenty-one hundred sixteen-a of this
article.
 2. The audit committee shall be established no later than January
first, two thousand six as a committee of the trustees or board, as an
advisory committee, or as a committee of the whole. An advisory
committee may include, or be composed entirely of persons other than
trustees or members of the board if, in the opinion of the trustees or
board, such membership is advisable to provide accounting and auditing
expertise.
 3. The audit committee shall consist of at least three members, who
shall serve without compensation. Committee members shall be reimbursed
for any actual and necessary expenditures incurred in relation to
attendance at meetings. Employees of the school district are prohibited
from serving on the audit committee. A member of an audit committee
shall be deemed a school district officer for the purposes of sections
thirty-eight hundred eleven through thirty-eight hundred thirteen of
this chapter, but shall not be required to be a resident of the school
district.
 4. The role of an audit committee shall be advisory and any
recommendations it provides to the trustees or board under subdivisions
five and six of this section shall not substitute for any required
review and acceptance by the trustees or board of education. If required
by a regulation adopted by the commissioner, the annual audit report
prepared by an independent certified public accountant or an independent
public accountant shall not be deemed final until accepted by a
resolution adopted by the trustees or board of education.
 5. It shall be the responsibility of the audit committee to:
 (a) provide recommendations regarding the appointment of the external
auditor for the district;
 (b) meet with the external auditor prior to commencement of the audit;
 (c) review and discuss with the external auditor any risk assessment
of the district's fiscal operations developed as part of the auditor's
responsibilities under governmental auditing standards for a financial
statement audit and federal single audit standards if applicable;
 (d) receive and review the draft annual audit report and accompanying
draft management letter and, working directly with the external auditor,
assist the trustees or board of education in interpreting such
documents;
 (e) make a recommendation to the trustees or board of education on
accepting the annual audit report; and
 (f) review every corrective action plan to be developed by a school
district as required by section twenty-one hundred sixteen-a of this
article and assist the trustees or board of education in the
implementation of such plan.
 6. In addition, it shall be the responsibility of the audit committee
to assist in the oversight of the internal audit function required by
section twenty-one hundred sixteen-b of this article, including, but not
limited to, providing recommendations regarding the appointment of the
internal auditor for the school district, the review of significant
findings and recommendations of the internal auditor, monitoring of the
school district's implementation of such recommendations, and the
evaluation of the performance of the internal audit function.
 7. Notwithstanding any provision of article seven of the public
officers law or any other law to the contrary, a school district audit
committee may conduct an executive session pursuant to section one
hundred five of the public officers law pertaining to any matter set
forth in paragraphs b, c, and d of subdivision five of this section. Any
trustee or member of the board of education who is not a member of such
audit committee may be allowed to attend an audit committee meeting if
authorized by a resolution of the trustees or board of education.
 8. The commissioner is authorized to promulgate regulations with
respect to audit committees as is necessary for the proper performance
of their duties.
 9. As long as the chancellor of a school district in a city having a
population of one million or more inhabitants shall annually certify to
the commissioner that such district has a process for review by an audit
committee of the district's annual audit that meets or exceeds the
requirements of this section, the provisions of this section shall not
apply to such school district.
 § 2117. Reports. 1. The school authorities of each school district
shall make a full report to the commissioner of education upon any
particular matter relating to their schools whenever such report shall
be required by said commissioner.
 2. The school authorities of each such school district shall, on the
first day of August in each year, make to the commissioner of education
a report in writing for the year ending June thirtieth preceding. In
districts under the jurisdiction of a district superintendent, such
reports shall be first submitted to the district superintendent, in
duplicate, and he shall approve one copy and file it with the
commissioner of education. Such report shall be in such form as the
commissioner of education shall approve; and every such report shall
certify:
 a. The whole time school has been maintained in their district during
the year ending on June thirtieth previous to the date of such report,
and stating what portion of the time such school has been taught by
qualified teachers, and the whole number of days, including holidays, in
which the school was taught by qualified teachers.
 b. The amount of their drafts upon the county treasurer, collector or
treasurer of the district for the payment of teachers' salaries during
such year, and the amount of their drafts for the purchase of books and
school apparatus during such year, and the manner in which such moneys
have been expended.
 c. The number of children taught in the district during such year by
qualified teachers, and the aggregate days' attendance of all such
children.
 d. The number of children residing in their district, from birth and
under eighteen years of age, who shall have been, on the thirtieth day
of August last preceding the date of such report, legal residents of
such district. Children supported at an orphan asylum shall not be
included in such enumeration.
 e. The number of vaccinated and unvaccinated children of school age in
their district.
 f. The amount of money paid for teachers' salaries, in addition to the
public money paid therefor, the amount of taxes levied in such district
for purchasing school sites, for building, hiring, purchasing, repairing
and insuring schoolhouses, for fuel, for school libraries, or for any
other purpose allowed by law.
 g. Such additional information in relation to the schools under their
management and control as the commissioner of education shall require.
 3. The commissioner of education shall prepare, based on information
submitted to him by school districts, periodic reports covering new
school buildings giving information about them including but not limited
to the following:
 (1) Cost of site.
 (2) Cost of site improvement including roads, parking, playfields, and
utility lines to the building wall.
 (3) Original furnishings, equipment and apparatus.
 (4) Professional fees.
 (5) Incidental costs.
 (6) Total cost of building.
 (7) Cost of building per pupil.
 (8) Cost of building per gross square foot.
 (9) Cost per gross square foot of the heating and ventilating.
 (10) Cost per gross square foot of the plumbing.
 (11) Cost per gross square foot of the electrical work.
 (12) Square foot per pupil in the total gross area.
 (13) Square foot per pupil in the net area of the regular and special
classrooms.
 (14) Square foot per pupil in the net area of other rooms used for
educational, health, administrative or social purposes such as the
cafeteria, auditorium, gymnasium, kitchen and library.
 (15) Square foot per pupil of the remaining difference between the
gross area and the sum of thirteen and fourteen which would include
toilet rooms, general storage, corridors, stair enclosures, janitor
closets, boiler rooms, building machinery rooms and the area occupied by
the walls of the building.
 (16) An outline of the school plan.
 (17) A brief outline specification for the building construction.
 (18) The name of the architect.
 (19) The name of the mechanical engineer.
 (20) The name of the structural engineer.
 (21) Whether single or multiple bidding was used.
 § 2118. Expenses of school district officers. All school district
officers, including trustees and members of boards of education, shall
be entitled to be reimbursed for any expenses actually and necessarily
incurred in the performance of their official duties. Mileage rates
established for the use of personally owned cars in lieu of auditing and
allowing claims for actual and necessary expenses of travel under the
provisions of subdivision twenty-seven of section sixteen hundred four
of this chapter, shall apply to claims under this section. This section
shall not apply to district superintendents of schools.
 § 2119. School district trustee not to draw draft on county treasurer
in certain cases. A school district trustee who issues an order or
draws a draft on a county treasurer, district treasurer or collector or
other disbursing officer of such district for any money, unless there is
at the time sufficient money in the hands of such county treasurer,
district treasurer or collector or other disbursing officer belonging to
the district to meet such order or draft, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
 PART II
 DISTRICT CLERK; TREASURER; COLLECTOR
 2121. Duties of district clerk.
 2122. Powers and duties of district treasurer in common school
 district.
 2123. Compensation of clerk and treasurer in common school
 districts.
 2124. Collector's official undertaking in common school
 district.
 2125. Collector to disburse state moneys.
 2126. Payments and reports by collector.
 2127. Liability of collector for moneys lost.
 2128. Remedy of trustees against collector in default.
 2129. Deposit of moneys by treasurer and collector.
 2130. Clerk, treasurer and collector in union free school
 district.
 § 2121. Duties of district clerk. It shall be the duty of the clerk
of each school district:
 1. To record the proceedings of all meetings of the voters of his
district in a book to be provided for that purpose by the district, and
to enter therein true copies of all reports made by the trustees to the
district superintendent.
 2. To give notice, in the manner prescribed by subdivision two of
section two thousand one, of the time and place of holding special
district meetings called by the trustees.
 3. To affix a notice in writing of the time and place of any adjourned
meeting in at least five of the most public places of such district,
when the meeting shall have been adjourned for a longer time than one
month. Such notice shall be so affixed at least five days before the
time appointed for such adjourned meeting.
 4. To give the required notice of every annual district meeting.
 5. To give notice immediately to every person elected or appointed to
office of his election or appointment; and also to report to the town
clerk of the town in which the schoolhouse of his district is situated,
the names and post-office addresses of such officers, under a penalty of
five dollars for neglect in each instance.
 6. To notify the trustees of every resignation duly accepted by the
district superintendent.
 7. To keep and preserve all records, books and papers belonging to his
office and to deliver the same to his successor. For a refusal or
neglect so to do, he shall forfeit fifty dollars for the benefit of the
schools of the district, to be recovered by the trustees.
 8. In the event that the district shall be dissolved, to deposit the
books, papers and records of his office with the clerk of the successor
school district.
 9. To attend all meetings of the board of trustees when notified, and
keep a record of their proceedings in a book provided for that purpose.
 10. To call special meetings of the inhabitants whenever all the
trustees of the district shall have vacated their office.
 11. To immediately notify the county treasurer of the name and address
of persons elected to the office of district treasurer, if a treasurer
is elected, and to the office of district collector.
 12. To receive, keep and preserve any and all records, books and
papers of the respective dissolved school districts deposited with him
pursuant to section fifteen hundred nineteen of this chapter, and such
records together with any records of dissolved school districts
heretofore deposited shall be considered to be records of the successor
school district.
 § 2122. Powers and duties of district treasurer in common school
district. 1. The treasurer of a school district shall be the chief
accounting officer and the custodian of all moneys belonging to the
district from whatever source derived, and it is hereby made the duty of
the trustees of such district to pay to such treasurer any and all
moneys that may come into their hands belonging to such district derived
from sales of personal or real property of the district, from insurance
policies, from bonds of the district issued and sold by them, or from
any other source whatever.
 2. Such treasurer is hereby authorized and empowered to receive from
the collector of such district all moneys collected by such collector
under and by virtue of any tax list and warrant issued and delivered to
him.
 3. Such treasurer is hereby authorized and empowered to demand and
receive from the county treasurer of the county in which such school
district is situated all public money apportioned to said district.
 4. It shall be the duty of such treasurer before entering upon the
discharge of his duties to execute and deliver to the trustees of such
district, his official undertaking in such sum as shall have been fixed
by a district meeting or as such trustees with the approval of the
district superintendent of schools shall require, with a corporate
surety to be approved by such trustees and by the district
superintendent of schools, conditioned to faithfully discharge the
duties of his office, and to well and truly account for all moneys
received by him, and to pay over any sums of money remaining in his
hands to his successor in office. Such official undertaking when so
executed and approved by resolution of such trustees shall be filed with
the clerk of the district. The expense of any undertaking executed
pursuant to this section shall be a school district charge.
 5. No moneys shall be paid out or disbursed by such treasurer, except
upon the written orders of a sole trustee, or a majority of the
trustees.
 6. Such treasurer shall, whenever required by such trustees, report to
them a detailed statement of the moneys received by him and of his
disbursements, and at the annual meeting of such district he shall
render a full account of all moneys received by him and from what
source, and when received, and all disbursements made by him and to whom
and the dates of such disbursements respectively, and the balance of
moneys remaining in his hands.
 § 2123. Compensation of clerk and treasurer in common school
districts. The clerk and treasurer of every common school district may
be entitled to receive such compensation for their services as shall be
fixed at an annual meeting of the district. In case such provision is
not made at an annual meeting for the compensation of the clerk and/or
treasurer of such common school district, the trustees of the district
may fix the same.
 § 2124. Collector's official undertaking in common school district.
1. It shall be the duty of the collector, before entering upon the
discharge of his duties to execute and deliver to the trustees of the
district, his official undertaking, with a corporate surety, to be
approved by a majority of the trustees and by the district
superintendent of schools, in such amount as the district meeting shall
have fixed, or if such meeting shall not have fixed the amount then in
such amount as the trustees with the approval of the district
superintendent of schools shall deem reasonable, conditioned for the due
and faithful execution of the duties of his office and for the proper
accounting for all moneys that may come into the hands of such collector
from any source whatsoever.
 2. The trustees, upon receiving said official undertaking, shall, if
they approve thereof, adopt a resolution to that effect, and if the
district superintendent also approve thereof he shall indorse his
approval thereon, whereupon the trustees or the district superintendent
shall forthwith file the same with the clerk of the district. The
expense of any undertaking executed pursuant to this section shall be a
school district charge.
 § 2125. Collector to disburse state moneys. In any school district
which does not have a treasurer it shall be the duty of the collector of
such district to disburse the money apportioned by the state.
 § 2126. Payments and reports by collector. 1. The collector shall
keep in his possession all moneys received or collected by him by virtue
of any warrant, or received by him from the county treasurer or board of
supervisors for taxes returned as unpaid, or moneys apportioned by the
state or raised by direct taxation, and pay the same out upon the
written order of a majority of the trustees.
 2. When a treasurer shall have been elected or appointed in a school
district, the collector of such district shall pay over all moneys
collected by him under and by virtue of any tax list and warrant issued
and delivered to him, to said treasurer; and he shall report in writing,
at the annual meeting, all his collections, receipts and disbursements,
and shall report to the county treasurer on or before the first Tuesday
of March in each year the amounts of school moneys in his hands not paid
out on trustees' orders, and shall pay over to his successor in office,
when such successor has duly qualified and given a bond as required by
section twenty-one hundred twenty-four, all moneys in his hands
belonging to the district.
 § 2127. Liability of collector for moneys lost. If by the neglect of
the collector any moneys shall be lost to a school district, which might
have been collected within the time limited in the warrant delivered to
him for their collection, he shall forfeit to such district the amount
of the moneys thus lost, and shall account for and pay over the same to
the trustees of such district, in the same manner as if they had been
collected.
 § 2128. Remedy of trustees against collector in default. For the
recovery of all such forfeitures, and of all balances, in the hands of
the collector, which he shall have neglected or refused to pay to his
successor, or to the treasurer of such district, the trustees, in the
name of their office, shall have their remedy upon the official
undertaking of the collector, or any action and any remedy given by law;
and they shall apply all such moneys, when recovered, in the same manner
as if paid without suit.
 § 2129. Deposit of moneys by treasurer and collector. All moneys
received by the treasurer and collector shall be deposited and secured
in the manner provided by section ten of the general municipal law.
 § 2130. Clerk, treasurer and collector in union free school district.
1. In every union free school district the board of education shall
have the power to appoint one of their number, or some other individual
as clerk of the board of education of such district.
 2. Such clerk shall also act as clerk of said district, and shall
perform all the clerical and other duties pertaining to his office, and
for his services he shall be entitled to receive such compensation as
shall be fixed at an annual meeting of such district.
 3. In case no provision is made at an annual meeting for the
compensation of a clerk, the board of education may fix the same.
 4. The board of education in every union free school district whose
limits do not correspond with those of an incorporated village or city
shall appoint a district treasurer, and a collector who shall hold
office during the pleasure of the board. The board shall also fix the
compensation of the treasurer. The board of education of such district
may also fix the compensation of the collector, which shall be in lieu
of all fees to which a school district collector might be entitled,
under the provisions of this chapter. The treasurer, collector, village
receiver or village collector and town official who acts as school
collector, shall deposit and secure all sums of money received and
collected by them in the manner provided by section ten of the general
municipal law.
 Notwithstanding the provisions of section ten of the general municipal
law, the board of education of the Fishers Island union free school
district in the town of Southold, Suffolk county may designate a
depositary located in the state of Connecticut. The board may require a
report by the cashier of the depositaries to be submitted at any regular
meeting of the board of the amount of deposit to the credit of the
treasurer.
 5. Such treasurer and collector shall each, and within ten days after
notice in writing of his appointment, duly served upon him, and before
entering upon the duties of his office, execute and deliver to the said
board of education an official undertaking, with such sufficient penalty
and corporate surety as the board may require, conditioned for the
faithful discharge of the duties of his office; and in case such
official undertaking shall not be given within the time specified, such
office shall thereby become vacant, and said board shall thereupon, by
appointment, fill such vacancy. In districts under the jurisdiction of a
district superintendent of schools, such official undertakings shall
also be approved by him. They shall be filed in the office of the clerk
of the district. The expense of any undertaking executed pursuant to
this section shall be a school district charge.
 6. So much of this section as relates to the election of a clerk shall
not apply to the towns of Cortlandt and White Plains in Westchester
county.
 7. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the board of education
of the Bronxville Union Free School District shall appoint a district
treasurer who shall hold office during the pleasure of the board. The
board shall also fix the compensation of the treasurer. The treasurer
shall deposit and secure all sums of money received and collected by him
or her in the manner provided by section ten of the general municipal
law.
 PART III
 TOWN AND COUNTY OFFICIALS
 2140. Duties of town clerks.
 2141. Expenses of town clerks.
 2142. Duties of supervisors.
 2143. County clerks and county treasurers to forward certain
 reports.
 § 2140. Duties of town clerks. It shall be the duty of the town clerk
of each town: 1. To keep all books, maps, papers, and records of his
office touching public schools, and forthwith to report to the district
superintendent any loss or injury to the same.
 2. To receive from the district superintendent or superintendents the
certificates of apportionment of school moneys to each school district
or part of a school district of the town, and to record them in a book
to be kept for that purpose.
 3. To notify forthwith the trustees of the several school districts of
the filing of each such certificate.
 4. To furnish the district superintendent of the supervisory district
in which his town is situated the names and postoffice addresses of the
school district officers reported to him by the district clerks.
 5. To distribute to the trustees of the school districts all books,
blanks and circulars which shall be delivered or forwarded to him by the
commissioner of education or district superintendent for that purpose.
 6. To receive, file and record the descriptions of the school
districts, and all papers and proceedings delivered to him by the
district superintendent pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
 7. To act, when thereto legally required, in the erection or
alteration of a school district, as in article thirty-one of this
chapter provided.
 8. To deliver within one year from the effective date of this act to
the clerk of the successor district any and all records of the
respective dissolved school districts heretofore deposited in the town
clerk's office pursuant to section fifteen hundred nineteen of the
education law as it existed prior to this act, and to notify in writing
the district superintendent of the supervisory district in which such
successor school district is situated that such records have been so
deposited.
 9. To perform any other duty which may be devolved upon him by this
chapter, or by any other law touching public schools.
 § 2141. Expenses of town clerks. The necessary expenses and
disbursements of the town clerk in the performance of his said duties,
are a town charge, and shall be audited and paid as such.
 § 2142. Duties of supervisors. It is the duty of every supervisor: 1.
To sue for and recover, in the name of his office, when the duty is not
elsewhere imposed by law, all penalties and forfeitures imposed by this
chapter, and for any default or omission of any town officer or school
district board or officer under this chapter; and after deducting his
costs and expenses to report the balances to the district
superintendent.
 2. To act, when legally required, in the erection or alteration of a
school district, as provided in article thirty-one of this chapter, and
to perform any other duty which may be devolved upon him by this
chapter, or any other law relating to public schools.
 3. To take and hold possession of the gospel and school lots of his
town.
 4. To lease the same for such time not exceeding twenty-one years, and
upon such conditions as he shall deem expedient.
 5. To sell the same with the advice and consent of the town board or,
if the town board shall so direct, with the advice and consent of the
inhabitants of the town, at a town election, for such price and upon
such terms of credit as shall appear to him most advantageous.
 6. To invest the proceeds of such sales in loans, secured by bond and
mortgage upon unincumbered real property of the value of double the
amount loaned.
 7. To purchase the property so mortgaged upon a foreclosure, and to
hold and convey, pursuant to the provisions of this section, the
property so purchased whenever it shall become necessary.
 8. To re-loan the amount of such loans repaid to him, upon the like
security.
 9. To apply the rents and profits of such lots, and the interest of
the money arising from the sale thereof, to the support of schools, as
may be provided by law, in such manner as shall be thus provided.
 10. To render a just and true account of the proceeds of the sales and
the interest on the loans thereof, and of the rents and profits of such
gospel and school lots, and of the expenditure and appropriation
thereof, on the last Tuesday next preceding the biennial town election,
to the town board.
 11. To deliver over to his successor in office, all books, papers and
securities relating to the same, at the expiration of his term of
office.
 12. To take therefor a receipt, which shall be filed in the clerk's
office of the town.
 13. To commence and prosecute in and by the name and style of the
supervisor of the town any suits against any of his predecessors in
office or against any other person to recover any debt, dues or demands,
in anywise arising from such public lot; and no such suit shall abate by
the death, resignation or removal from office of the said supervisor but
the same shall and may be prosecuted to judgment and execution by his
successor in office.
 § 2143. County clerks and county treasurers to forward certain
reports. 1. The county clerk of each county shall, upon the requisition
of the commissioner of education, file with such commissioner any
reports of trustees of school districts and boards of education or the
abstract of such reports made by district superintendents which have
been filed in the office of such county clerk pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter, whenever it is necessary for the commissioner of
education to obtain information or data contained in official reports
which have been transmitted to the education department but which have
been destroyed by fire or otherwise.
 2. The county treasurer of each county shall, upon the requisition of
the commissioner of education, forward to said commissioner any original
certificates relating to the apportionment of school moneys which the
commissioner of education has filed in the office of such treasurer,
whenever it is necessary to obtain information on the apportionment of
school moneys when the data relating thereto in the office of the
commissioner of education have been destroyed by fire or otherwise.
After securing such information as may be necessary from such
certificates, the commissioner of education shall return the same to the
treasurer of such county.
 ARTICLE 45
 SUPERVISORY DISTRICTS
Section 2201. Supervisory districts.
 2202. Office of district superintendent of schools continued.
 2204. Appointment of district superintendent.
 2205. Qualifications of district superintendent.
 2206. District superintendent must take oath of office.
 2208. Vacancies in the office of district superintendent.
 2209. Salary of district superintendent.
 2211. Salary of district superintendent may be withheld.
 2212. Removal of district superintendent from office.
 2212-b. Mandatory withholding of excess salaries and benefits;
 removal from office for violations of salary and
 benefit caps.
 2213. District superintendent not to engage in other business.
 2214. District superintendent not to be interested in certain
 business.
 2215. General powers and duties of district superintendent.
 2216. District superintendent subject to regulations of
 commissioner of education.
 2217. Appeals from acts of district superintendent.
 2218. Partitioning of territory and formation of new school
 districts by district superintendents.
 § 2201. Supervisory districts. 1. All supervisory districts in
existence on the date this section, as hereby amended, takes effect, are
hereby continued and may be altered or dissolved as provided in
subdivisions two and three of this section.
 2. Whenever a vacancy hereafter occurs in the office of district
superintendent of schools in any supervisory district or whenever the
commissioner receives a letter of resignation from a district
superintendent, the commissioner shall survey the field in the county
where the vacancy occurred, and if it shall find that the continuance of
the number of supervisory districts then existing is no longer necessary
to serve adequately the educational interests of the county he or she
shall be authorized to conduct a study to examine the possible
reorganization of such supervisory district if no such study has been
conducted within five years.
 3. The commissioner is authorized when in his judgment such action
will promote the educational interests of the area to study the transfer
of one or more school districts in another adjoining supervisory
district, to such supervisory district.
 4. The commissioner shall complete such study no later than four
months after the date such vacancy occurred in the office of district
superintendent. The findings of such study shall be presented to the
boards of trustees and boards of education by the regent representing
such boards at a public meeting held no later than thirty days after the
completion of such study, for the purpose of eliciting public comment on
the proposed reorganization plan, a copy of such plan shall be provided
to the governor, the temporary president of the senate and the speaker
of the assembly. The commissioner shall cause notice of such meeting to
be posted at least ten days before each such meeting in ten conspicuous
places in the school district. In addition to the posting of such
notice, a copy thereof shall be duly published, at least three days
before such meeting, in a daily or weekly newspaper published within, or
in general circulation in, the supervisory district in which the meeting
is to be held. The expense of posting and publishing such notice shall
be a charge upon the component districts contained within such
supervisory district.
 5. The commissioner shall be authorized to reorganize any supervisory
district, upon completion of the requirements herein, when in his
judgement such action will promote the educational interests of such
supervisory districts affected.
 6. Such changes in supervisory districts shall conform to the
following requirements:
 a. No school district shall be divided between supervisory districts.
 b. The territory of supervisory districts shall remain contiguous and
compact.
 c. Towns shall remain arranged in supervisory districts so that there
shall be as equal a division of the territory and number of school
districts as may be practicable.
 § 2202. Office of district superintendent of schools continued. The
office of district superintendent of schools is hereby continued.
 § 2204. Appointment of district superintendent. 1. The board of
cooperative educational services of a supervisory district shall meet
upon the direction of the commissioner of education, at a time and place
designated by the commissioner, for the purpose of appointing a district
superintendent of schools whenever a vacancy in such office shall occur,
unless the commissioner shall issue an order pursuant to section
twenty-two hundred one redistricting the county so as to provide for a
lesser number of supervisory districts. Such direction shall be filed by
the commissioner of education in the office of the clerk of the board of
cooperative educational services and the commissioner shall also mail a
notice of the time and place of such meeting to each member of the board
of cooperative educational services of the district. If such vacancy
shall not be filled at such meeting, such meeting may be adjourned to a
subsequent date, and the commissioner may appoint a district
superintendent of schools who shall serve until the board of cooperative
educational services shall fill such vacancy.
 2. In the appointment of such district superintendent the vote shall
be by ballot and the person receiving a majority of all votes cast shall
be appointed subject to the approval of the commissioner of education.
Each member of the board of cooperative educational services shall be
entitled to one vote in such appointment.
 3. The clerk of such board shall file a copy of the proceedings of
each such meeting and each such appointment, certified by himself and
the president, in the office of the clerk of the county in which such
meeting or appointment takes place and with the commissioner of
education within five days after the close thereof.
 4. Whenever a district superintendent from one supervisory district is
appointed to be a temporary or acting superintendent in another
supervisory district, he or she shall not receive any compensation for
duties associated with the temporary or acting position.
 § 2205. Qualifications of district superintendent. 1. To be eligible
to appointment to the office of district superintendent of schools a
person must be at least twenty-one years of age, a citizen of the United
States and a resident of the state. No person shall be ineligible on
account of sex.
 2. In addition thereto he shall possess or be entitled to a
superintendent's certificate as provided in section three thousand three
of this chapter.
 3. A district superintendent who is removed from office shall not be
eligible for appointment to such office in any supervisory district for
a period of five years.
 § 2206. District superintendent must take oath of office. A district
superintendent of schools before entering upon the discharge of the
duties of his office, and not later than five days after the date on
which his term of office is to commence, shall take the oath of office
prescribed by the constitution. Such oath may be taken before a county
clerk, a justice of the peace, or a notary public, and must be filed in
the office of the secretary of state.
 § 2208. Vacancies in the office of district superintendent. The office
of district superintendent of schools shall be vacant upon:
 1. The death of an incumbent.
 2. His removal from office by the commissioner of education.
 3. His filing in the offices of the commissioner of education and of
the clerk of the board of cooperative educational services his written
resignation.
 4. His acceptance of the office of supervisor, town clerk or trustee
of a school district.
 5. His failure to take and file the oath of office as provided in this
article.
§ 2209. Salary of district superintendent. 1. Each district
superintendent shall receive an annual salary from the state of
forty-three thousand four hundred ninety-nine dollars, payable by the
commissioner of education from moneys appropriated therefor, and in no
event shall any moneys in excess of such amount be paid for such
salaries unless this section is amended or explicitly notwithstood.
 2. The supervisors of the towns composing any supervisory district
may by adopting a resolution by a majority vote increase the salary to
be paid by such district to its district superintendent. Such
supervisors must thereupon file with the clerk of the board of
supervisors a certificate showing the amount of such increase. The
board of supervisors of each county shall levy such amount annually by
tax on the towns composing such supervisory district within the county.
 § 2211. Salary of district superintendent may be withheld. The
commissioner of education may, whenever he is satisfied that a district
superintendent of schools has persistently neglected to perform an
official duty, withhold payment of the whole or any part of such
superintendent's salary as it shall become due and he may also withhold
any sum to which such superintendent shall be entitled for expenses and
the amount thus withheld shall be forfeited; but said commissioner may
in his discretion remit such forfeiture in whole or in part
 § 2212. Removal of district superintendent from office. A district
superintendent may be removed from office at any time upon the
affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the board of
cooperative educational services, or by the commissioner pursuant to
section three hundred six of this chapter.
 § 2212-b. Mandatory withholding of excess salaries and benefits;
removal from office for violations of salary and benefit caps. 1. The
commissioner shall annually review whether district superintendents are
in full compliance with the provisions of subparagraph two of paragraph
a of subdivision four of section nineteen hundred fifty of this title.
It shall be the duty of each such superintendent to report each such
violation.
 2. The commissioner shall withhold from the state salary paid to a
district superintendent pursuant to this article twice the value of each
such violation, unless the commissioner determines that the violation
was inadvertent, in which case the commissioner shall withhold the value
of such violation.
 3. In addition to the remedy described in subdivision two of this
section, a district superintendent shall be removed from office, and the
office deemed vacated, upon a finding by the commissioner that a
district superintendent has intentionally, knowingly or repeatedly
violated the provisions of subparagraph two of paragraph a of
subdivision four of section nineteen hundred fifty of this title, or has
knowingly failed to report such violation voluntarily pursuant to
subdivision one of this section. Upon such a finding and after affording
the district superintendent the opportunity for a hearing, the
commissioner shall take all necessary steps to remove the district
superintendent from office.
 § 2213. District superintendent not to engage in other business. A
district superintendent of schools shall devote his whole time to the
performance of the duties of his office and shall not engage in any
other occupation or profession. Such time as shall not necessarily be
devoted by a district superintendent of schools to the performance of
the clerical and administrative work of his office shall be devoted to
the visitation and inspection of the schools maintained in his
supervisory district.
 § 2214. District superintendent not to be interested in certain
business. A district superintendent of schools shall not: 1. Be directly
or indirectly interested otherwise than as author in the sale,
publication, or manufacture of school books, maps, charts, or school
apparatus or in the sale or manufacture of school furniture or any other
school or library supplies.
 2. Be directly or indirectly interested in any contract made by the
trustees of a school district.
 3. Be directly or indirectly interested in any agency or bureau
maintained to obtain or aid in obtaining positions for teachers or
superintendents.
 4. Directly or indirectly receive any emolument, gift, pay, reward or
promise of pay or reward for recommending or procuring the sale, use or
adoption or aiding in procuring the sale, use or adoption of any book,
map, chart, school apparatus or furniture or other supplies for any
school or library or for recommending a teacher or aiding a teacher in
obtaining an appointment to teach.
 § 2215. General powers and duties of district superintendent. A
district superintendent of schools shall have power and it shall be his
duty: 1. To inquire from time to time into and ascertain whether the
boundaries of the school districts within his supervisory district are
definitely and plainly described in the records of the office of the
proper town clerk; to cause to be made and filed in the education
department a record of such boundaries; and in case the record of the
boundaries of any school district shall be found indefinite or
defective, or if the same shall be in dispute, then to cause the same to
be amended or an amended record of the boundaries to be made and filed
in the office of the proper town clerk and in the education department.
All necessary expenses incurred in making and filing such records and in
establishing such amended records shall be a charge on the district or
districts affected, to be audited and allowed by the trustees thereof,
on the certificate of the district superintendent.
 2. To assemble all the teachers of his district by towns or otherwise,
for the purpose of conference on the course of study, for reports of and
advice and counsel in relation to discipline, school management and
other school work, and for promoting the general good of all the schools
of the district. Teachers shall be entitled to compensation for days
actually in attendance upon such conference.
 3. To hold meetings of trustees and other school officers and to
advise with and counsel them in relation to their powers and duties and
particularly in relation to the repair, construction, heating,
ventilating and lighting of schoolhouses and improving and adorning the
school grounds. To especially advise trustees relative to the employment
of teachers, the adoption of textbooks and the purchase of library
books, school apparatus, furniture and supplies.
 6. At the direction of the commissioner, to direct the trustees of any
district to abate any nuisance in or on the school grounds.
 7. To approve the amount of or the corporate sureties on official
undertakings of treasurers and collectors of school districts, where
such approval is required pursuant to law.
 8. At the direction of the commissioner, to condemn a schoolhouse as
provided in section four hundred twelve of this chapter.
 9. To examine and license teachers pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter. He shall also conduct such other examinations as the
commissioner of education shall direct.
 10. To examine any charge affecting the moral character of any teacher
residing or employed within his district, and to revoke such teachers'
certificate as provided by section three thousand eighteen of this
chapter.
 11. To take affidavits and administer oaths in all matters pertaining
to the public school system, but without charge or fee.
 12. To take and report to the commissioner of education under the
direction of such commissioner testimony in a case on appeal. In such a
case or in any matter or proceeding to be heard or determined by the
district superintendent, he may issue a subpoena to compel the
attendance of a witness. A subpoena issued under this section shall be
regulated by the civil practice law and rules.
 13. To exercise in his discretion any of the powers and perform any of
the duties of another district superintendent on the written request of
such other superintendent, and he must exercise such powers and perform
such duties when directed to do so by the commissioner of education.
 14. To make such investigations and to make such reports to the
commissioner of education upon any matter or act as said commissioner
shall from time to time request. He shall make an annual report on the
first day of August in such form and giving such information as the
commissioner of education shall require.
 15. To participate in the permanent computerized statewide school
district address match and income verification system as provided in
section one hundred seventy-one of the tax law, and cooperative
agreement pursuant thereto and as directed by the commissioner.
 16. To report to the commissioner under the direction of such
commissioner on cost-effective practices as defined in section two
hundred fifteen-c of this chapter in school districts within his or her
supervisory district.
 17. To determine the adequacy and appropriateness of the facilities
space available to house special education programs in the geographic
area served by the board of cooperative educational services, consistent
with the least restrictive environment requirement and to ensure the
stability and continuity of program placements for students with
disabilities, including procedures that ensure that special education
programs and services located in appropriate facilities will not be
relocated without adequate consideration of the needs of participating
students with disabilities.
 § 2216. District superintendent subject to regulations of commissioner
of education. A district superintendent shall be subject to such
regulations and directions as the commissioner of education shall from
time to time prescribe.
 § 2217. Appeals from acts of district superintendent. Appeals from the
official acts of a district superintendent of schools or from his
refusal or failure to act in any matter in which he may legally act, may
be taken to the commissioner of education. All questions in controversy
relating to the election of such district superintendent shall be
determined by the commissioner of education on proper appeal. The
provisions of article seven of this chapter shall apply to and govern
such appeals and decisions therein.
 § 2218. Partitioning of territory and formation of new school
districts by district superintendents. Notwithstanding any other
provision of law to the contrary, in addition to the authority granted
under the provisions of article thirty-one of this chapter, a district
superintendent of schools may order the partitioning of territory from
an existing union free, central, central high school or enlarged city
school district that is located within his or her supervisory district,
the dissolution and reformation of the existing school district where
necessary and the formation of a new union free or city school district
out of such territory in accordance with the provisions of this section.
 1. Definitions: For the purposes of this section and section
thirty-six hundred two-f of this chapter:
 a. "Actual valuation" means the actual valuation, as defined in
paragraph c of subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this
chapter, of a school district that would result from reorganization
pursuant to this section.
 b. "Enlarged city school district" means a city school district of a
city having a population of less than one hundred twenty-five thousand
inhabitants that includes areas outside of the city boundaries.
 c. "Enrollment" means the unduplicated count of all children
registered to receive educational services in grades kindergarten
through twelve, including children in ungraded programs as registered on
the date prior to November first that is specified by the commissioner
as the enrollment reporting date for the school district or non-public
school, as reported to the commissioner.
 d. "Municipality" means a city having a population of less than one
hundred twenty-five thousand inhabitants, a village or a town, wholly
contained in one school district.
 e. "New school district" means the school district formed or reformed
from the territory partitioned from the pre-existing school district
that is coterminous with a municipality.
 f. "Pre-existing school district" means a union free, central, central
high school or enlarged city school district from which territory is to
be partitioned pursuant to this section.
 g. "Remaining school district" means the school district remaining
after its boundary is altered to partition a municipality.
 h. "Union free school district" means any union free school district
other than a special act school district as defined in subdivision eight
of section four thousand one of this chapter.
 2. Minimum qualifications. To be eligible for reorganization pursuant
to this section, the municipality seeking to reorganize a new school
district shall have a population of at least ten thousand inhabitants
and the remaining school district shall have an enrollment of at least
one thousand children, provided that any territory that was added to the
pre-existing school district by vote for annexation, centralization or
consolidation shall not be eligible for partitioning pursuant to this
section until five years after the vote approving such annexation,
centralization or consolidation.
 3. Procedure for reorganization. a. Reorganization pursuant to this
section may be initiated by a petition to the board of education of the
pre-existing school district submitted by the governing body of the
municipality seeking to reorganize a new school district. If the board
of education determines that the petition has been properly submitted
and that the territory described in the petition meets the minimum
qualifications for reorganization under this section, it shall transmit
a copy to the district superintendent with a request for assistance in
the development of a plan for reorganization to form a new union free or
city school district out of such territory.
 b. The district superintendent shall assist the petitioners in
developing such reorganization plan in consultation with representatives
of the pre-existing school district. Such reorganization plan shall:
 (i) describe the boundaries of the new school district;
 (ii) state the effective date of the reorganization and indicate
whether the new school district will be a union free school district or
a city school district and, in the case of reorganization involving a
central high school district or a city school district, the type of
school district that the remaining school district will be;
 (iii) describe how the facilities needs of the new school district
will be met;
 (iv) describe the impact of the reorganization upon teachers and other
employees of the pre-existing school district;
 (v) describe the educational programs and services to be provided by
the new school district, and for any reorganization that will take
effect during a school year, describe how programs and services to
students residing in the new school district will be continued without
disruption for the balance of such school year;
 (vi) set forth any real or personal property of the pre-existing
school district that will be transferred to the new school district in
accordance with this section;
 (vii) provide for a proposed allocation of the bonded indebtedness of
the pre-existing school district incurred while the territory to be
partitioned was part of such pre-existing school district and for a
proposed allocation of other debt of the pre-existing school district;
 (viii) describe the impact of the reorganization on the contractual
obligations of the pre-existing school district;
 (ix) include a proposed budget for the new school district for the
first school year of its operation and estimate the impact of the
proposed reorganization on school taxes for taxpayers in the new school
district and the remaining school district; and
 (x) describe any necessary transition procedures for the first school
year of operation of the new school district, including but not limited
to procedures for the recommendation of special education programs and
services for students with disabilities and preschool children with
disabilities residing within the new school district.
 c. The district superintendent shall review the proposed
reorganization plan and determine whether it is in compliance with the
requirements of this section. If the district superintendent certifies
to the board of education of the pre-existing school district that such
plan is in compliance, such board, within twenty days after receipt of
such certification, shall proceed to call a special district meeting to
conduct a vote on the proposed reorganization unless such reorganization
is approved by a vote of the board of education to the extent provided
under paragraph d of this subdivision and shall schedule at least one
public hearing on the proposed reorganization, to be held not less than
seven days prior to the vote. Notice of such special district meeting
shall specify the date and time at which the vote will be held, which
shall be not less than twenty nor more than thirty days after the
publication or posting of such notice, and the place or places within
the pre-existing school district at which the vote will be held. Such
notice shall be published at least once a week for three consecutive
weeks preceding the meeting in at least one newspaper in general
circulation in the pre-existing school district, and if there be no such
newspaper in general circulation in the district, such notice shall be
posted in at least five conspicuous places in said district at least
twenty days before such meeting.
 d. The proposed reorganization shall be subject to approval by:
 (i) a majority vote of the qualified voters residing in such
municipality, or a vote of at least two-thirds of the governing body of
such municipality, and
 (ii) a majority vote of the qualified voters residing in the remaining
school district, or a vote of at least two-thirds of the board of
education of the pre-existing school district provided that a member who
resides in such municipality shall be ineligible to vote as a school
board member on the proposition for reorganization.
 e. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the
board of education of the pre-existing school district shall be
authorized to establish special election districts for the purpose of
conducting the votes required under paragraph d of this subdivision, and
the district superintendent shall be authorized to order any other
modifications in school election procedures that are needed to carry out
the provisions of this section.
 4. Order of district superintendent. The clerk of the pre-existing
school district shall file with the district superintendent a
certification of the results of the votes required by paragraph d of
subdivision three of this section. Upon filing of a certification that
both required votes are in favor of reorganization, the district
superintendent shall issue an order forming or reforming the new school
district, altering the boundaries of the pre-existing school district
accordingly, and, where necessary, reforming the remaining school
district and shall file such order in the manner prescribed in section
fifteen hundred six of this chapter. The new school district shall be
formed as a union free school district authorized to provide instruction
in grades kindergarten through twelve, except that if the new school
district is coterminous with a city having a population of one hundred
twenty-five thousand inhabitants or less, such order shall designate
such district as a city school district. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
where the territory partitioned from a central high school district is
coterminous with a former component school district of such central high
school district, the district superintendent's order shall reform the
component school district as a union free school district authorized to
provide instruction in grades kindergarten through twelve. The remaining
school district shall retain its status as a union free, central,
central high school or city school district, except that (i) where the
new school district is a city school district, the remaining school
district shall be reformed as a union free school district, and (ii)
where such reorganization would result in a central high school district
with only one component district, the district superintendent shall
order reformation of the remaining central high school district into a
union free school district.
 5. Effect of partitioning of territory. a. If there is outstanding
bonded indebtedness chargeable against the pre-existing school district
at the time of reorganization incurred while the territory to be
partitioned was part of such pre-existing school district, the district
superintendent shall apportion such indebtedness between the new school
district and the remaining school district according to the actual
valuation of the two districts, based on data on file with the
commissioner; and any approved expenditures for debt service represented
by such apportioned indebtedness shall be eligible for an apportionment
of building aid computed pursuant to subdivision six of section
thirty-six hundred two of this chapter using an aid ratio computed for
use in any year commencing with the nineteen hundred
eighty-one--eighty-two school year for the pre-existing school district.
The portion of such bonded indebtedness so apportioned shall become a
charge upon the respective districts as though the same had been
incurred by said districts separately, and the amount so apportioned
shall not be adjusted thereafter.
 b. Where the pre-existing school district has incurred indebtedness
other than bonds or notes for the benefit of the residents of the
municipality such other debt may be apportioned by the district
superintendent between the new school district and the remaining school
district in the manner and to the extent provided in the reorganization
plan.
 c. Upon the effective date of the reorganization, legal title and all
other property rights to any school facility of the pre-existing school
district that is located within the new school district shall be
transferred to such new school district, except that school facilities
of a central high school district shall remain the property of the
central high school district. The district superintendent shall
apportion the value of any school facility so transferred between the
new school district and the remaining school district according to the
actual valuation of the two districts based on data on file with the
commissioner. In determining such value, the district superintendent
shall deduct from the fair market value of the school facility the
amount of any outstanding bonded indebtedness on such facility. The
cost of an appraisal to determine fair market value shall be a charge
upon the new school district. The board of education of the new school
district shall reimburse the board of education of the remaining school
district in an amount equal to the remaining school district's share of
the value of the school facility as apportioned by the district
superintendent, and such amount shall be a charge upon the new school
district.
 d. Any school bus or personal property of the pre-existing school
district that is no longer needed by the remaining school district may
be transferred to the new school district upon such terms and conditions
as may be agreed upon by the boards of education of the remaining school
district and the new school district.
 e. For any reorganization pursuant to this section that takes effect
during a school year, the district superintendent shall apportion the
administrative expense of the board of cooperative educational services
chargeable to the pre-existing school district between the new school
district and the remaining district based on the actual valuation of the
two districts.
 f. Members of the teaching and supervisory staff of the pre-existing
school district at the time of the reorganization shall have the right
to select the school district in which he or she shall be considered an
employee, with the same tenure status he or she maintained in the
pre-existing school district. Such selection shall be based on each
teacher's seniority in the pre-existing school district, with the right
of selection passing from such teachers with the most seniority to such
teachers with the least seniority. Any such teacher who is unable to
obtain a teaching position in the new school district because the number
of positions needed is less than the number of teachers eligible to be
considered employees pursuant to this paragraph shall, in such new
school district and in the remaining school district, be placed on a
preferred eligible list of candidates for appointment to a vacancy that
may thereafter occur in a position similar to the one such teacher
filled in the pre-existing school district. Such teachers shall be
appointed to vacancies in such corresponding or similar positions in the
order of their length of service in the pre-existing school district,
within seven years from the date of the reorganization pursuant to this
section. For such teachers, for salary, sick leave or any other purpose,
the length of service credited in the pre-existing school district shall
be credited as employment time with the new school district or the
remaining school district, as applicable.
 g. Members of the board of education of the pre-existing school
district who reside in the territory partitioned pursuant to this
section shall vacate their positions on the effective date of the
reorganization, and the vacancies so created shall be filled in the
manner provided by law, provided, however, that if the board of
education of the remaining school district is unable to obtain a quorum
to vote on whether to fill such vacancies by appointment or to call a
special district meeting to fill the vacancies by election within thirty
days after the reorganization, the district superintendent shall be
authorized to fill such vacancies until the next annual meeting and
election of the district. Whenever a school district is reformed
pursuant to this section, the reformed school district shall be the
successor in interest of the former school district and the board of
education of the former school district shall continue as the board of
education of the reformed school district, except that where a central
high school district is reformed as a union free school district the
board of education of the component school district that is coterminous
with the central high school district shall become the board of
education of the reformed school district, and the members of the board
of education of the central high school district shall vacate their
positions on the effective date of the reorganization.
 h. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, if a
proposal for reorganization pursuant to this section is defeated by the
voters, such proposal may not be resubmitted for a vote until two years
after the original vote.
 ARTICLE 52
 CITY SCHOOL DISTRICTS OF CITIES WITH ONE HUNDRED TWENTY-FIVE THOUSAND
 INHABITANTS OR MORE
Section 2550. Application of article.
 2551. Board of education corporate body.
 2552. Board of education.
 2553. Board of education; eligibility; how chosen; term of
 office; vacancies.
 2554. Powers and duties of board of education.
 2554-a. Powers of boards of education to ban fraternities,
 sororities and other secret societies.
 2554-b. Special provisions relating to the city school district
 of the city of New York during emergency period.
 2554-c. Identification photos of senior high school, junior high
 school or intermediate school students in the city
 school district of the city of New York.
 2555. Kindergartens, nursery and night schools.
 2556. Buildings, sites, et cetera.
 2557. Purchase and sale of real property.
 2559. Power of removal of member of board of education.
 2560. Liability of board of education and community school
 boards in a city having a population of one million or
 more inhabitants.
 2561. Liability of certain officers and employees of boards of
 education in a city having a population of one million
 or more inhabitants.
 2562. Presentation of claims against a board of education of a
 city having a population of four hundred thousand or
 more to be pleaded.
 2563. Meetings of board of education.
 2564. Local school board districts.
 2565. Superintendent of schools, associate superintendents,
 board of superintendents.
 2566. Powers and duties of superintendent of schools.
 2567. Protection of rights exercised under licenses issued by
 a board of education in a city having a population of
 one million or more.
 2568. Superintendent of schools authorized to require medical
 examination of certain employees of certain boards of
 education.
 2569. Appointment of teachers.
 2573. Appointment of assistant, district or other
 superintendents, teachers and other employees; their
 salaries, et cetera.
 2574. Assistant superintendents in a city having a population
 of one million or more.
 2575. Retirement of employees of board of education.
 2575-a. Transfer of certain board of education administrative
 employees' to school clerical services of the board of
 education of the city of New York.
 2575-b. Transfer of attendance teachers and specially
 certificated attendance officers to the New York City
 teachers' retirement system.
 2575-c. Transfer of the director of attendance, assistant
 director of attendance, chief attendance officer,
 division supervising attendance officers and district
 supervising attendance officers, supervisors of school
 social workers to the New York city teachers'
 retirement system.
 2575-d. Payment of benefits by board of education retirement
 system of the city of New York in cases where
 workmen's compensation is or may be payable;
 reimbursement of such retirement system from workmen's
 compensation awards.
 2575-e. Eligibility of retirees for membership in the board of
 education retirement system of the city of New York.
 2575-f. Transfer of employees represented by the united
 federation of teachers to the New York city teachers'
 retirement system.
 2576. Annual estimate.
 2577. Annual financial report.
 2579. Payment of obligations.
 2580. Funds; custody and disbursement.
 2581. Certain corporate schools entitled to participate in
 funds of board of education of city of New York.
 2582. Trustees of corporate schools entitled to participate in
 funds of the board of education of the city of New
 York may convey to city of New York and be merged.
 2583. Certain schools to report as to moneys and attendance;
 accidental omission to report.
 2584. Bonds of employees.
 2585. Continuation in office of boards, bureaus, teachers,
 principals and other employees, et cetera.
 2586. Anniversary day as a holiday for pupils in the public
 schools of the borough of Brooklyn and in the borough
 of Queens, city of New York.
 2586-a. Diwali as a holiday in the public schools of the city of
 New York.
 2587. Tenure in fashion institute of technology.
 2588. Seniority, retention and displacement rights in
 connection with abolition of positions in city school
 districts of cities having more than one million
 inhabitants.
 § 2550. Application of article. This article shall apply to the city
school districts of the following cities only: New York, Buffalo,
Rochester, Syracuse and Yonkers.
 § 2551. Board of education corporate body. The board of education of
each city school district of a city with one hundred twenty-five
thousand inhabitants or more according to the latest federal census is
hereby continued as a body corporate.
 § 2552. Board of education. The board of education of each such city
school district is hereby continued. The educational affairs in each
such city school district shall be under the general management and
control of a board of education to consist of not less than three and
not more than nine members, to be chosen as hereinafter provided, and to
be known as members of the board of education, except that the board of
education of the city school district of the city of New York shall be
constituted as provided in article fifty-two-A of this title. The number
of members on the board of education of each such city school district
shall continue to be as follows, provided that student ex officio board
members as described in subdivision eleven of section twenty-five
hundred fifty-three of this article shall not be considered board
members for purposes of this section:
 a. City school district of the city of Buffalo: nine members.
 b. City school district of the city of Rochester: seven members.
 c. City school district of the city of Syracuse: seven members.
 d. City school district of the city of Yonkers: nine members.
 § 2553. Board of education; eligibility; how chosen; term of office;
vacancies. 1. No person shall be eligible to the office of member of a
board of education who is not a citizen of the United States, who is not
qualified to register for or vote at an election in accordance with the
provisions of section 5-106 of the election law, and who, in the case of
the city school district of the city of Yonkers, has not been a resident
of the city school district for which he is chosen for a period of at
least three years immediately preceding the date of his election or
appointment and who, in the case of the city school district of the city
of Buffalo, in the case of a member to be elected at large is not a
qualified voter of such city school district and who has not been a
resident of such district for a period of at least three years
immediately preceding the date of his election and in the case of a
member elected from a city school subdistrict is not a qualified voter
of such city school subdistrict and has not been a resident of the city
school district for three years and a resident of the city school
subdistrict which he represents or seeks to represent for a period of
one year immediately preceding the date of his election, and who, in the
case of the city school district of the city of Rochester, is not a
qualified voter under section 5-102 of the election law of such city
school district; and who in the case of the city school district of the
city of Syracuse has not been a qualified voter under section 5-102 of
the election law of such city school district for at least ninety days
immediately preceding the date of his election or appointment.
 1-a. The provisions of subdivision one of this section shall not apply
to ex officio board members, as described in subdivision eleven of this
section.
 2. In the city school districts of the cities of Rochester and
Syracuse the members of such board of education shall be chosen by the
voters at large at either a general or municipal election, or at both.
In the city school district of the city of Buffalo the members of such
board of education shall be chosen pursuant to the provisions of
subdivision ten of this section.
 2-a. Upon the certification of election results and the completion of
the voter history file after each election, each school district that
holds school board elections pursuant to this article shall transmit
copies of the records required to be transmitted pursuant to section
3-112 of the election law in a manner and time provided for in such
section.
 3. In the city school district of the city of Yonkers members of the
board of education shall be appointed from the city at large by the
mayor and shall be for terms of five years each, to begin on the first
Tuesday in May.
 4. In the city school districts of the following cities, the terms of
such members shall be as follows:
 a. Rochester: Four Years;
 b. Syracuse: Four Years;
 c. Yonkers: Five Years.
 5. The terms of one-fifth of all the members of a board of education,
or of a fraction as close to one-fifth thereof as possible, shall expire
annually on the first Tuesday in May, except in the city school
districts of the cities of Buffalo, Rochester and Syracuse.
 6. If a vacancy occurs other than by expiration of term in the office
of a member of a board of education in a district in which such members
are elected at a general or municipal election, such vacancy shall be
filled by appointment by the mayor until the next general or municipal
election is held, and such vacancy shall then be filled at such election
for the unexpired portion of such term, except that in the city school
district of the city of Rochester any such vacancy shall be filled
pursuant to the provisions of subdivision nine of this section and
except further that any such vacancy on the board of education of the
city school district of the city of Buffalo shall be filled pursuant to
the provisions of subdivision ten of this section.
 7. If such vacancy occurs in such office in a district in which the
members of the board of education are appointed by the mayor, such
vacancy shall be filled by appointment by the mayor of such city for the
unexpired portion of such term, but in Buffalo such appointment shall be
subject to confirmation by the council.
 8. A member of a board of education who publicly declares that he will
not accept or serve in the office of member of such board of education,
or refuses or neglects to attend three successive meetings of such
board, of which he is duly notified, without rendering a good and valid
excuse therefor to the other members of such board of education, vacates
his office by refusal to serve.
 9. (a) The members of the board of education of the city school
district of the city of Rochester shall be elected by the qualified
voters of such city as provided herein.
 (b) The members of the board of education shall be elected at large
throughout the city by the qualified voters at a general election.
 (c) Such elections for such officers shall be governed by the
provisions of the election law in the same manner as candidates for
office generally to be elected by the voters of the city of Rochester;
provided, however, that each such candidate shall be required to file
petitions containing at least one thousand signatures.
 (d) No person shall be eligible for the office of members of such
board of education who is not a qualified voter under section 5-102 of
the election law of such city school district. No person shall hold at
the same time the office of member of the board of education and any
other elective office nor shall he be a candidate for any other elective
office at the same time he is a candidate for the office of member of
such board of education.
 (e) The term of office of each member of such board shall be four
years, commencing on the first day of January following his election.
The candidates receiving a plurality of the votes cast respectively for
the several offices shall be declared elected. Where more than one
office is to be filled by such election and there is a variance in the
length of the terms, the candidate receiving the largest number of votes
shall be entitled to the longest term and the candidates receiving the
next highest number of votes shall be entitled, in decreasing order of
the respective number of votes to the several offices, in decreasing
order of the length of such terms or unexpired portions of terms.
Whenever a vacancy shall occur or exist in the office of member of the
board of education except by reason of expiration of term, such vacancy
shall be filled by the president of the board of education by
appointment of a nominee of the members of the board of education of the
same political affiliation as the person who vacated the office and such
nominee shall be elected by the majority vote of the board of education;
if the board shall not have filled the vacancy within thirty days from
the date the vacancy occurred, then the president of the board shall
fill the vacancy from the same political party as that of the person who
vacated the office. However, if the vacancy shall occur in the office of
member of the board of education filled by an incumbent elected on a
non-partisan or an independent basis, such vacancy shall be filled,
after nomination by the president of the board of education, by majority
vote of the remaining members of the board of education. A person
appointed to fill a vacancy shall hold office to and including the
thirty-first day of December next succeeding the first general election
following such vacancy, at which a successor must be elected for the
remainder of the unexpired term, if any.
 (f) The members so elected to the board of education shall convene on
the first business day in January of each year at the time of the
commencement of their term of office and select from their members a
president who shall serve for a term of one year or such other term, not
exceeding the term of his office, as may be fixed by the rules and
regulations of the board.
 (g) The election of members of the board of education of the school
district of Rochester shall take place at a general election to be held
in such city when an incumbent's term expires, and the first election
hereinunder shall take place in November of nineteen hundred eighty-one.
Such election shall be conducted by the board of elections of the county
of Monroe in the same manner as general elections are conducted by it.
The results of such elections, after canvassing, shall be certified and
reported by the board of elections to the board of education of such
city. The clerk or other appropriate officer of the board of education
shall within twenty-four hours after the receipt of such certification
by the board of elections serve a written notice either personally or by
mail upon each person declared to be elected as a member of the board of
education informing him of his election and the length of his term.
 (h) Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law, the present
members of said board of education shall serve the full terms for which
they were elected. Vacancies which may occur in the board shall be
filled as provided herein, except, that the vacancies created by the
expansion of the board of education from five to seven members, as
provided herein, shall be filled at the next general election.
 10. a. The members of the board of education of the city school
district of the city of Buffalo shall be elected by the qualified voters
of such city as provided herein.
 b. The common council of the city of Buffalo shall within three months
of the operative date of this paragraph of this section of this act
define and publish by local law boundaries of each of six city school
subdistricts which said subdistricts shall be contiguous and each of
which shall contain as nearly as possible the same number of
inhabitants. The boundaries of the said city school subdistricts may
thereafter be redefined by the board of education of the city school
district of the city of Buffalo by resolution, after a public hearing
thereon, at intervals of not less than five years and such resolution
must be passed at least eight months prior to the next election for
school board member or members.
 c. The members of the board of education of the city school district
of the city of Buffalo shall be elected as follows: one member from each
of such six city school subdistricts within such city by the qualified
voters therein and three members of such board of education shall be
chosen by the qualified voters at large within such city.
 d. (1) Such election for such office shall be governed by the
provisions of the election law in the same manner as candidates for
office generally to be elected by the voters of the city of Buffalo.
Notwithstanding section 6-142 of the election law, each such candidate
for election as a member of the board of education from a city school
subdistrict shall be required to file a petition containing signatures
of at least two hundred registered voters of such city school
subdistrict in which he is a candidate and each candidate for election
to the board of education by the voters at large shall be required to
file a petition containing the signatures of at least four hundred
registered voters of the city of Buffalo.
 (2) No petition shall contain any political party or independent body
name or label. Each petition shall contain the name of only one
candidate and such petition shall be filed with the board of elections
of the county of Erie not earlier than twenty-four weeks before, and not
later than twenty-three weeks preceding the date on which an election
shall be held. A certificate of acceptance or declination of any
individual so nominated shall be filed not later than the third day
after the twenty-third Tuesday preceding the election.
 e. No person shall hold at the same time the office of member of the
board of education of the city of Buffalo and any other elective office
nor shall he be a candidate for any other elective office at the same
time he is a candidate for the office of member of such board of
education.
 f. Petitions for the nomination of members of such school board shall
be on white paper containing the required signatures of qualified voters
of the city of Buffalo. The sheets of such petition shall be numbered
consecutively, beginning with number one, at the foot of each sheet.
Such a petition must set forth in every instance the correct date of
signing, the full name of the signer and his or her residence. A signer
need only place his or her signature upon the petition, and need not
himself or herself fill in the other required information.
 g. Each sheet of such a petition shall be signed in ink and shall be
substantially in the following form:
 I, the undersigned, do hereby state that I am a duly qualified voter
of the city of Buffalo, that my place of residence is truly stated
opposite my signature hereto, and I do hereby nominate the following
named person as a candidate for nomination (for the public office of
member of the board of education of the city of Buffalo at
large..............day of...................., 20.....,) (for the city
school subdistrict.............day of........, 20.....)
 I do hereby appoint........................(here insert the names and
addresses of at least three persons, all of whom shall be registered
voters within the city of Buffalo), as a committee to fill vacancies in
accordance with the provisions of the election law.
 In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand the day and year
placed opposite my signature.
 Date Name of Signer Present Residence
 .............. .................. ....................
 .............. .................. ....................
 .............. .................. ....................
 The petition shall be authenticated by witnesses. Such statement shall
be accepted for all purposes as the equivalent of an affidavit, and if
false shall subject the witness to the same penalties as if he or she
had been duly sworn. The form of such statement shall be substantially
as follows:
 STATEMENT OF WITNESS
 I,...................., (name of witness), state: I am a duly
qualified voter of the state of New York, and now reside in the city,
town or village of..............., in such state, at
........................(fill in street and house number and post office)
therein. I know each of the voters whose names are subscribed to this
petition sheet containing (fill in number).............signatures and
each of them subscribed the same in my presence and upon so subscribing
declared to me that the foregoing statement, made and subscribed by him,
was true.
 .....................
 Signature of witness
Date...........
 h. The board of elections shall refuse to accept such petitions signed
by an insufficient number of qualified voters, or petitions which are
not timely or petitions bearing a political party or independent body,
name or emblem or which contain the name of more than one candidate.
 i. Except as it may be modified by the provisions of paragraph (d) and
paragraph (n) of this subdivision, the provisions of the election law
with respect to acceptances by candidates nominated by independent
nominating petitions shall apply to candidates nominated by petitions
for members of such board of education.
 j. Objections to petitions for the nomination of members of such board
of education, procedures and remedies applicable to such objections
shall be made pursuant to section 6-154 of the election law.
 k. The board of elections shall cause to be printed official ballots
containing the names of all candidates as above provided, except that
the board may refuse to have the names of ineligible candidates placed
on such ballots. The names of the candidates shall be arranged according
to lot, and shall not bear the designation of any political party or
independent body, name or emblem. Blank spaces shall be provided so that
voters may vote for candidates who have not been nominated for the
offices to be filled at such elections. The form of such ballots shall
conform substantially to the form of ballots used at general elections
as prescribed in the election law.
 l. Voting for the election of members of such board of education shall
be by voting machine and shall be governed by the applicable provisions
of the election law with respect to voting machines.
 m. If a candidate, after a petition in his behalf shall have been duly
filed with the board of elections, and prior to the date of the
election, shall decline to accept the nomination, die, remove from the
school district, accept another office, or become otherwise disqualified
for such city school district office, such vacancy shall be filled by
the committee on vacancies pursuant to the election law.
 n. The term of office of each member of such board from a city school
subdistrict shall be three years, and the term of office of each such
member of the board elected at large shall be for five years. Of the
candidates to be elected for membership on the board of education of the
city school district of the city of Buffalo by the voters at large the
three candidates receiving the largest number of votes cast in the city,
shall be declared elected as at-large members of such board of
education. In each city school subdistrict the candidates seeking the
election as the member of such board of education for such city school
subdistrict receiving a plurality of votes in such city school
subdistrict shall be declared elected to that position.
 Whenever a vacancy shall occur or exist in the office of member of the
board of education except by reason of expiration of term or increase in
the number of members of such board, such vacancy shall be filled by a
majority vote of the remaining members of the board of education within
thirty days of the date when such vacancy shall have occurred. If the
remaining members of the board of education shall fail to fill such
vacancy within such thirty day period, then the mayor of the city of
Buffalo shall within thirty days thereafter fill such vacancy subject to
the confirmation of such appointment by the common council of the city
of Buffalo. No one shall be appointed to fill a vacancy of a subdistrict
member of the board of education unless he fulfills all of the
qualifications in this subdivision to enable him to be a candidate for
the office of a member of the board of education from the subdistrict
involved.
 o. The members so elected to the board of education shall convene on
the first business day in January of each year, at the time of the
commencement of their term of office and select from their members a
president who shall serve for a term of one year or such other term, not
exceeding the term of his office, as may be fixed by the rules and
regulations of the board.
 p. The election of members of the board of education of the school
district of the city of Buffalo shall take place on the first Tuesday
after the first Monday in November in each year in which an incumbent's
term expires. Such election shall be conducted by the board of elections
of the county of Erie in the same manner as other elections are
conducted by it. The results of such elections, after canvassing, shall
be certified and reported by the board of elections to the board of
education of such city. The clerk or other appropriate officer of the
board of education shall within twenty-four hours after receipt of such
certification by the board of elections serve a written notice either
personally or by mail upon each person declared to be elected as a
member of the board of education informing him of his election and the
length of his term.
 11. Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law, each board of
education shall establish a process for designating at least one student
as an ex officio board member. Ex officio student members shall be
entitled to sit with board members at all public meetings and hearings
of the board and may participate in other board activities and
responsibilities at the discretion of the board. Such ex officio student
members shall not be allowed to vote, shall not be allowed to attend
executive session or any other meetings or hearings not open to the
public.
 § 2554. Powers and duties of board of education. * Subject to the
provisions of this chapter, the board of education in a city, except the
city board of the city of New York, shall have the power and it shall be
its duty:
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2026
 * Subject to the provisions of this chapter, the board of education in
a city shall have the power and it shall be its duty:
 * NB Effective June 30, 2026
 1. To perform any duty imposed upon boards of education or trustees of
common schools under this chapter or other statutes, or the rules of the
regents and regulations of the commissioner of education so far as they
may be applicable to the school or other educational affairs of a city,
and not inconsistent with the provisions of this article, except that
the provisions of subdivision six of section sixteen hundred four and
subdivision eight of section seventeen hundred nine of this chapter
shall not be applicable to a board of education in any city having a
population of over thirty-five thousand in which the title to the school
property is vested in the city.
 2. To create, abolish, maintain and consolidate such positions,
divisions, boards or bureaus as, in its judgment, may be necessary for
the proper and efficient administration of its work; to appoint a
superintendent of schools, such associate, assistant, district and other
superintendents, examiners, directors, supervisors, principals,
teachers, lecturers, special instructors, medical inspectors, nurses,
auditors, attendance officers, secretaries, clerks, custodians, janitors
and other employees and other persons or experts in educational, social
or recreational work or in the business management or direction of its
affairs as said board shall determine necessary for the efficient
management of the schools and other educational, social, recreational
and business activities; provided, however, that in the city school
districts of the cities of Buffalo, Rochester, and Syracuse appointment
of associate, assistant and district superintendents, and other
supervising staff who are excluded from the right to bargain
collectively pursuant to article fourteen of the civil service law
shall, within the amounts budgeted for such positions, be by the
superintendent of such city school district; and to determine their
duties except as otherwise provided herein.
 2-a. a. In its discretion to adopt a resolution establishing the
office of claims auditor and appoint a claims auditor who shall hold his
or her position subject to the pleasure of the board. In its discretion,
the board may adopt a resolution establishing one or more offices of
deputy claims auditor who shall act as claims auditor in the absence of
the claims auditor. Such claims auditor shall report directly to the
board of education. No person shall be eligible for appointment to the
office of claims auditor or deputy claims auditor who shall be
 (1) a member of the board of education;
 (2) a clerk or treasurer of the board of education;
 (3) the superintendent of schools or other official of the district
responsible for business management;
 (4) the person designated as purchasing agent; or
 (5) clerical or professional personnel directly involved in accounting
and purchasing functions of the school district.
 b. The positions of claims auditor or deputy claims auditor shall be
classified in the exempt class of civil service. The board of education,
at any time after the establishment of the office of claims auditor or
deputy claims auditor, may adopt a resolution abolishing the office.
When the office of claims auditor shall have been established and a
claims auditor shall have been appointed and shall have qualified, the
powers and duties of the board of education with respect to auditing
accounts, charges, claims or demands against the city school district
shall devolve upon and thereafter be exercised by such claims auditor,
during the continuance of the office. The board of education shall be
permitted to delegate the claims audit function to one or more
independent entities by using (1) inter-municipal cooperative
agreements, or (2) independent contractors, to fulfill this function.
 c. When the board of education delegates the claims audit function
using an inter-municipal cooperative agreement, shared service
authorized by section nineteen hundred fifty of this title, or an
independent contractor, the board shall be responsible for auditing all
claims for services from the entity providing the delegated claims
auditor, either directly or through a delegation to a different
independent entity.
 * 3. To appoint, in a city having a population of one million or more,
notwithstanding the provisions of any local laws or charter to the
contrary, a superintendent of schools emeritus, whose duty it shall be
to consult and advise with the educational officers as and when
requested by the superintendent of schools. No person shall be eligible
for such appointment unless he shall have served in the positions of
superintendent of schools, associate superintendent and district
superintendent or assistant superintendent, and whose total period of
service in such position shall have been at least ten years in a city
having a population of one million or more. He shall receive for the
duration of his life such annual salary as the board of education and
the mayor or like financial authority shall determine at the time of his
appointment, but he shall not receive a retirement allowance or any
other benefit from the teachers' retirement system or any other pension
fund, and upon his death his beneficiaries and/or his estate shall not
be entitled to any benefits from any pension fund as a result of his
service.
 * NB Repealed July 1, 2002 and revived on June 30, 2026
 4. To have the care, custody, control and safekeeping of all school
property or other property of the city used for educational, social or
recreational work and not specifically placed by law under the control
of some other body or officer, and to prescribe rules and regulations
for the preservation of such property.
 * 5. To dispose, in the city of New York, of such personal property
used in the schools and other buildings of the city of New York under
the charge of the board of education of such city as shall no longer be
required for use therein. Such disposition shall be made in the name of
the city of New York and for such city.
 Such board may sell, at prices as may be agreed upon, such
manufactured articles or other products of any of its schools, day and
evening, as may not be utilized by the board of education and all moneys
realized by the sale thereof shall be paid into the city treasury and
shall at once be appropriated by the city to a special fund to be
administered by the board of education for such purposes as such board,
in its discretion, may determine. All other moneys realized by the sale
of personal property shall be paid into the city treasury and shall at
once be appropriated by the city to the special school fund of the board
of education for use in the borough in which the property sold was
situated.
 Such method of disposal shall be deemed not to apply to the
disposition of school books pursuant to subdivision eight of this
section.
 * NB Repealed July 1, 2002 and revived on June 30, 2026
 6. To lease property required for the purpose of furnishing school
accommodations for schools administered by the board of education and to
prepare and execute leases therefor. To be eligible for aid pursuant to
subdivision six of section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter, any
such lease shall be approved by the commissioner prior to execution; the
leased space shall meet requirements for access by individuals with
disabilities to both facilities and programs, as defined in regulations
of the commissioner; the requirements set forth in paragraphs a, b, c, d
and f of subdivision one of section four hundred three-b of this chapter
shall be met, except for the requirement of voter approval; and the
leased space shall be used to house programs for pupils in grades
prekindergarten through twelve, other than programs funded pursuant to
section forty-four hundred ten of this chapter, with minimal associated
administrative and support services space as approved by the
commissioner.
 7. To purchase and furnish such apparatus, maps, globes, books,
furniture and other equipment and supplies as may be necessary for the
proper and efficient management of the schools and other educational,
social and recreational activities and interests under its management
and control. To provide textbooks or other supplies to all the children
attending the schools of such cities in which free textbooks or other
supplies were lawfully provided prior to June eighth, nineteen hundred
seventeen.
 * 7-a. To develop a plan to ensure that all instructional materials to
be used in the schools of the district are available in a usable
alternative format for each student with a disability, as defined in
section forty-four hundred one of this chapter, and for each student who
is a qualified individual with a disability as defined in the
rehabilitation act of nineteen hundred ninety-three (29 U.S.C. 701), as
amended, in accordance with his or her educational needs and course
selection, at the same time as such instructional materials are
available to non-disabled students. As part of such plan, the board of
education shall amend its procurement policies to give a preference in
the purchase of instructional materials to vendors who agree to provide
materials in alternative formats. For purposes of this subdivision,
"alternative format" shall mean any medium or format for the
presentation of instructional materials, other than a traditional print
textbook, that is needed as an accommodation for a disabled student
enrolled in the school district, including but not limited to Braille,
large print, open and closed captioned, audio, or an electronic file in
an approved format, as defined in the regulations of the commissioner.
When an electronic file is provided, the plan shall specify how the
format will be accessed by students and/or how the district shall
convert to an accessible format. Such plan shall identify the needs of
students residing in the district for alternative format materials. Such
plan shall also specify ordering timelines to ensure that alternative
format materials are available at the same time as regular format
materials. Such plans shall include procedures to address the need to
obtain materials in alternative format without delay for disabled
students who move into the school district during the school year.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2026
 * 7-a. To develop a plan to ensure that all instructional materials to
be used in the schools of the district are available in a usable
alternative format for each student with a disability, as defined in
section forty-four hundred one of this chapter, and for each student who
is a qualified individual with a disability as defined in the
rehabilitation act of nineteen hundred ninety-three (29 U.S.C. 701) as
amended, in accordance with his or her educational needs and course
selection, at the same time as such instructional materials are
available to non-disabled students; provided that in the city school
district of the city of New York, such plan shall be developed by the
chancellor of the city district. As part of such plan, the board of
education shall amend its procurement policies to give a preference in
the purchase of instructional materials to vendors who agree to provide
materials in alternative formats. For purposes of this subdivision,
"alternative format" shall mean any medium or format for the
presentation of instructional materials, other than a traditional print
textbook, that is needed as an accommodation for a disabled student
enrolled in the school district, including but not limited to Braille,
large print, open and closed captioned, audio, or an electronic file in
an approved format, as defined in the regulations of the commissioner.
When an electronic file is provided, the plan shall specify how the
format will be accessed by students and/or how the district shall
convert to an accessible format. Such plan shall identify the needs of
students residing in the district for alternative format materials. Such
plan shall also specify ordering timelines to ensure that alternative
format materials are available at the same time as regular format
materials. Such plans shall include procedures to address the need to
obtain materials in alternative format without delay for disabled
students who move into the school district during the school year.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2026
 * 8. To dispose of, in the city of New York, to the best advantage of
the city of New York, either by sale or on the basis of money allowance
for waste paper all books delivered to the several public schools of
such city that have been discarded either by reason of being obsolete,
no longer required by the course of study, worn by long usage or
mutilated by accident. If disposal is made by sale it shall be to the
highest bidder and the money realized shall be paid into the city
treasury and shall at once be appropriated by the city to the special
school fund of the board of education entitled "supplies". If disposal
is made on the basis of money allowance for waste paper, it shall be to
the highest bidder. Such discarded books may be disposed of without
public advertisement or entry into a formal contract. Should the
discarded books be in such condition that no sale or exchange can be
made, or should there be reason to believe that such discarded books
have become infected through disease among the pupils, or should the
superintendent of schools certify that such discarded books contain
erroneous, inaccurate, obsolete or antiquated subject matter,
illustrations, maps, charts or other material, the committee on supplies
of the board of education, if such books cannot be sold, given away or
otherwise salvaged as waste paper without danger to the public health,
may authorize their destruction by fire, in which event the
superintendent of school supplies shall obtain and file in his office a
certificate that such books have been so destroyed, signed by the
principal of the school in which the books are located.
 * NB Repealed July 1, 2002 and revived on June 30, 2026
 9. To establish and maintain such free elementary schools, high
schools, training schools, vocational and industrial schools,
kindergartens, nursery schools, technical schools, night schools,
part-time or continuation schools, vocation schools, schools for adults,
schools for physically or mentally handicapped or delinquent children or
such other schools or classes as such board shall deem necessary to meet
the needs and demands of the city.
 10. To establish and maintain libraries which may be open to the
public, to organize and maintain public lecture courses, and to
establish and equip playgrounds, recreation centers, social centers, and
reading rooms from such funds as the education law or other statutes
authorize and the state appropriates for such purposes, and from such
other funds as may be provided therefor from local taxation or other
sources.
 11. To authorize the general courses of study which shall be given in
the schools and to approve the content of such courses before they
become operative.
 12. To authorize and determine the textbooks to be used in the schools
under its jurisdiction.
 13. a. To prescribe such regulations and by-laws as may be necessary
to make effectual the provisions of this chapter and for the conduct of
the proceedings of said board and the transaction of its business
affairs, for the general management, operation, control, maintenance and
discipline of the schools, and of all other educational, social or
recreational activities and other interests under its charge or
direction.
 * b. In a city having a population of one million or more, the city
board shall prescribe such regulations and by-laws authorizing the
chancellor to exercise such of its administrative and ministerial powers
as the board may deem necessary to make effectual the provisions of this
chapter and for the general management, operation, control, maintenance
and discipline of schools, and of all other educational, social or
recreational activities and other interests under its charge or
direction. If in the exercise of its discretion and in order better to
discharge its policy-making and other functions and to provide for the
efficient administration of the educational system, the board delegates
any of its administrative and ministerial powers to the chancellor, such
chancellor shall exercise such delegated powers in the same manner and
with the same force and effect as if such powers were given to him under
the provisions of the education law.
 * NB Repealed July 1, 2002 and revived on June 30, 2026
 * 14. To provide in the schools administered by the board of education
of the city of New York, the proper book or books, in form as required
by the by-laws of the board of education of such city, in which it shall
cause the class teachers under the direction and supervision of the
principal to enter the names, ages and residences of the pupils
attending the school, the name of the parent or guardian of each pupil
and the days on which the pupils shall have attended respectively, and
the aggregate attendance of each pupil during the year, and also the day
upon which the school shall have been visited by the superintendent of
schools or by an associate superintendent of schools or by an assistant
superintendent, or by members of the board of education, or by members
of the local school board, or by any of them, which entry shall be
verified by such oath or affirmation of the principal as may be
prescribed by the board of education of such city. Such books shall be
preserved as the property of such board of education and shall at all
times be open to inspection by members of such board of education, by
members of the local school boards and by the superintendent of schools,
or by any associate superintendent of schools, or by the assistant
superintendents.
 * NB Repealed July 1, 2002 and revived on June 30, 2026
 15. a. To perform such other duties and possess such other powers as
may be required to administer the affairs placed under its control and
management, to execute all powers vested in it, and to promote the best
interests of the schools and other activities committed to its care, and
to authorize, or in its discretion to conduct, and maintain such extra
classroom activities, including the operation of cafeterias or
restaurant service for pupils and teachers, as the board, from time to
time, shall deem proper. Such cafeterias or restaurant service may be
used by the community for school related functions and activities and to
furnish meals to the elderly residents, sixty years of age or older, of
the district. Such utilization shall be subject to the approval of the
board of education. Charges shall be sufficient to meet the direct cost
of preparing and serving such meals, reducible by available
reimbursements.
 * b. In a city having a population of one million or more, the board
of education shall make rules and regulations for the conduct, operation
and maintenance of extra classroom activities and for the safeguarding,
accounting and audit of all moneys received and derived therefrom. In
the case of any extra classroom activity as it shall deem proper, and
notwithstanding the provisions of section twenty-five hundred thirty of
this chapter, it may direct that the moneys received or derived from the
conduct, operation or maintenance of such an extra classroom activity be
deposited with the auditor of the board of education, who in such event
shall be the treasurer of such an extra classroom activity, the moneys
of which are required to be so deposited. In the procurement of articles
and services for the conduct, operation and maintenance of a cafeteria
or restaurant service, the board of education shall be subject to the
provisions of subdivision ten of section twenty-five hundred six of this
chapter, except that said board of education need not have duly
advertised for estimates in order to contract for such articles or
services in an amount exceeding one thousand dollars. In such a city,
the board of education shall also have power to assign any of its
officers or employees to perform such duties as it may prescribe in
connection with an extra classroom activity and to designate such of its
officers and employees when so assigned from whom a bond shall be
required for faithful performance of their duties and to fix the sum in
which each such bond shall be given.
 * NB Repealed July 1, 2002 and revived on June 30, 2026
 c. For the purposes of this section, a general organization of
students of a school conducted under the rules and regulations of the
board of education or with its approval, and engaged in extra classroom
activities other than the operation of a cafeteria or restaurant service
shall be known as a student organization. Unless such student
organization is required by the board of education to deposit with the
auditor the moneys received or derived from carrying on such extra
classroom activity, such moneys shall be subject to the use and
disposition of such student organization under the rules and regulations
prescribed by the board of education.
 * d. The board of education in a city having a population of one
million or more shall inquire into the origin of all moneys or other
property in the possession of any student organization, on March
twenty-third, nineteen hundred thirty-six, and all such moneys which the
board of education may find to have been derived from the operation of a
cafeteria or restaurant service, it may require to be deposited with the
auditor of the board of education and applied to the conduct and
operation of a cafeteria or restaurant service, or other extra classroom
activity, in such manner and to such extent as the board of education
may direct.
 * NB Repealed July 1, 2002 and revived on June 30, 2026
 * (e) In order to facilitate operation of the school lunch programs
administered by the board of education of the city of New York, better
to serve the public interest, all persons employed in a cafeteria or
lunchroom in any high school under the jurisdiction of this board for
one year prior to the date this section takes effect, shall, because of
their special training, experience and efficiency, and, notwithstanding
any provisions to the contrary in any general, special or local law, be
continued in the employment of this board without competitive
examination, provided the necessary funds for such continued employment
are appropriated by the board. The positions so held by such employees
shall be in the noncompetitive class. The New York city civil service
commission, however, after notice to any such employee of the reasons
therefore, and after according such employee a hearing, may exclude him
from further employment if found by the commission not to be a person of
satisfactorily good character. Not later than one year after this
section shall take effect, the commission shall determine for which of
such positions competitive examinations shall have become feasible, and
shall thereupon reclassify the various positions, with the approval of
the mayor and the state civil service commission. The then incumbents of
such positions shall continue to hold their positions without further
examination, provided, however, that all subsequent appointments to such
positions shall be made in accordance with the civil service law and
rules.
 * NB Repealed July 1, 2002 and revived on June 30, 2026
 16. To compensate, in its discretion, teachers and other employees for
loss of personal property but shall provide workmen's compensation
coverage as provided in the workmen's compensation law for all teachers
and other employees for injuries incurred in actual performance of duty
and with respect to teachers and other employees for whom such workmen's
compensation coverage is not required in cities of one million or more
population, to provide in its discretion for reasonable medical and
hospital expenses for injuries incurred in actual performance of duty on
or after July first, nineteen hundred sixty-two.
 16-a. In its discretion, to provide under a group insurance policy or
policies issued by any insurance company or insurance companies
authorized to do business in this state or under a group contract issued
by one or more corporations subject to article forty-three of the
insurance law, life insurance or accident and health insurance benefits
or medical and surgical benefits or hospital service benefits or any two
or more of such kinds of benefits to teachers and other employees of the
school district who participate in a plan or plans, as hereinafter
provided. The disbursing officer of the school district is authorized to
deduct from the salary of such participant with his prior consent, in
writing, the sums representing the participant's share of the premium or
premiums which are payable by such officer to such insurance company or
corporation. Such board of education is authorized to pay from such
moneys as are available for the purpose, a share of the cost of such
benefit or benefits in such amount as is required to be paid under such
group insurance policy or policies or group contract or contracts by the
board of education, as employer. The sum to be paid by the board of
education under such policy or policies or contract or contracts, in the
discretion of such board may be any percentage of the total cost of the
benefit or benefits including the whole thereof.
 Notwithstanding any provisions of this chapter, subdivision
thirty-one-a of section one thousand six hundred four, subdivision
thirty-four-a of section one thousand seven hundred nine and subdivision
ten-a of section two thousand five hundred three of the education law
and this subdivision shall not apply to a city having a population of
one million or more inhabitants.
 16-b. In its discretion, to purchase insurance against personal
injuries incurred by an authorized participant in a school volunteer
program, including but not limited to, those authorized participants who
assist on school buses, school sponsored transportation to and from
school, or on school sponsored field trips or any other school sponsored
activity; provided, however, that the injuries were incurred while the
authorized participant was functioning either within the scope of his or
her authorized volunteer duties or under the direction of the board of
education, trustee, or board of cooperative educational services, or
both.
 * 17. To maintain, in the city of New York, through such
representatives as it may designate, an effective visitation and
inspection of all schools and classes maintained in institutions
controlled by the department of correction of the city of New York.
 * NB Repealed July 1, 2002 and revived on June 30, 2026
 18. To provide transportation, home-teaching or special classes, as
defined under sections forty-four hundred one and forty-four hundred two
of this chapter for physically or mentally handicapped and delinquent
children. Such transportation, home-teaching or special classes, when
provided pursuant to this subdivision, shall be granted to all such
children irrespective of the school they legally attend.
 19. To provide by contract for the transportation of children to and
from any school or institution of learning whenever in its judgment such
transportation is required because of the remoteness of the school to
the pupil or for the promotion of the best interests of such children.
Any such contract may be made for a period not exceeding five years,
notwithstanding any provision of any charter or other provision of law
inconsistent herewith.
 19-a. In its discretion, to lease a motor vehicle or vehicles for the
transportation of children of the district under the same terms and
conditions as the board of education of a union free school district,
provided, however that no voter approval shall be required.
 19-b. To establish a minority scholarship recruitment program by the
board of education of the city of Buffalo.
 20. To provide, outside the territorial limits of the city school
district but within the state or within an adjoining state, for the
education of children resident within the city school district whenever
in the judgment of the board of education, approved by the commissioner
of education, the health or welfare of such children makes such
provision necessary or desirable, and the average daily attendance of
such pupils shall be included in the average daily attendance of such
district as certified to the commissioner in the report of the board of
education.
 * 21. To assign, in its discretion, one or more employees of the board
in a city having a population of one million or more to serve as trial
examiner with power to conduct investigations and hearings on behalf of
such board. Each trial examiner shall report the result of any such
investigation or hearing to the board.
 * NB Repealed July 1, 2002 and revived on June 30, 2026
 22. To provide, in its discretion, compensation to a speaker or
speakers at commencement day exercises in such amount as may be
determined by the board.
 23. In its discretion, and with the written consent of any employee,
to deduct from the salary of such employee such amount as may be agreed
to by such employee for payment to any credit union doing business in
the state of New York as such employee may designate. Any such written
authorization may be withdrawn by such employee at any time.
 * 24. Each year, the board of education shall prepare a school
district report card, pursuant to regulations of the commissioner, and
shall make it publicly available by transmitting it to local newspapers
of general circulation, appending it to copies of the proposed budget
made publicly available as required by law, making it available for
distribution at the annual meeting, and otherwise disseminating it as
required by the commissioner. Such report card shall include measures of
the academic performances of the school district, on a school by school
basis, and measures of the fiscal performance of the district, as
prescribed by the commissioner. Pursuant to regulations of the
commissioner the report card shall also compare these measures to
statewide averages for all public schools, and statewide averages for
public schools of comparable wealth and need, developed by the
commissioner. Such report card shall include, at a minimum, any
information on the school district regarding pupil performance and
expenditure per pupil required to be included in the annual report by
the regents to the governor and the legislature pursuant to section two
hundred fifteen-a of this chapter; and any other information required by
the commissioner. School districts (i) identified as having fifteen
percent or more of their students in special education, or (ii) which
have fifty percent or more of their students with disabilities in
special education programs or services sixty percent or more of the
school day in a general education building, or (iii) which have eight
percent or more of their students with disabilities in special education
programs in public or private separate educational settings shall
indicate on their school district report card their respective
percentages as defined in this paragraph and paragraphs (i) and (ii) of
this subdivision as compared to the statewide average.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2026
 * 24. In every city school district in a city having a population of
less than one million inhabitants, each year, the board of education
shall prepare a school district report card, pursuant to regulations of
the commissioner, and shall make it publicly available by transmitting
it to local newspapers of general circulation, appending it to copies of
the proposed budget made publicly available as required by law, making
it available for distribution at the annual meeting, and otherwise
disseminating it as required by the commissioner. Such report card shall
include measures of the academic performances of the school district, on
a school by school basis, and measures of the fiscal performance of the
district, as prescribed by the commissioner. Pursuant to regulations of
the commissioner the report card shall also compare these measures to
statewide averages for all public schools, and statewide averages for
public schools of comparable wealth and need, developed by the
commissioner. Such report card shall include, at a minimum, any
information on the school district regarding pupil performance and
expenditure per pupil required to be included in the annual report by
the regents to the governor and the legislature pursuant to section two
hundred fifteen-a of this chapter; and any other information required by
the commissioner. School districts (i) identified as having fifteen
percent or more of their students in special education, or (ii) which
have fifty percent or more of their students with disabilities in
special education programs or services sixty percent or more of the
school day in a general education building, or (iii) which have eight
percent or more of their students with disabilities in special education
programs in public or private separate educational settings shall
indicate on their school district report card their respective
percentages as defined in this paragraph and paragraphs (i) and (ii) of
this subdivision as compared to the statewide average.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2026
 25. a. Shall require, for purposes of a criminal history record check,
the fingerprinting of all prospective employees pursuant to section
three thousand thirty-five of this chapter, who do not hold valid
clearance pursuant to such section or pursuant to section three thousand
four-b of this chapter or section five hundred nine-cc or twelve hundred
twenty-nine-d of the vehicle and traffic law. Prior to initiating the
fingerprinting process, the prospective employer shall furnish the
applicant with the form described in paragraph (c) of subdivision thirty
of section three hundred five of this chapter and shall obtain the
applicant's consent to the criminal history records search. Every set of
fingerprints taken pursuant to this subdivision shall be promptly
submitted to the commissioner for purposes of clearance for employment.
 b. Upon the recommendation of the superintendent, the board may
conditionally appoint a prospective employee. A request for conditional
clearance shall be forwarded to the commissioner along with the
prospective employee's fingerprints, as required by paragraph a of this
subdivision. Such appointment shall not commence until notification by
the commissioner that the prospective employee has been conditionally
cleared for employment and shall terminate forty-five days after such
notification of conditional clearance or when the prospective employer
is notified of a determination by the commissioner to grant or deny
clearance, whichever occurs earlier, and may not be extended or renewed
unless the commissioner issues a new conditional clearance after finding
that there was good cause for failing to obtain clearance within such
period, provided that if clearance is granted, the appointment shall
continue and the conditional status shall be removed. Prior to
commencement of such conditional appointment, the prospective employer
shall obtain a signed statement for conditional appointment from the
prospective employee, indicating whether, to the best of his or her
knowledge, he or she has a pending criminal charge or criminal
conviction in any jurisdiction outside the state.
 c. Upon the recommendation of the superintendent, the board may make
an emergency conditional appointment when an unforeseen emergency
vacancy has occurred. When such appointment is made, the process for
conditional appointment pursuant to paragraph b of this subdivision must
also be initiated. Emergency conditional appointment may commence prior
to notification from the commissioner on conditional clearance but shall
terminate twenty business days from the date such appointment commences
or when the prospective employer is notified by the commissioner
regarding conditional clearance, whichever occurs earlier, provided that
if conditional clearance is granted, the appointment shall continue as a
conditional appointment. Prior to the commencement of such appointment,
the prospective employer must obtain a signed statement for emergency
conditional appointment from the prospective employee, indicating
whether, to the best of his or her knowledge, he or she has a pending
criminal charge or criminal conviction in any jurisdiction. An
unforeseen emergency vacancy shall be defined as: (i) a vacancy that
occurred less than ten business days before the start of any school
session, including summer school, or during any school session,
including summer school, without sufficient notice to allow for
clearance or conditional clearance; (ii) when no other qualified person
is available to fill the vacancy temporarily; and (iii) when emergency
conditional appointment is necessary to maintain services which the
district is legally required to provide or services necessary to protect
the health, education or safety of students or staff. The provisions of
subparagraph (i) of this paragraph shall not apply if the board finds
that the district has been unable to fill the vacancy despite good faith
efforts to fill such vacancy in a manner which would have allowed
sufficient time for clearance or conditional clearance.
 d. Shall develop a policy for the safety of the children who have
contact with an employee holding conditional appointment or emergency
conditional appointment.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2026
 * 25. Shall require, for purposes of a criminal history record check,
except in the city school district of the city of New York, the
fingerprinting of all prospective employees pursuant to section three
thousand thirty-five of this chapter, who do not hold valid clearance
pursuant to such section or pursuant to section three thousand four-b of
this chapter or section five hundred nine-cc or twelve hundred
twenty-nine-d of the vehicle and traffic law. Prior to initiating the
fingerprinting process, the prospective employer shall furnish the
applicant with the form described in paragraph (c) of subdivision thirty
of section three hundred five of this chapter and shall obtain the
applicant's consent to the criminal history records search. Every set of
fingerprints taken pursuant to this subdivision shall be promptly
submitted to the commissioner for purposes of clearance for employment.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2026
 * 26. Shall, upon commencement and termination of employment of an
employee by the city school district, provide the commissioner with the
name of and position held by such employee.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2026
 * 26. Shall, except in the city school district of the city of New
York, upon commencement and termination of employment of an employee by
the city school district, provide the commissioner with the name of and
position held by such employee.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2026
 27. Where the district has provided transportation to students
enrolled in such district to a school sponsored field trip,
extracurricular activity or any other similar event, it shall provide
transportation back to either the point of departure or to the
appropriate school in the district, unless the parent or legal guardian
of a student participating in such event has provided the school
district with written notice, consistent with district policy,
authorizing an alternative form of return transportation for such
student or unless intervening circumstances make such transportation
impractical. In cases where intervening circumstances make
transportation of a student back to the point of departure or to the
appropriate school in the district impractical, a representative of the
school district shall remain with the student until such student's
parent or legal guardian has been (a) contacted and informed of the
intervening circumstances which make such transportation impractical and
(b) such student had been delivered to his or her parent or legal
guardian.
 * 28. To pass a resolution, in the discretion of the board of such
district, authorizing the entering of an agreement with the city within
such district, for the installation and use of school bus photo
violation monitoring systems pursuant to section eleven hundred
seventy-four-a of the vehicle and traffic law, provided that the
purchase, lease, installation, operation and maintenance, or any other
costs associated with such cameras shall not be considered an aidable
expense pursuant to section thirty-six hundred twenty-three-a of this
chapter.
 * NB Repealed December 1, 2029
 § 2554-a. Powers of boards of education to ban fraternities,
sororities and other secret societies. 1. In its discretion, the board
of education of each school district, may adopt rules and regulations to
abolish and/or prohibit any fraternity, sorority or other secret society
in any secondary school under its jurisdiction.
 2. Prior to the adoption and promulgation of a rule or regulation in
accordance with the provisions of subdivision one of this section by any
board of education of a school district, the board of education of the
school district must find that the fraternity, sorority or secret
society group has by virtue of its activities caused or created a
disruption of or interference with the academic processes of any
secondary school within its jurisdiction or caused or created any
interference with or disruption of the academic progress of any
individual student or students in any secondary school within its
jurisdiction.
 3. For the purposes of this chapter a fraternity, sorority or secret
society shall mean any organization composed wholly or in part of pupils
enrolled in public secondary schools which exists or seeks to perpetuate
itself by taking in additional members from the pupils enrolled in such
schools on the decision of the membership rather than upon the free
choice of any pupil in such school but shall not be construed to include
organizations institutionally sponsored by agencies of public welfare,
the Boy Scouts of America, the Girl Scouts of America, the Campfire
Girls, Young Men's Christian Association, Young Women's Christian
Association, Young Men's Hebrew Association, Young Women's Hebrew
Association, Catholic Youth Organization, Kiwanis International, Hi-Y or
other similar organizations without limitation to the foregoing.
 4. Upon and after the adoption and promulgation of a rule or
regulation in accordance with the provisions of subdivision one of this
section by the board of education of any such school district, such
board of education may in any secondary school under its jurisdiction
discipline any pupil who shall promise to join, or shall become a member
of, or shall remain a member of, or shall solicit other persons to join
any such fraternity, sorority or secret society.
 § 2554-b. Special provisions relating to the city school district of
the city of New York during emergency period. 1. As used in this
section, the term "emergency period" shall mean the period from the
effective date of this section to the first day of July, nineteen
hundred sixty-two.
 2. In order to place the educational affairs of the city school
district of the city of New York under the closer supervision of the
regents and the commissioner during the emergency period, the board of
education of such district shall submit to the regents and the
commissioner and to the mayor of the city of New York on the first day
of January and April, nineteen hundred sixty-two, an interim progress
report in such form and detail as the commissioner shall prescribe and
on the first day of July, nineteen hundred sixty-two, a final report in
such form and detail as the commissioner shall prescribe as to:
 a. the corrective action taken in the emergency period and planned by
the board of education with respect to the administration of the program
for new school building construction;
 b. the corrective action taken in the emergency period and planned by
the board of education with respect to the repair and maintenance of
existing school buildings and other structures under the control of the
school district;
 c. the disciplinary action taken in the emergency period with respect
to employees guilty of accepting gratuities in relation to the
performance of their duties, and the corrective action taken by the
board of education to prevent recurrences of such misconduct;
 d. the corrective action taken in the emergency period and planned by
the board of education with respect to administrative reform and the
development of a program for the division of responsibility between the
board and the superintendent of schools and the administrative staff for
the more efficient and effective management of the district;
 e. the plans developed and action taken in the emergency period by the
board of education for the revitalization of local school boards and for
increased participation of residents throughout the city of New York in
the affairs of their local neighborhood schools;
 f. the plans developed and action taken in the emergency period by the
board of education to establish a long-range program and the necessary
staff organization for better informed and coordinated planning of new
school construction and the modernization of existing structures; and
 g. the steps taken in the emergency period by the board of education
to evaluate and to improve the quality of instruction in the schools.
 3. During the emergency period, the board of education of the city
school district of the city of New York shall have, specifically, the
power:
 a. To undertake any studies, inquiries, surveys or analyses it may
deem relevant through the personnel of the district or in cooperation
with or by agreement with any other public or private agency;
 b. To employ and at pleasure remove educational, engineering,
architectural, legal or management consultants and such other assistants
as it may deem necessary for the performance of its functions and fix
their compensation within the amounts made available by appropriation
therefor;
 c. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision one of section
twenty-five hundred sixty-five of this chapter, to remove at its
pleasure by a vote of a majority of all its members, the superintendent,
any deputy superintendent or any associate superintendent of schools of
the district irrespective of the date of their appointments, provided,
however, that the board may enter into a contract with the
superintendent of schools for a period of not less than three and not
more than five years; and
 d. To authorize the superintendent of schools and the administrative
staff of the district by by-law, rule, regulation or resolution to
exercise on its behalf such of its administrative and ministerial powers
and duties with respect to the administration of the city school
district, the purchase, repair, remodeling, improvement or enlargement
of school buildings or other buildings or sites and the construction of
new buildings as the board deems necessary or desirable for the more
efficient administration of the district or for the more expeditious
completion of school construction, maintenance or repairs, provided,
however, that the board shall not authorize the superintendent of
schools and the administrative staff to exercise any powers and duties
relating to its investigative or judicial functions.
 § 2554-c. Identification photos of senior high school, junior high
school or intermediate school students in the city school district of
the city of New York. Upon the recommendation of the principal of a
senior high school, junior high school or intermediate school and
subject to the approval of the community superintendent for junior high
schools or intermediate schools and chancellor for senior high schools,
students enrolled in a senior high school, junior high school or
intermediate school may be required to be photographed for purposes of
identification. The principal of such school may designate the
photographer to be used, but the student may not be charged for the cost
of such photograph. If required by the principal, such photograph shall
be taken within three months after the student's admission to such
school. Such photograph shall be kept within the school at a place
designated by the principal. At the discretion of the principal, and
subject to the approval of the community superintendent for junior high
schools or intermediate schools and chancellor for senior high schools,
an identification card bearing a photograph of each student may also be
required to be kept on the person of such student during hours when the
student is attending such school.
 § 2555. Kindergartens, nursery and night schools. 1. The board of
education of each city may maintain kindergartens which shall be free to
resident children between the ages of four and six years, provided,
however, such board may fix a higher minimum age for admission to such
kindergartens.
 2. A board of education may maintain nursery schools which shall be
free to resident children and may fix the age for admission.
 3. Night schools, which shall be free to all persons residing in the
city, and wherein the common branches and such additional subjects as
may be adapted to students applying for instruction are taught on at
least two nights each week, for two hours each night, shall be
maintained by the board of education on at least one hundred nights.
 § 2556. Buildings, sites, et cetera. 1. A board of education is
authorized and it shall have power to purchase, repair, remodel, improve
or enlarge school buildings or other buildings or sites, and to
construct new buildings, subject to such limitations and restrictions
and exceptions as are herein provided.
 2. Whenever in the judgment of a board of education it is necessary to
select a new site, or to enlarge a present site, or to designate a
playground or recreation center, or to acquire title to or lease real
property for other educational purposes authorized by this chapter, such
board may take options on property desirable for such purposes but
before taking title thereto shall pass a resolution stating the
necessity therefor, describing by metes and bounds the grounds or
territory desired for each of such purposes, and estimating the amount
of funds necessary therefor. An item for such amount, if funds are not
available for the purchase or lease of such property, may be included in
the next annual budget, if not included in a special budget as herein
provided.
 3. Whenever in the judgment of a board of education the needs of the
city require a new building for school purposes or for recreation or
other educational purposes authorized by this chapter, or when in its
judgment a building should be remodelled or enlarged, such board shall
pass a resolution specifying in detail the necessity therefor and
estimating the amount of funds necessary for such purpose. An item for
such amount, if funds are not available for the construction of such
building, may be included in the next annual budget, if not included in
a special budget as herein provided.
 4. No site shall be designated except upon a majority vote of a board
of education and no building shall be constructed, remodelled or
enlarged until the plans and specifications therefor are approved by the
board of education.
 5. It shall be unlawful for a schoolhouse to be constructed in the
city of New York without an open-air playground attached to or used in
connection with the same. Existing playgrounds shall not be sold, leased
or transferred, or permanently authorized for other uses such as school
building construction, renovation, placement or storage of building
materials for such work that would eliminate the use of such playground
space for outdoor recreational activities unless a plan is established
and implemented to provide suitable and adequate physical activities or
space to accommodate the physical and recreational needs of the pupils
of such building. The provisions of this subdivision shall not apply to
school construction or renovation activities that occur on or require
the use of such playgrounds for a duration of no more than one year.
 * 5-a. (a) Notwithstanding subdivision three-a of section four hundred
eight of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for a new schoolhouse to be
constructed in the city of New York within five hundred feet of a
controlled-access highway unless (i) the president of the New York city
school construction authority determines that there is no other
appropriate site to erect such schoolhouse; (ii) if such schoolhouse is
planned to contain a secondary school, the community district, as such
term is defined in section twenty-five hundred ninety-a of this title,
in which the site of such schoolhouse is to be located has a projected
enrollment rate for secondary school education greater than seventy
percent of its capacity, based on the most recent report issued pursuant
to section 21-988 of the administrative code of the city of New York;
(iii) if such schoolhouse is planned to contain an elementary school or
a middle school, the subdistrict, as such term is defined in section
21-989 of the administrative code of the city of New York, in which the
site of such schoolhouse is to be located has a projected enrollment
rate for elementary school education or middle school education, as
applicable, greater than seventy percent of capacity, based on the most
recent report issued pursuant to section 21-988 of the administrative
code of the city of New York; (iv) the site of such schoolhouse is
located on a property a portion of which is used or is planned to be
used for residential or commercial purposes; or (v) plans for such
schoolhouse include adequate engineering controls to address air
quality, based on regulations promulgated by the New York city
department of environmental protection.
 (b) For purposes of this subdivision, neither the construction of a
new schoolhouse upon the site of an existing schoolhouse nor an addition
nor an annex constructed to serve an existing schoolhouse shall be
considered construction of a new schoolhouse.
 (c) For purposes of this subdivision, a "controlled-access highway"
shall mean: (i) a controlled-access highway as defined by section one
hundred nine of the vehicle and traffic law under the jurisdiction of
the commissioner of transportation which has been functionally
classified by the department of transportation as principal arterial -
interstate or principal arterial - other freeway/expressway on official
functional classification maps approved by the federal highway
administration pursuant to part 470.105 of title 23 of the code of
federal regulations, as amended from time to time; and (ii) a divided
highway under the jurisdiction of the New York state thruway authority
for mixed traffic with access limited as the authority may determine and
generally with grade separations at intersections.
 (d) Nothing in this subdivision shall be construed to create a private
right of action to enforce the terms of this subdivision.
 * NB Effective December 21, 2029
 6. After a site has been selected and plans and specifications for a
building thereon have been approved as provided herein, a board of
education in a city having a population of more than four hundred
thousand but less than one million may, in its discretion, by regulation
deliver such plans and specifications to the common council or other
local legislative body which may thereupon, in its discretion, award a
contract for the erection of such building in the same manner and in
accordance with the provisions of law regulating the awarding of
contracts for the construction of municipal buildings of such city.
 7. a. The board of education of the city of New York, with the
permission of the department of parks and of the board of estimate, may
construct schoolhouses and school playgrounds upon a portion of the
public parks in the district east of the Bowery and Catharine street and
south of Fourth street in such city.
 b. The board of education of the city of New York, with the permission
of the department of parks and recreation and of the board of estimate,
may construct a temporary schoolhouse upon a portion of a public park in
the borough of Queens, commonly referred to as Equity Park.
Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of subdivision nine of this
section, such park land shall revert to the control and management of
the department of parks and recreation seven years after the date of the
completion of the construction of such temporary schoolhouse without
further action of the board of education or of the board of estimate.
 8. In a city having a population of one hundred twenty-five thousand
or more and less than two hundred fifty thousand in which the common
council, the board of estimate and apportionment and the board of
contract and supply and the commissioner of public works or other city
officials, or any one or more thereof, had the authority under the law
in force prior to June eighth, nineteen hundred seventeen, to erect,
remodel, improve, or enlarge school buildings or to purchase supplies or
real property for any school purpose, such officers, board or boards
shall continue to possess such powers and duties and to perform such
functions.
 9. When the real property of a city under the control and management
of the board of education is no longer needed for educational purposes
in the city, such board shall notify the common council of such fact and
in a city having no common council, the council or other legislative
body or the commissioners of the sinking fund, and such common council
or such council or body or such commissioners of the sinking fund, as
the case may be, may then sell or dispose of such property in the manner
in which other real property owned by the city may be sold or disposed
of and the proceeds thereof shall be credited to the funds under the
control and administration of the board of education in such city,
except that in a city where the proceeds of such sales were required by
statute, in effect prior to June eighth, nineteen hundred seventeen, to
be paid to the credit of the sinking fund established and maintained
therein, the proceeds of such sales shall continue to be paid to the
credit of the sinking fund of such city as required by statute, and
except that in a city having a council or a board of estimate and
apportionment, such council or board may, by resolution, authorize the
use of the proceeds of such sale for other municipal purposes.
 10. The board of education shall let all contracts for public work and
all purchase contracts to the lowest responsible bidder after
advertisement for bids where so required by section one hundred three of
the general municipal law.
 10-a. In a city having a population of one million or more if the
several parts of the work or labor to be done and/or the supplies,
materials and equipment to be furnished shall together involve an
expenditure of not more than fifteen thousand dollars, the same may be
procured on order awarded to the lowest responsible bidder upon bids
submitted without public advertisement under such regulations as shall
be made by the board of education. Purchases of two hundred fifty
dollars or less may be made without competition.
 11. In all contracts by a board of education, in a city having a
population of one million or more, for the construction, repair,
alteration or remodeling of buildings or for the purchase of supplies,
furniture or equipment, a stipulation may be inserted for liquidated
damages for any breach, failure or delay in the performance thereof; and
such board of education is authorized and empowered to remit the whole
or any part of such damages as in its discretion may be just and
equitable; and in all suits commenced on any such contracts or on any
bond given in connection therewith it shall not be necessary for such
board, whether plaintiff or defendant, to prove actual or specific
damages sustained by reason of any such breach, failure or delay, but
such stipulation for liquidated damages shall be conclusive and binding
upon all parties.
 12. In a city having a population of one million or more a board of
education may make rules and regulations governing the qualifications of
bidders entering into contracts for the erection and construction of
buildings, and for the alteration of buildings when the entire cost of
such alteration shall exceed twenty-five thousand dollars. The bidding
may be restricted to those who shall have qualified prior to the receipt
of bids according to standards fixed by the board of education, provided
that notice or notices for the submission of qualifications shall be
published in the official publication of the municipality, and in an
appropriate trade journal published in such city, at least once, not
less than ten days prior to the date fixed for the filing of
qualifications.
 13. A board of education, in a city having a population of one million
or more, may through its duly designated officers, agents or employees
enter upon public or private property for the purpose of making surveys,
soundings or test borings necessary for the exercise of the powers or
the performance of the duties, of such board of education, provided
however, that the mayor had formally approved the acquisition of the
real property as a school site.
 14. a. The chancellor of a city school district in a city having a
population of one million or more shall compile an inventory of and
issue a written report about the outdoor schoolyards in the city school
district. Such inventory and report shall:
 (i) identify each outdoor schoolyard located at educational
facilities, as defined in subdivision nine of section twenty-five
hundred ninety-a of this title, of the city school district. Each
outdoor schoolyard shall be identified by the community school district
in which the outdoor schoolyard is located, its address, approximate
size and physical condition;
 (ii) identify which outdoor schoolyards are used for physical
education, activity and/or recreation; for each such outdoor schoolyard,
a description of how often students of the city school district use the
outdoor schoolyard and any limitations on the uses of the schoolyard;
 (iii) identify which outdoor schoolyards are not used for physical
education, activity or recreation. For each such schoolyard, an
explanation of why it is not being used for physical education, physical
activity or recreation by students of the city school district;
 (iv) whether each outdoor schoolyard is used and the frequency of such
use during the school day and whether it is available for use by
students or the general public during after school hours;
 (v) for each outdoor schoolyard, a description of the capital plans
for construction, placement, renovation and/or reconfiguration thereof,
and any plan to increase or decrease the availability and utilization
thereof; and
 (vi) any other facts, information and recommendations which the
chancellor deems necessary to improve the outdoor schoolyards of the
educational facilities of the city school district. Such improvements
shall be those that enhance the physical education, physical and mental
fitness, and well-being of the students of the city school district.
 b. On or before December thirty-first, two thousand twelve, the
chancellor shall submit the inventory and report, compiled pursuant to
paragraph a of this subdivision, to the governor, the temporary
president of the senate, the speaker of the assembly, the chairs of the
senate and assembly committees on education, and the department.
 c. For the purposes of this subdivision, "outdoor schoolyard" means
outdoor space which is located at educational facilities, and is used or
intended to be used by students for physical education, physical
activity and/or recreation.
 15. a. The chancellor of a city school district in a city having a
population of one million or more shall compile an inventory of and
issue a written report and develop recommendations regarding
transportable classroom units ("TCU" or also commonly known as a
"trailer"). Such inventory, report and recommendations shall:
 (i) identify each transportable classroom unit located in the city
school district. Each transportable classroom unit shall be identified
by the community school district in which it is located, its address
with identification of any school building it is part of or associated
with, its approximate size, its age, and a description of its physical
condition;
 (ii) identify the number of students served within each transportable
classroom unit, including the grade level of such students, if
applicable, the average class size within each transportable classroom
unit, and a description of the amount of the school day the students
spend within each transportable classroom unit;
 (iii) provide recommendations to minimize the number of transportable
classroom units within the city school district.
 b. On or before December thirty-first, two thousand seventeen, the
chancellor shall submit the inventory, report, and the recommendations
to minimize the number of transportable classroom units within the city
school district, compiled and developed pursuant to paragraph a of this
subdivision, to the governor, the temporary president of the senate, the
speaker of the assembly, the chairs of the senate and assembly
committees on education, and the department. Annually, on or before
December thirty-first, the chancellor shall update such inventory,
report and recommendations and provide such updated information and
recommendations to the governor, the temporary president of the senate,
the speaker of the assembly, the chairs of the senate and assembly
committees on education, and the department.
 § 2557. Purchase and sale of real property. The board of education
may purchase real property for any of the purposes authorized by law and
shall take title thereof in the name of the city, which shall hold said
property in trust for the use of such school district and the city is
hereby empowered to sell and convey the same when it deems it for the
interest of such school district, and when the owner of such property
refuses to sell the same or such board is unable to agree with the owner
of such property on the purchase price thereof, it shall have the power
and authority to institute such proceedings and take any action
necessary to acquire title to such property under and pursuant to the
provisions of the eminent domain procedure law, except that in a city
in which the common council, board of contract and supply or other city
officers or body were authorized and empowered by law to acquire title
to real property for school purposes under the laws in force on June
eighth, nineteen hundred seventeen, said council, board, officers or
body shall continue to possess such powers and shall exercise the same,
including the power to acquire real property for said purposes except
further that such real property shall be acquired pursuant to the
eminent domain procedure law.
 § 2559. Power of removal of member of board of education. For cause
shown, and after giving notice of the charge and opportunity of defense,
the commissioner of education may remove any member of a board of
education. Wilful disobedience of any lawful requirement of the
commissioner of education, or a want of due diligence in obeying such
requirement or wilful violation or neglect of duty, is cause for
removal.
 § 2560. Liability of board of education and community school boards in
a city having a population of one million or more inhabitants. 1.
Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of law, general, special or
local, or the limitation contained in the provisions of any city
charter, any duly appointed member of the board of education in a city
having a population of one million or more, the members of each
community school board in such city, the teaching or supervising staff,
officer, or employee of such board and of each such community school
board, member of a committee on special education or subcommittee
thereof or authorized participant in the school volunteer program in
such city shall be entitled to legal representation and indemnification
pursuant to the provisions of, and subject to the conditions, procedures
and limitations contained in section fifty-k of the general municipal
law, except that any judgment or settlement pursuant to this section
shall be payable from the monies of the board of education.
 2. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of law, general, special
or local, or limitations contained in the provision of any city charter,
it shall not be within the power of the board of education or a
community school board in any school district in a city with a
population of one million or more to require a volunteer participating
in any school activities to execute a waiver of responsibility in favor
of that board as a condition, either express or implied, of such
participation. Such waiver would include, but not be limited to, a
release of any party against whom the volunteer may have rights under
any existing provision of law for personal injuries incurred during the
performance of authorized volunteer duties by an authorized participant
in a school volunteer program.
 § 2561. Liability of certain officers and employees of boards of
education in a city having a population of one million or more
inhabitants. If, in order to furnish needy children or minors with
food, shoes, clothing, and other necessities to enable them to attend
school as contemplated by law and to benefit from instruction, the board
of education of a city having a population of one million or more shall
have required, imposed or permitted, the performance of duties by any of
its officers and employees, because of which it became necessary or
expedient for any such officer or employee to act for the board of
education, or to act for or in cooperation with any other agency of
government, federal, state or municipal, then irrespective of the fact
that the authority to require, impose or permit the performance of such
duties may not have been specifically conferred upon said board of
education by provisions of this chapter, each such board of education
shall be liable for and shall assume liability to the extent that it
shall save harmless any such officers or employees for damages arising
out of the negligence of any such officer or employee prior to April
fifteenth, nineteen hundred thirty-seven, while actually engaged in the
performance of such required or permitted duties, provided the officer
or employee at the time was acting within the scope of his duties or
employment.
 § 2562. Presentation of claims against a board of education of a city
having a population of four hundred thousand or more to be pleaded. 1.
No action or special proceeding, for any cause whatever, shall be
prosecuted or maintained against a board of education of a city having a
population of four hundred thousand or more, unless it shall appear by
and as an allegation in the complaint or necessary moving papers that at
least thirty days have elapsed since the demand, claim or claims upon
which such action or special proceeding is founded were presented to the
said board of education for adjustment, and that the officer or body
having the power to adjust or pay said claim has neglected or refused to
make an adjustment or payment thereof for thirty days after such
presentment.
 2. The said board of education may require any person presenting for
settlement an account or claim for any cause whatever against it to be
sworn before it or a committee thereof, or before the claims auditor or
deputy claims auditor, or before any person designated by said board,
touching such account or claim, and when so sworn, to answer orally as
to any facts relative to the justness of such account or claim. A member
of the board, the claims auditor, or any other person designated as
hereinbefore stated, shall have the power to administer an oath to any
person who shall give testimony to the justness of such account or
claim, and for the purpose of securing such testimony may issue
subpoenas for the attendance of witnesses. Wilful false swearing before
the said board of education, a committee thereof, the claims auditor or
deputy claims auditor, or before any person designated as hereinbefore
stated, is perjury and punishable as such.
 § 2563. Meetings of board of education. 1. The annual meeting of a
board of education shall be held on the second Tuesday in May, at four
o'clock in the afternoon, at which meeting the board shall select a
president for the ensuing year, except that the annual meeting of the
board of education of the city school district of the city of New York
shall be held on the first Tuesday in July.
 2. Each of such boards shall also fix the day and hour for holding
regular board meetings which shall be at least as often as once each
month and shall also prescribe a method for calling special meetings of
such board.
 § 2564. Local school board districts. 1. The board of education of
the city school district of the city of New York, by resolution duly
adopted, shall divide the city school district into such number of local
school board districts as such board in its discretion may determine.
The board of education may from time to time alter the boundaries of
such districts, consolidate two or more districts or parts thereof, or
divide any such district or districts as it shall consider necessary.
For the purposes of this section, a school decentralization
demonstration project in existence on April first, nineteen hundred
sixty-eight shall be deemed to be a local school board district.
 2. Such board of education, upon the establishment of such local
school board districts, shall have the power to appoint, or provide for
the election of, and remove at its pleasure, a local school board for
each such local school board district, which shall consist of such
number of members as the board shall determine from time to time.
 3. The board of education, with the approval of the regents, shall
have the power to delegate to such local school boards any or all of its
functions, powers, obligations and duties in connection with the
operation of the schools and programs under its jurisdiction, and may
modify or rescind any function, power, obligation and duty so delegated.
 4. In accordance with rules and regulations to be promulgated by the
board of education, each such local school board shall have the power to
employ a local superintendent of schools upon such terms and conditions
as such local school board shall determine. Such employment shall be by
contract at an annual rate of compensation not in excess of thirty
thousand dollars.
 § 2565. Superintendent of schools, associate superintendents, board of
superintendents. 1. The superintendent or an associate superintendent
of schools of a city in office on June eighth, nineteen hundred
seventeen, shall hold his position for the term for which he was chosen
and until his successor is chosen. A superintendent or associate
superintendent appointed after such date shall hold his position in a
city having a population of two hundred fifty thousand or more for a
period not to exceed four years from the date of his appointment and in
all cities subject to the pleasure of the board of education, except
that in all other cities the superintendent of schools may be appointed
for a term of not to exceed five years, provided that the terms or
provisions of any employment contract between the superintendent and the
board of education relating to an increase in salary, compensation or
other benefits, shall not be based on or tied to the terms of any
contract or collective bargaining agreement that the board of education
has or will enter with the teachers or other employees of the school
district.
 2. A superintendent or an associate superintendent may vacate his
position by filing a written resignation with the board of education.
No person shall be eligible to the position of superintendent of
schools, deputy superintendent of schools, associate superintendent of
schools, assistant superintendent of schools or other superintendent of
schools or member of a board of examiners in a city unless he shall
possess or be entitled to a superintendent's certificate as provided in
section three thousand three of this chapter.
 3. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivisions one and two of this
section, the superintendent of schools of the Rochester city school
district shall serve at the pleasure of the board of education;
provided, however, that such term shall, in no event, exceed a period of
four years.
 § 2566. Powers and duties of superintendent of schools. The
superintendent of schools of a city shall possess, subject to the
by-laws of the board of education, the following powers and be charged
with the following duties:
 1. To be the chief executive officer of such board and the educational
system, and to have a seat on the board of education and the right to
speak on all matters before the board, but not to vote.
 2. To enforce all provisions of law and all rules and regulations
relating to the management of the schools and other educational, social
and recreational activities under the direction of the board of
education.
 3. In a city having a population of one million or more, to exercise
such administrative and ministerial powers of such board as may be
delegated to him by regulation and by-laws of such board in such manner
and with the same force and effect as if such powers were given to him
by the provisions of the education law.
 4. To prepare the content of each course of study authorized by the
board of education. The content of each such course shall be submitted
to the board of education for its approval and, when thus approved, the
superintendent shall cause such courses of study to be used in the
grades, classes and schools for which they are authorized.
 5. To recommend suitable lists of textbooks to be used in the schools.
 6. To have supervision and direction of associate, assistant, district
and other superintendents, directors, supervisors, principals, teachers,
lecturers, medical inspectors, nurses, claims auditors, deputy claims
auditors, attendance officers, janitors and other persons employed in
the management of the schools or the other educational activities of the
city authorized by this chapter and under the direction and management
of the board of education, except that in the city school districts of
the cities of Buffalo, Rochester, and Syracuse to also appoint, within
the amounts budgeted therefor, such associate, assistant and district
superintendents and all other supervising staff who are excluded from
the right to bargain collectively pursuant to article fourteen of the
civil service law; to transfer teachers from one school to another, or
from one grade of the course of study to another grade in such course,
and to report immediately such transfers to said board for its
consideration and action; to report to said board of education
violations of regulations and cases of insubordination, and to suspend
an associate, assistant, district or other superintendent, director,
supervisor, expert, principal, teacher or other employee until the next
regular meeting of the board, when all facts relating to the case shall
be submitted to the board for its consideration and action.
 7. To have supervision and direction over the enforcement and
observance of the courses of study, the examination and promotion of
pupils, and over all other matters pertaining to playgrounds, medical
inspection, recreation and social center work, libraries, lectures and
all other educational activities and interest under the management,
direction and control of the board of education.
 8. To issue such licenses to teachers, principals, directors, school
psychiatrists, school psychologists, school medical inspectors, school
aurists, school psychiatric social workers, school social case workers,
research assistants, teacher-clerks, school clerks, clerical assistants,
industrial or trade helpers in vocational schools, school librarians,
laboratory assistants, placement and investigation assistants, financial
assistants, machine shop assistants, tool boys, and other members of the
teaching and supervising staff as may be required under the by-laws and
regulations of the board of education in cities in which such board
requires its teachers to hold qualifications in addition to or in
advance of or different from, where such qualifications are not provided
by the commissioner, the minimum qualifications required under this
chapter. All such licenses issued prior to the first day of December,
nineteen hundred thirty-four, and all appointments made or hereafter
made pursuant to such licenses are hereby authorized and validated
against any statutory provision, omission, or irregularity, provided the
examination for such license was conducted by the board of examiners in
accordance with the by-laws and regulations of the board of education,
notwithstanding the invalidity of any such by-laws and regulations. All
such licenses issued by the chancellor prior to the effective date of a
chapter of the laws of 1990, entitled "AN ACT to amend the education law
and the administrative code of the city of New York, in relation to
appointment of teaching service personnel by abolishing the board of
examiners in cities having a population of one million or more and to
repeal certain provisions of the education law relating thereto" and all
appointments made or hereafter made pursuant to such licenses are hereby
authorized and validated, notwithstanding any provision of statute or
regulation to the contrary. Nothing in this chapter shall affect the
rights of persons serving pursuant to appropriate licenses issued prior
to the effective date of a chapter of the laws of 1990, entitled "AN ACT
to amend the education law and the administrative code of the city of
New York, in relation to appointment of teaching service personnel by
abolishing the board of examiners in cities having a population of one
million or more and to repeal certain provisions of the education law
relating thereto" or require them to obtain certifications or licenses
not previously required of them.
 9. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of law, the provisions
of subdivision six of this section relating to the transfer of teachers
may be modified by an agreement that is collectively negotiated pursuant
to the provisions of article fourteen of the civil service law.
 § 2567. Protection of rights exercised under licenses issued by a
board of education in a city having a population of one million or more.
No person shall forfeit any right given to him under a license issued by
a board of education in a city having a population of one million or
more, pursuant to this chapter, because of absence while in service in
the armed forces of the United States or in the service of the American
Red Cross. Any person may at any time within six months after his
discharge from service in the armed forces of the United States or the
American Red Cross make application to the license issuing authority by
affidavit setting forth that he or she has been in service in the armed
forces of the United States or the American Red Cross during world war
II and has been discharged from such service and that he desires the
license theretofore issued to him or to her to be reissued as of the
date of such application, and it shall be the duty of the licensing
authority to reinstate such license as of the date on which application
is made.
 § 2568. Superintendent of schools authorized to require medical
examination of certain employees of certain boards of education. The
superintendent of schools of a city having a population of one million
or more shall be empowered to require any person employed by the board
of education of such city to submit to a medical examination by a
physician or school medical inspector of the board, in order to
determine the mental or physical capacity of such person to perform his
duties, whenever it has been recommended in a report in writing that
such examination should be made. Such report to the superintendent may
be made only by a person under whose supervision or direction the person
recommended for such medical examination is employed. The person
required to submit to such medical examination shall be entitled to be
accompanied by a physician or other person of his own choice. The
findings upon such examination shall be reported to the superintendent
of schools and may be referred to and considered for the evaluation of
service of the person examined or for disability retirement.
 § 2569. Appointment of teachers. a. In a city having a population of
one million or more inhabitants, state certification in accordance with
the regulations of the commissioner shall be a prerequisite to
appointment to any teaching or supervisory position. The commissioner,
after consultation with the chancellor, shall identify in the
regulations the state certificates which correspond to licenses utilized
by the city school district of the city of New York. Where the
regulations of the commissioner do not identify a corresponding state
certificate, the minimum education and experience requirements
promulgated by the chancellor in accordance with subdivision two of
section twenty-five hundred ninety-j of this chapter shall be a
prerequisite to appointment to any teaching position in such license. In
addition, placement upon qualifying eligible lists in accordance with
subdivision ten of section twenty-five hundred seventy-three of this
article shall be conditional upon satisfactory performance on (i) an
interview test administered by the chancellor and (ii) a performance
test where required by the chancellor.
 b. For purposes of qualifying teachers for service exclusively within
a school district wherein instruction is given bi-lingually, all
interviews and performance tests provided for by this section shall be
given in English and Spanish or any other appropriate second language
and the applicant at the time of application shall designate the
language of his choice, except that a written composition as determined
by the chancellor under the policies of the city board of education
shall be given in English.
 § 2573. Appointment of assistant, district or other superintendents,
teachers and other employees; their salaries, et cetera. 1. (a) i.
Teachers and all other members of the teaching staff, appointed prior to
July first, two thousand fifteen and authorized by section twenty-five
hundred fifty-four of this article, shall be appointed by the board of
education, upon the recommendation of the superintendent of schools, for
a probationary period of three years, except that in the case of a
teacher who has rendered satisfactory service as a regular substitute
for a period of two years or as a seasonally licensed per session
teacher of swimming in day schools who has served in that capacity for a
period of two years and has been appointed to teach the same subject in
day schools on an annual salary, the probationary period shall be
limited to one year; provided, however, that in the case of a teacher
who has been appointed on tenure in another school district within the
state, the school district where currently employed, or a board of
cooperative educational services, and who was not dismissed from such
district or board as a result of charges brought pursuant to subdivision
one of section three thousand twenty-a of this chapter, the probationary
period shall not exceed two years; provided, however, that in cities
with a population of one million or more, a teacher appointed under a
newly created license, for teachers of reading and of the emotionally
handicapped, to a position which the teacher has held for at least two
years prior to such appointment while serving on tenure in another
license area who was not dismissed as a result of charges brought
pursuant to subdivision one of section three thousand twenty-a of this
chapter, the probationary period shall be one year. The service of a
person appointed to any of such positions may be discontinued at any
time during such probationary period, on the recommendation of the
superintendent of schools, by a majority vote of the board of education.
Each person who is not to be recommended for appointment on tenure shall
be so notified by the superintendent of schools in writing not later
than sixty days immediately preceding the expiration of such person's
probationary period. In city school districts having a population of
four hundred thousand or more, persons with licenses obtained as a
result of examinations announced subsequent to the twenty-second day of
May, nineteen hundred sixty-nine appointed upon conditions that all
announced requirements for the position be fulfilled within a specified
period of time, shall not acquire tenure unless and until such
requirements have been completed within the time specified for the
fulfillment of such requirements, notwithstanding the expiration of any
probationary period. In all other city school districts subject to the
provisions of this article, failure to maintain certification as
required by this article and by the regulations of the commissioner
shall be cause for removal within the meaning of subdivision five of
this section.
 ii. Teachers and all other members of the teaching staff appointed on
or after July first, two thousand fifteen and authorized by section
twenty-five hundred fifty-four of this article, shall be appointed by
the board of education, upon the recommendation of the superintendent of
schools, for a probationary period of four years, except that in the
case of a teacher who has rendered satisfactory service as a regular
substitute for a period of up to two years, or such teacher has rendered
satisfactory service as a seasonally licensed per session teacher of
swimming in day schools who has served in that capacity for a period of
up to two years and has been appointed to teach the same subject in day
schools on an annual salary, the teacher shall be appointed for a
probationary period of a minimum of two years, depending upon the length
of the regular substitute service that shall shorten the length of the
probationary period; provided, however, that in the case of a teacher
who has been appointed on tenure in another school district within the
state, the school district where currently employed, or a board of
cooperative educational services, and who was not dismissed from such
district or board as a result of charges brought pursuant to subdivision
one of section three thousand twenty-a of this chapter, the teacher
shall be appointed for a probationary period of three years; provided
further, however, that in cities with a population of one million or
more, a teacher appointed under a newly created license, for teachers of
reading and of the emotionally handicapped, to a position which the
teacher has held for at least two years prior to such appointment while
serving on tenure in another license area who was not dismissed as a
result of charges brought pursuant to subdivision one of section three
thousand twenty-a of this chapter, the teacher shall be appointed for a
probationary period of two years. The service of a person appointed to
any of such positions may be discontinued at any time during such
probationary period, on the recommendation of the superintendent of
schools, by a majority vote of the board of education. Each person who
is not to be recommended for appointment on tenure shall be so notified
by the superintendent of schools in writing not later than sixty days
immediately preceding the expiration of such person's probationary
period. In all city school districts subject to the provisions of this
article, failure to maintain certification as required by this article
and by the regulations of the commissioner shall be cause for removal
within the meaning of subdivision five of this section.
 (b) i. Administrators, directors, supervisors, principals and all
other members of the supervising staff, except executive directors,
associate, assistant, district and community superintendents and
examiners, appointed prior to July first, two thousand fifteen and
authorized by section twenty-five hundred fifty-four of this article,
shall be appointed by the board of education, upon the recommendation of
the superintendent or chancellor of schools, for a probationary period
of three years. The service of a person appointed to any of such
positions may be discontinued at any time during the probationary period
on the recommendation of the superintendent of schools, by a majority
vote of the board of education.
 ii. Administrators, directors, supervisors, principals and all other
members of the supervising staff, except executive directors, associate,
assistant, district and community superintendents and examiners,
appointed on or after July first, two thousand fifteen and authorized by
section twenty-five hundred fifty-four of this article, shall be
appointed by the board of education, upon the recommendation of the
superintendent or chancellor of schools, for a probationary period of
four years provided that such probationary period may be extended in
accordance with paragraph (b) of subdivision five of this section;
provided, however, that in the case of a principal, administrator,
supervisor, or other member of the supervising staff who has been
appointed on tenure pursuant to this chapter as an administrator within
an authorized administrative tenure area in another school district
within the state, the school district where currently employed, or a
board of cooperative educational services, and who was not dismissed
from such district or board as a result of charges brought pursuant to
subdivision one of section three thousand twenty-a or section three
thousand twenty-b of this chapter, the principal, administrator,
supervisor or other member of the supervising staff shall be appointed
for a probationary period of three years. The service of a person
appointed to any of such positions may be discontinued at any time
during the probationary period on the recommendation of the
superintendent of schools, by a majority vote of the board of education.
 2. The chancellor shall require, in anticipation of the reasonable
needs of the school system, that interviews and performance tests be
conducted for teaching service positions, pursuant to section two
thousand five hundred sixty-nine of this article, so that qualifying
eligible lists may be ready for promulgation as soon as vacancies come
into existence. Where vacancies already exist, and cannot be filled
because eligible lists have been exhausted, the chancellor shall require
interviews and performance tests to be conducted forthwith and shall
have lists available for promulgation within six months from the date of
the administration of the test. Appropriate procedures for filling
supervisory positions shall be established pursuant to regulations
promulgated by the chancellor and qualifying eligible lists shall be
promulgated and thereafter supplemented annually Supervisory positions
shall be filled in accordance with regulations promulgated by the
chancellor; supervisors who are properly assigned or appointed through
such regulations shall be considered appointed in the license area of
the supervisory position. Appointments shall be made from appropriate
eligible lists in accordance with regulations of the chancellor to fill
all existing vacancies not later than six months from the date of the
existence of such vacancy, except that the board of education may defer
such appointments until the opening of school following the expiration
of such six month period.
 3. Associate superintendents, examiners and all other employees
authorized by section twenty-five hundred fifty-four of this article,
except as otherwise provided in subdivision one of this section, shall
be appointed by the board of education except that in the city school
districts of the cities of Buffalo, Rochester, and Syracuse, the
associate, assistant and district superintendents and all other
supervising staff who are excluded from the right to bargain
collectively pursuant to article fourteen of the civil service law shall
be appointed, within amounts budgeted therefor, by the superintendent of
such city school district. In a city having a population of one million
or more, such appointments shall be made on nomination of the
superintendent of schools. Notwithstanding any other provision in this
chapter to the contrary, whenever an associate superintendent of schools
in the employ of the board of education in a city having a population of
one million or more fails of reappointment, said person shall be
immediately appointed an assistant superintendent of schools with
permanent appointment as said term permanent appointment is defined in
subdivisions four, five and six of this section. The salary of such
assistant superintendent shall be less than the salary of an associate
superintendent, but said differential in salary shall not exceed ten per
centum of the annual salary of an associate superintendent of schools.
When, however, an associate superintendent of schools who fails of
reappointment has to his credit thirty or more years of city service
including ten or more years of service as such associate superintendent
of schools, he shall suffer no reduction of salary or of pension
prospects while serving as such assistant superintendent of schools.
 4. Clerks, draftsmen, inspectors, chemists, tabulating machine
operators, secretaries, stenographers, copyists, statisticians,
janitors, custodians, custodian-engineers, and all other administrative
employees of a board of education, unless otherwise provided in this
chapter, shall be appointed for a probationary period provided in the
civil service law and regulations based thereon. The service of a person
appointed to any of such positions may be discontinued by the board of
education at any time during such probationary period. Such persons who
have served the full probationary period shall hold their respective
positions during good behavior and efficient and competent service, and
shall not be removed except for cause after a hearing by the affirmative
vote of a majority of the board.
 5. (a) At the expiration of the probationary term of any persons
appointed for such term prior to July first, two thousand fifteen, the
superintendent of schools shall make a written report to the board of
education recommending for permanent appointment those persons who have
been found competent, efficient and satisfactory. Such persons and all
others employed in the teaching, service of the schools of a city, who
have served the full probationary period, shall hold their respective
positions during good behavior and efficient and competent service, and
shall not be removable except for cause after a hearing as provided by
section three thousand twenty-a of this chapter.
 (b) At the expiration of the probationary term of any persons
appointed for such term on or after July first, two thousand fifteen,
the superintendent of schools shall make a written report to the board
of education recommending for permanent appointment those persons who
have been found competent, efficient and satisfactory. Any person who
has acquired tenure shall, upon such person's effective tenure date,
hold their position during good behavior and efficient and competent
service, and shall not be removable except for cause after a hearing as
provided by section three thousand twenty and section three thousand
twenty-a of this chapter. Failure to maintain certification as required
by this chapter and the regulations of the commissioner shall constitute
cause for removal.
 6. (a) In a city having a population of four hundred thousand or more,
at the expiration of the probationary term of any persons appointed for
such term prior to July first, two thousand fifteen, the superintendent
of schools shall make a written report to the board of education
recommending for permanent appointment those persons who have been found
satisfactory, and such board of education shall immediately thereafter
issue to such persons permanent certificates of appointment. Such
persons and all others employed in the teaching service of the schools
of such city, who have served the full probationary period shall receive
permanent certificates to teach issued to them by the certificating
authority, except as otherwise provided in subdivision ten-a of this
section, and shall hold their respective positions during good behavior
and satisfactory teaching service, and shall not be removable except for
cause after a hearing as provided by section three thousand twenty-a of
this chapter.
 (b) At the expiration of the probationary term of any persons
appointed for such term on or after July first, two thousand fifteen,
the superintendent of schools shall make a written report to the board
of education recommending for permanent appointment those persons who
have been found competent, efficient and satisfactory. Any person who
has acquired tenure shall, upon such person's effective tenure date,
hold their position during good behavior and efficient and competent
service, and shall not be removable except for cause after a hearing as
provided by section three thousand twenty and section three thousand
twenty-a of this chapter. Failure to maintain certification as required
by this chapter and the regulations of the commissioner shall constitute
cause for removal.
 8. No charges under this section shall be brought more than three
years after the occurrence of the alleged incompetency or misconduct
except where the charge is of misconduct which resulted in conviction
for a crime.
 9. No principal, supervisor, director, or teacher shall be appointed
to the teaching force of a city who does not possess qualifications
required under this chapter and under the regulations prescribed by the
commissioner of education for the persons employed in such positions in
the schools of the cities of the state, but a board of education may
prescribe additional or higher qualifications for the persons employed
in any of such positions.
 10. (a) In a city having a population of one million or more,
recommendations for appointment to the teaching service shall be from
the first three persons chosen by random selection from the qualifying
eligible lists prepared by the chancellor. Competitive eligible lists in
existence at the time of enactment of this subdivision shall not be
merged and any such lists shall be exhausted or have expired before
nominations are made from a qualifying list of a subsequent date
promulgated hereunder. Qualifying eligible lists for supervisory
positions shall be merged with any subsequently promulgated lists in the
same license area so that there shall be one continuing non-expiring
eligible list for each license area. No competitive eligible list shall
remain in force for a longer period than four years, nor have a life of
less than three years. No competitive eligible list now in force shall
terminate any sooner than four years from the date on which it was
promulgated. The board of education, on the recommendation of the
chancellor shall designate, subject to the other provisions of this
chapter, the kind and grades of licenses which shall be required for
service as principal, branch principal, director, supervisor or teacher
of a special branch, head of department, assistant, school psychiatrist,
school psychologist, school medical inspector, school social worker,
school social caseworker, school secretary, industrial or trade helper
in vocational schools, school librarian, laboratory assistant, or any
other position of the teaching staff together with the academic and
professional qualifications required for each kind or grade of license.
No person required to have a license under the provisions of this
chapter in order to be employed in a position who does not have such
license shall have any claim for salary, except that a person who has
been assigned to teach in a subject or field not specifically covered in
his license but on the same rank or level of service shall be entitled
to his salary.
 (b) Qualifying eligible lists for teaching and supervisory positions
shall consist of the names of all persons who have met the eligibility
requirements for appointment as defined by the chancellor pursuant to
sections two thousand five hundred ninety-j and two thousand five
hundred sixty-nine of this chapter. Where the regulations of the
commissioner do not identify a state certificate that corresponds to a
license utilized by the city school district, the chancellor shall
develop and administer an examination appropriate to the license,
provided the development of such examination and the passing score are
based upon appropriate validity studies conducted in accordance with
professional standards of measurement. For teaching service positions,
competitive eligible lists in existence on the effective date of this
paragraph shall not be merged. Subsequently promulgated qualifying
eligible lists in the same license area shall be merged so that there
shall be one qualifying eligible list for each license area. No
candidate shall remain on the qualifying eligible list longer than seven
years from the date the candidate is placed on the qualifying eligible
list. This paragraph does not affect the examinations for teaching or
supervisory service positions announced by the board of examiners prior
to the effective date of this paragraph.
 (i) Each year, the chancellor shall direct the division of personnel
to select by random selection from among candidates who are available
for assignment and who are on the qualifying eligible lists for teaching
positions in existence on such date for each license area, a list of
prospective appointees deemed to be sufficient to meet the needs of the
school system for the next school year. The random selection to
establish the initial list of prospective appointees shall be held prior
to April first, nineteen hundred ninety-one. In any instance where the
list of prospective appointees is insufficient for the twelve month
period, the chancellor shall direct the division of personnel to select
by random selection additional candidates who are available for
assignment and who are on qualifying eligible lists in order to compile
a supplementary list of prospective appointees.
 (ii) Candidates selected by a random selection system and whose names
appear on the list of prospective appointees for teaching positions
shall be assigned to community districts and to divisions under the
jurisdiction of the chancellor in the order in which their names were
selected by such system provided that each appointment by the chancellor
or community board as appropriate shall be made from among the first
three persons so assigned.
 (iii) Lists of prospective appointees for teaching positions shall not
be merged and a list shall be exhausted or have expired before
assignments are made from a list of prospective appointees selected by a
random selection procedure of subsequent date. No candidate shall remain
on the list of prospective appointees longer than seven years from the
date that the candidate was placed on the qualifying eligible list.
 10-a. In the city school district of the city of Buffalo, members of
the teaching and supervising staff appointed on or after the effective
date of this subdivision shall be required to hold a state teaching
certificate, but shall not be required to hold a license issued by the
Buffalo city school district. Persons appointed to the teaching and
supervising staff prior to such effective date may continue to serve
under a license issued by such city school district and the board of
education shall be authorized to issue permanent licenses and permanent
certificates of appointment after such effective date to such persons
who fulfill all announced requirements for the position that were
imposed at the time of appointment. Nothing in this chapter shall affect
the rights of persons serving pursuant to appropriate licenses issued
prior to the effective date of this subdivision or require such persons
to obtain certifications or licenses not previously required of them.
 11. In a city have a population of one million or more, the board of
education, subject to the approval of the commissioner of education,
shall have power to authorize the superintendent of schools to assign
any teacher employed to teach any subject or subjects other than any
specific subject for which such teacher is licensed. No such assignment
shall be made unless the superintendent of schools shall have certified
that such teacher is competent to teach the assigned subject or
subjects. The superintendent of schools with the approval of the board
of education, shall have power to make rules and regulations in relation
to ascertainment of competency of teachers to teach such assigned
subject or subjects. The assignment of a teacher to teach any such
assigned subject shall not operate to change the rank or level of such
teacher from that which he or she occupied prior to such assignment.
 12. The salaries of all members of the supervising and teaching force
and of all employees and for all positions authorized under section
twenty-five hundred four of this article shall continue to be not lower
than such salaries were on June eighth, nineteen hundred seventeen.
Rules and regulations shall be adopted governing excusing of absences
and for the granting of leaves of absence either with or without pay.
 13. Teachers appointed in the schools or classes maintained in the
institutions controlled by the department of correction of the city of
New York shall be appointed by the commissioner of correction of such
city upon the nomination of the superintendent of schools of such city
and shall be licensed by the board of examiners of the board of
education of such city.
 15. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section no period in
any school year for which there is no required service and/or for which
no compensation is provided shall in any event constitute a break or
suspension of probationary period or continuity of tenure rights of any
of the persons hereinabove described.
 16. In the city school district of the city of New York, the board of
education shall ascertain prior to August first, nineteen hundred sixty,
and annually thereafter the number of appointments which will be
required for the duration of not less than a term of the ensuing school
year by reason of leaves of absence granted to members of the teaching
staff serving on tenure. The board shall thereupon establish and make
appointments to positions of replacement teachers in a number which,
including any such teachers already serving as a result of earlier
appointment, shall be at least equal, if possible, and, if not, as
nearly as possible, to two-thirds of the minimum number of such teachers
expected to be absent on leave at any one time. Such positions shall
constitute a pool from which the board shall assign teachers to replace
the teachers who are absent on leave. Appointments to such positions of
replacement teachers shall be made from the appropriate eligible lists
for the positions for which such replacement teachers will be required
as determined by the board. Such positions of replacement teachers shall
be in all respects permanent positions in the school system and persons
duly appointed by the board to such positions shall be entitled to the
rights of tenure and retirement accruing to persons serving in other
permanent teaching positions, except that no replacement teacher shall
be entitled to the special limitation of the probationary period to one
year provided for certain teachers by subdivision one of this section.
Upon acceptance of appointment as replacement teacher, the name of each
such appointee shall be placed on a preferred eligible list as a
candidate for appointment to any permanent teaching position for which
he holds a valid license and such candidates shall be entitled to
appointment from such preferred eligible list in order of their
placement on such list. At any time when the total number of positions
of replacement teacher in such pool exceeds the total number of teachers
who will be absent on leave for the ensuing term of school, the board
may abolish positions in such pool which are in excess of the number of
teachers to be absent on leave as aforesaid, or may use replacement
teachers in such pool instead of substitute teachers to replace teachers
who are absent for shorter periods than one term. Whenever a particular
replacement teacher cannot be used to replace any teacher who is absent
on leave for a full term, he may similarly be used to replace teachers
who are absent for shorter periods. Nothing herein contained shall be
construed as preventing the appointment of regular substitute teachers
to replace teachers absent on leave when no persons holding positions
created pursuant to this subdivision are available for such replacement.
 17. In the city school district of the city of Buffalo, the board of
education shall, within sixty days of the effective date of this
subdivision and annually prior to August first of each year thereafter,
ascertain the number of appointments which will be required for the
duration of not less than a term of the ensuing school year by reason of
leaves of absence granted to members of the teaching staff serving on
tenure. The board shall thereupon establish and make appointments to
positions of replacement teachers in a number which, including any such
teachers already serving as a result of earlier appointment, shall be
equal, if possible, or as nearly as possible, to two-thirds of the
minimum number of such teachers expected to be absent on leave at any
one time. Such positions shall constitute a pool from which the board
shall assign teachers to replace the teachers who are absent on leave.
Such positions of replacement teachers shall be in all respects
permanent positions in the school system and persons duly appointed by
the board to such positions shall be entitled to the rights of tenure
and retirement accruing to persons serving in other permanent teaching
positions, except that no replacement teacher shall be entitled to the
special limitation of the probationary period to one year provided for
certain teachers by subdivision one of this section. Upon acceptance of
appointment as replacement teacher, the name of each such appointee
shall be placed on a preferred eligible list as a candidate for
appointment to any permanent teaching position for which he or she holds
a valid license and such candidates shall be entitled to appointment
from such preferred eligible list in order of their placement on such
list. At any time when the total number of positions of replacement
teacher in such pool exceeds the total number of teachers who will be
absent on leave for the ensuing term of school, the board may abolish
positions in such pool which are in excess of the number of teachers to
be absent on leave as aforesaid, or may use replacement teachers in such
pool instead of substitute teachers to replace teachers who are absent
for shorter periods than one term. Whenever a particular replacement
teacher cannot be used to replace any teacher who is absent on leave for
a full term, he or she may similarly be used to replace teachers who are
absent for shorter periods. Nothing herein contained shall be construed
as preventing the appointment of regular substitute teachers to replace
teachers absent on leave when no persons holding positions created
pursuant to this subdivision are available for such replacement.
 § 2574. Assistant superintendents in a city having a population of one
million or more. The title district superintendent used in any law to
designate a district superintendent in the employ of the board of
education of a city having a population of one million or more is hereby
changed to assistant superintendent. The persons affected by this
section shall, under such new title, continue to have the pension
rights, salary rights, tenure rights, and all other rights they had
under the title district superintendent.
 § 2575. Retirement of employees of board of education. 1. (a) The
board of education of a city school district of a city having a
population of one hundred thousand or more shall have power to establish
a retirement system for all civil employees permanently employed by said
board other than superintendents and teachers who may now be retired
under the provisions of other retirement laws. In any such city in which
there is a bureau of compulsory education, school census, and child
welfare established under the provisions of this chapter, all persons,
except for attendance teachers and specially certificated attendance
officers who are first employed by a board of education of a city having
a population of one million or more, beginning on the first day of
September, nineteen hundred sixty-eight, and further except for the
director of attendance, assistant director of attendance, chief
attendance officer, division supervising attendance officer, and
district supervising attendance officer, supervisors of school social
workers, who were first employed by a board of education of a city
having a population of one million or more, beginning on the first day
of September nineteen hundred sixty-nine, of which such a bureau of
compulsory education, school census, and child welfare consists shall be
members of the retirement system created in accordance with the
provisions of this section, provided that any such person who on May
fourth, nineteen hundred twenty-six, was a member of another retirement
system in such city may continue such membership so long as he or she
holds an office or position in such bureau. Transfer of membership of
any such persons from another retirement system to a retirement system
as herein provided shall be made in accordance with the provisions of
section fifty-nine of the civil service law. The board of education of
such city shall adopt appropriate rules and regulations for the
government, management and control of the retirement of said employees;
except that in regard to the actions of the governing board of a
retirement system governed by such rules and regulations, the
concurrence of one employee representative and one non-employee
representative shall be necessary for an act of such board, and there
shall be no fewer than two employee representatives of such board.
Before they become effective such rules and regulations must be approved
by the board of estimate, or the board of estimate and apportionment in
a city having such body, and in a city not having such body by the
common council or such other officers or bodies as have the management
and control of financial affairs similar to that exercised by such board
of estimate or board of estimate and apportionment. The board of
estimate or the board of estimate and apportionment in a city having
such body, and in other cities the officers or bodies performing the
functions similar to those of a board of estimate or a board of estimate
and apportionment shall appropriate annually the sum necessary to pay
the expenses of the administration of this section, except that in the
city of New York such appropriations shall be made pursuant to chapter
six of the New York city charter, and also to pay such pensions to the
employees herein described as they shall be entitled to receive annually
under the rules and regulations prescribed by the board of education and
approved by the said board of estimate or board of estimate and
apportionment or other authorities.
 (b) (1) The rules and regulations prescribed by the board of education
and approved by the board of estimate or the board of estimate and
apportionment or other authorities named herein shall provide for the
annual payment of a pension which shall be a per centum of the average
annual personal compensation of an employee for the five years of
service immediately preceding his retirement, except as otherwise
provided in subparagraph two of this paragraph (b).
 (2) Such rules and regulations so prescribed and approved with respect
to any such retirement system established in the city school district of
a city having a population of one million or more may provide for the
annual payment of a pension which shall be a per centum of the
compensation of an employee during any period designated in such rules
and regulations; provided, however, that such period shall in no event
be less than one year or more than five years.
 2. In a city having a population of one million or more and having a
teachers' retirement board, changes, alterations, amendments or
modifications in the rules and regulations established for the
administration of this section shall be adopted as follows:
 The board of education of said city may adopt and shall submit such
changes, alterations, amendments or modifications, hereinafter in this
subdivision referred to as changes, to said teachers' retirement board
for approval. Said teachers' retirement board shall within thirty days
after the submission to it of such changes transmit to said board of
education a statement in writing setting forth which of such changes it
approves and which it disapproves, if any, and the reasons for such
disapproval. If said teachers' retirement board shall approve of all of
such changes, then such changes shall immediately become effective and
in full force and operation.
 If said teachers' retirement board shall disapprove of all or any of
such changes and if said board of education and said teachers'
retirement board within thirty days thereafter shall fail to agree upon
changes in place of the changes so disapproved, then the changes shall
be submitted by said board of education within ten days after the lapse
of said thirty days to the commissioner of education who shall have full
power to approve, alter or modify the changes disapproved by said
teachers' retirement board, and the action of the commissioner of
education shall be final, and thereupon the changes approved by said
teachers' retirement board and the changes as approved, altered or
modified by the commissioner of education shall immediately become
effective and in full force and operation.
 Should said teachers' retirement board fail either to approve or to
disapprove all or any of such changes submitted to it as herein
provided, then such changes not approved or not disapproved shall at the
expiration of the thirty days immediately following their submission to
said teachers' retirement board be deemed to have been approved by said
teachers' retirement board and such changes shall immediately become
effective and in full force and operation.
 Said teachers' retirement board and the trustees of any variable
annuity funds created by said rules and regulations may negotiate an
agreement whereby said variable annuity funds are commonly invested with
the variable annuity funds of said teachers' retirement board. In such
event, final authority for investing such funds shall rest with the
teachers' retirement board for the period of such agreement. Such
agreement shall be for a period not to exceed five years but may be
renewed.
 3. Notwithstanding any provision of this section or any other
provision of law, in a city having a population of one million or more
the board of education is authorized to adopt a resolution amending the
provisions governing any retirement system adopted pursuant to or
subject to the provisions of this section to the extent necessary to put
into effect a pensions-providing-for-increased-take-home-pay plan
analogous to that authorized by a chapter of the laws of nineteen
hundred sixty, entitled "An act to amend the administrative code of the
city of New York, in relation to authorizing the addition of
pensions-providing-for-increased-take-home-pay and death benefits with
respect to the New York city employees' retirement system." Such
resolution of the board of education, however, shall not take effect
until and unless it is approved by the board of estimate of such city.
 4. Notwithstanding any provision of this section or any other
provision of law, in a city having a population of one million or more
the board of education is authorized to adopt a resolution amending the
provisions governing any retirement system adopted pursuant to or
subject to the provisions of this section to the extent necessary to put
into effect a pensions-providing-for-increased-take-home-pay plan
analogous to that authorized by a chapter of the laws of nineteen
hundred sixty-two, entitled "An act to amend the administrative code of
the city of New York, in relation to authorizing pensions-providing-forincreased-take-home-pay and death benefits with respect to the New York
city employees' retirement system." Such resolution of the board of
education, however, shall not take effect until and unless it is
approved by the board of estimate of such city.
 5. Notwithstanding any provision of this section or any other
provision of law, in a city having a population of one million or more
the board of education is authorized to adopt a resolution amending the
provisions governing any retirement system adopted pursuant to or
subject to the provisions of this section to the extent necessary to put
into effect a pensions-providing-for-increased-take-home-pay plan for
the fiscal year nineteen hundred sixty-three--nineteen hundred
sixty-four analogous to that authorized for the fiscal year nineteen
hundred sixty-two--nineteen hundred sixty-three by chapter seven hundred
eighty-seven of the laws of nineteen hundred sixty-two. Such resolution
of the board of education, however, shall not take effect until and
unless it is approved by the mayor of such city.
 6. Notwithstanding any provision of this section or any other
provision of law, in a city having a population of one million or more,
the board of education is authorized to adopt a resolution amending the
provisions governing any retirement system adopted pursuant to or
subject to the provisions of this section to the extent necessary to put
into effect a pensions-providing-for-increased-take-home-pay plan for
the fiscal year nineteen hundred sixty-four--nineteen hundred sixty-five
analogous to that authorized for the fiscal year nineteen hundred
sixty-three--nineteen hundred sixty-four by chapter five hundred
seventeen of the laws of nineteen hundred sixty-three. Such resolution
of the board of education, however, shall not take effect until and
unless it is approved by the mayor of such city.
 7. Notwithstanding any provision of this section or any other
provision of law, in a city having a population of one million or more,
the board of education is authorized to adopt a resolution amending the
provisions governing any retirement system adopted pursuant to or
subject to the provisions of this section to the extent necessary to put
into effect a pensions-providing-for-increased-take-home-pay plan for
the fiscal year nineteen hundred sixty-five--nineteen hundred sixty-six
analogous to that authorized for the fiscal year nineteen hundred
sixty-two--nineteen hundred sixty-three by chapter seven hundred
eighty-nine of the laws of nineteen hundred sixty-two. Such resolution
of the board of education, however, shall not take effect until and
unless it is approved by the mayor of such city.
 8. Notwithstanding any provision of this section or any other
provision of law, in a city having a population of one million or more,
the board of education is authorized to adopt a resolution amending the
provisions governing any retirement system adopted pursuant to or
subject to the provisions of this section to the extent necessary to put
into effect a pensions-providing-for-increased-take-home-pay plan for
the fiscal year nineteen hundred sixty-six--nineteen hundred sixty-seven
analogous to that authorized for the fiscal year nineteen hundred
sixty-two--nineteen hundred sixty-three by chapter seven hundred
eighty-nine of the laws of nineteen hundred sixty-two. Such resolution
of the board of education, however, shall not take effect until and
unless it is approved by the mayor of such city.
 9. Notwithstanding any provision of this section or any other
provision of law, in a city having a population of one million or more,
the board of education is authorized to adopt a resolution amending the
provisions governing any retirement system adopted pursuant to or
subject to the provisions of this section to the extent necessary to put
into effect a pensions-providing-for-increased-take-home-pay plan for
the fiscal year nineteen hundred sixty-seven-nineteen hundred
sixty-eight analogous to that authorized for the fiscal year nineteen
hundred sixty-two-nineteen hundred sixty-three by chapter seven hundred
eighty-nine of the laws of nineteen hundred sixty-two. Such resolution
of the board of education, however, shall not take effect until and
unless it is approved by the mayor of such city.
 10. Notwithstanding any provision of this section or any other
provision of law, in a city having a population of one million or more,
the board of education is authorized to adopt a resolution amending the
provisions governing any retirement system adopted pursuant to or
subject to the provisions of this section to the extent necessary to put
into effect a pension-providing-for-increased-take-home-pay plan, in
addition to the plan authorized by subdivision nine of this section, for
members who are employees of the board of education in the titles of
attendance teacher, attendance officer, attendance teacher (Spanish
speaking), auxiliary attendance teacher, or auxiliary attendance
officer, for the period September first, nineteen hundred sixty-seven
through June thirtieth, nineteen hundred sixty-eight, analogous to that
authorized for the fiscal year nineteen hundred sixty-two--nineteen
hundred sixty-three by chapter seven hundred eighty-nine of the laws of
nineteen hundred sixty-two, provided, however, that the reduced rate of
contribution factor to be used on computing the reduction provided for
in the resolution authorized by this subdivision in the contributions of
such members may be designated by the board of education as three per
centum. Such resolution may contain provisions for a period of
retroactive applicability analogous to those contained in paragraph
thirteen of subdivision j of section B3--36.1 of the administrative code
of the city of New York, as such section was added by chapter seven
hundred eighty-seven of the laws of nineteen hundred sixty-two. Such
resolution may also provide that the amount of the reduction provided
for in the resolution in the contributions of any members to whom such
resolution applies, attributable to the period of retroactive
applicability of such resolution shall be refunded by the system without
interest. Such resolution of the board of education, however, shall not
take effect until and unless it is approved by the mayor of such city.
 11. Notwithstanding any provision of this section or any other
provision of law, in a city having a population of one million or more,
the board of education is authorized to adopt a resolution amending the
provisions governing any retirement system adopted pursuant to or
subject to the provisions of this section to the extent necessary to put
into effect a pensions-providing-for-increased-take-home-pay plan for
the fiscal year nineteen hundred sixty-eight--nineteen hundred
sixty-nine analogous to that authorized for the fiscal year nineteen
hundred sixty-two--nineteen hundred sixty-three by chapter seven hundred
eighty-nine of the laws of nineteen hundred sixty-two, provided,
however, that
 (1) the reduced rate of contribution factor to be used in computing
the reduction in contributions of members who are employees of the board
of education in the titles of attendance teacher, attendance officer,
attendance teacher (spanish speaking), auxiliary attendance teacher, may
be designated by the board of education as eight per centum, and
provided further, however, that
 (2) the reduced rate of contribution factor to be used in computing
the reductions of any member who is eligible for the benefits analogous
to the career pension plan of the New York city employees' retirement
system, if a bill entitled "An act to amend the administrative code of
the city of New York and the military law, in relation to providing
additional rights, privileges, and benefits for members of the New York
city employees' retirement system and establishing an optional career
pension plan for certain of such members" is enacted into law, and if
the board of education adopts a resolution amending the provisions
governing any retirement system adopted pursuant to or subject to the
provisions of this section to provide a plan analogous to such career
pension plan, regardless of whether such member elects the benefits of
such analogous plan, may be designated by the board of education as four
per centum. Such resolution of the board of education, however, shall
not take effect until and unless it is approved by the mayor of such
city.
 12. Notwithstanding any provisions of this section or any other
provision of law, in a city having a population of one million or more,
the board of education is authorized to adopt a resolution amending the
provisions governing any retirement system adopted pursuant to or
subject to the provisions of this section to the extent necessary to put
into effect a pensions-providing-for-increased-take-home-pay plan for
the fiscal year nineteen hundred sixty-nine--nineteen hundred seventy
analogous to that authorized for the fiscal year nineteen hundred
sixty-two--nineteen hundred sixty-three by chapter seven hundred
eighty-nine of the laws of nineteen hundred sixty-two, provided,
however, that
 (1) the reduced-rate-of-contribution factor to be used in computing
the reduction in contributions of members who are employees of the board
of education in the titles of attendance teacher, attendance officer,
attendance teacher (spanish speaking), auxiliary attendance teacher, may
be designated by the board of education as eight percentum, and provided
further, however, that
 (2) the reduced-rate-of-contribution factor to be used in computing
the reductions of any member who is a career pension plan member or who
is eligible to elect to become a career pension plan member under the
provisions governing any retirement system adopted pursuant to or
subject to the provisions of this section, regardless of whether such
member makes such election, may be designated by the board of education
as four percentum, and provided further, however, that
 (3) the reduced-rate-of-contribution factor to be used in computing
the reductions of any member other than a member mentioned in paragraphs
one and two of this subdivision twelve may be designated by the board of
education as five per centum, and provided further, however, that
 (4) such resolution of the board of education shall not take effect
until and unless it is approved by the mayor of such city.
 13. Notwithstanding any provisions of this section or any other
provision of law to the contrary, in a city having a population of one
million or more, the board of education is authorized to adopt a
resolution amending the provisions governing any retirement system
adopted pursuant to or subject to the provisions of this section to the
extent necessary to put into effect a pensions-providing-for-increasedtake-home-pay plan for the fiscal year nineteen hundred
seventy--nineteen hundred seventy-one analogous to that authorized for
the fiscal year nineteen hundred sixty-two--nineteen hundred sixty-three
by chapter seven hundred eighty-nine of the laws of nineteen hundred
sixty-two, provided, however, that
 (1) the reduced-rate-of-contribution factor to be used in computing
the reductions of any member who is a career pension plan member or who
is eligible to elect to become a career pension plan member under the
provisions governing any retirement system adopted pursuant to or
subject to the provisions of this section, regardless of whether such
member makes such election, may be designated by the board of education
as four percentum, and provided further, however, that
 (2) the reduced-rate-of-contribution factor to be used in computing
the reductions of any member other than a member mentioned in paragraph
one of this subdivision thirteen may be designated by the board of
education as five per centum, and provided further, however, that
 (3) such resolution of the board of education shall not take effect
until and unless it is approved by the mayor of such city.
 14. (1) In the event that:
 (a) a bill entitled "An act to amend the administrative code of the
city of New York and chapter eight hundred seventeen of the laws of
nineteen hundred sixty-nine, entitled, 'An act to amend the
administrative code of the city of New York, in relation to providing
additional rights, privileges and benefits for members of the New York
city employees' retirement system who are career pension plan members or
fifty-five-year-increased-service-fraction members, and for certain
beneficiaries of such system', in relation to establishing a new career
pension plan for certain members of the New York city employees'
retirement system" is enacted into law; and
 (b) The provisions which govern a retirement system established
pursuant to this section with respect to the board of education of a
city having a population of one million or more and which were adopted
pursuant or subject to this section are amended pursuant or subject to
this section so that such provisions include a retirement plan analogous
to that set forth in such bill; no plan for pensions-providing-forincreased-take-home-pay shall be adopted for the fiscal year nineteen
hundred seventy-one--nineteen hundred seventy-two with respect to the
members of such retirement system.
 (2) In the event that such bill referred to in paragraph one of this
subdivision fourteen is not enacted into law, such board of education
referred to in paragraph one of this subdivision fourteen, is
authorized, notwithstanding any provision of this section or any other
provision of law to the contrary, to adopt a resolution amending the
provisions governing such retirement system adopted pursuant or subject
to the provisions of this section to the extent necessary to put into
effect a pensions-providing-for-increased-take-home-pay plan for the
fiscal year nineteen hundred seventy-one--nineteen hundred seventy-two
analogous to that authorized for the fiscal year nineteen hundred
sixty-two--nineteen hundred sixty-three by chapter seven hundred
eighty-nine of the laws of nineteen hundred sixty-two, provided,
however, that
 (a) the reduced-rate-of-contribution factor to be used in computing
the reduction in contributions of members under such plan may be
designated by the board of education to be four per centum, and provided
further, however, that
 (b) such resolution of the board of education shall not take effect
unless and until it is approved by the mayor of such city.
 15. (1) In the event that:
 (a) a bill entitled "An act to amend the administrative code of the
city of New York and chapter eight hundred seventeen of the laws of
nineteen hundred sixty-nine, entitled, 'An act to amend the
administrative code of the city of New York, in relation to providing
additional rights, privileges and benefits for members of the New York
city employees' retirement system who are career pension plan members or
fifty-five-year-increased-service-fraction members, and for certain
beneficiaries of such system', in relation to establishing a new career
pension plan for certain members of the New York city employees'
retirement system" is enacted into law; and
 (b) the provisions which govern a retirement system established
pursuant to this section with respect to the board of education of a
city having a population of one million or more and which were adopted
pursuant or subject to this section are amended pursuant or subject to
this section so that such provisions include a retirement plan analogous
to that set forth in such bill;
no plan for pensions-providing-for-increased-take-home-pay shall be
adopted for the fiscal year nineteen hundred seventy-two--nineteen
hundred seventy-three with respect to the members of such retirement
system.
 (2) In the event that such bill referred to in paragraph one of this
subdivision fifteen is not enacted into law, such board of education
referred to in paragraph one of this subdivision fifteen, is authorized,
notwithstanding any provision of this section or any other provision of
law to the contrary, to adopt a resolution amending the provisions
governing such retirement system adopted pursuant or subject to the
provisions of this section to the extent necessary to put into effect a
pensions-providing-for-increased-take-home-pay plan for the fiscal year
nineteen hundred seventy-two--nineteen hundred seventy-three analogous
to that authorized for the fiscal year nineteen hundred
sixty-two--nineteen hundred sixty-three by chapter seven hundred
eighty-nine of the laws of nineteen hundred sixty-two, provided,
however, that
 (a) the reduced-rate-of-contribution factor to be used in computing
the reduction in contributions of members under such plan may be
designated by the board of education to be four per centum, and provided
further, however, that
 (b) such resolution of the board of education shall not take effect
unless and until it is approved by the mayor of such city.
 16. (a) As used in this subdivision, the following terms shall mean
and include:
 (1) "Board of education". The board of education of a city.
 (2) "City". A city having a population of one million or more.
 (3) "Rules and regulations". The rules and regulations for the
government, management and control of the retirement system adopted
pursuant to this section.
 (4) "Retirement system". The board of education retirement system
established pursuant to the provisions of this section in a city.
 (5) (i) "Normal contribution for balance sheet liability purposes".
The hypothetical amount which the normal contribution payable in each
city fiscal year occurring during the period beginning on July first,
nineteen hundred seventy-four and ending on June thirtieth, nineteen
hundred eighty would have equalled if such normal contribution had been
required by law to be paid to the contingent reserve fund in the city
fiscal year in which the obligation to make such normal contribution
accrued and such normal contribution had been required by law to be
determined in the manner provided for in items (ii), (iii) and (iv) of
this subparagraph.
 (ii) Upon the basis of the mortality and other tables effective under
the rules and regulations as of July first, nineteen hundred
seventy-seven and interest at the rate of five and one-half per centum
per annum, the actuary shall determine, as of June thirtieth next
preceding each such fiscal year for which such normal contribution is
being determined (hereinafter referred to as the "subject fiscal year")
the amount of the then total liability for all benefits provided in the
rules and regulations, in articles eleven and fourteen of the retirement
and social security law and in any other law prescribing benefits
payable by the retirement system on account of all then members and
beneficiaries, exluding the then liability on account of future annual
contributions, for balance sheet liability purposes, on account of
reserves-for-increased-take-home-pay (as defined in subparagraph eight
of this paragraph), if any, and the then liability for benefits
attributable to the annuity savings fund and to the variable annuity
savings fund.
 (iii) The hypothetical normal rate of contribution with respect to the
subject fiscal year shall be the rate per centum obtained:
 (A) by adding together:
 (1) the present value of all then required future unfunded accrued
liability contributions for balance sheet liability purposes (as defined
in subparagraph six of this paragraph); and
 (2) the present value of all then required future annual
contributions, for balance sheet liability purposes, on account of
amortization of losses on dispositions of certain securities within the
meaning of subdivision six of section seven of the rules and regulations
(as defined in subparagraph seven of this paragraph); and
 (3) the present value of future member contributions of members
subject to article fourteen of the retirement and social security law;
and
 (4) the amount obtained by adding together the total funds on hand
(excluding therefrom the then amount in the annuity savings fund and in
the variable annuity savings fund) and the balance sheet liability as of
such June thirtieth next preceding the subject fiscal year; and
 (B) by subtracting from the amount of the total liability determined
pursuant to item (ii) of this subparagraph the sum resulting from the
addition prescribed by sub-item (A) of this item; and
 (C) by dividing the remainder resulting from the subtraction
prescribed by sub-item (B) of this item by one per centum of the then
present value of the prospective future salaries of all members, as
computed on the basis of the mortality and service tables adopted
pursuant to subdivision two of section five of the rules and regulations
and in effect on July first, nineteen hundred seventy-seven, and on the
basis of interest at the rate of five and one-half per centum per annum.
 (iv) The amount of the normal contribution for balance sheet liability
purposes hypothetically payable in the subject fiscal year shall be the
amount obtained (1) by multiplying such hypothetical normal contribution
rate computed with respect to the subject fiscal year by the aggregate
annual salaries of the members as of June thirtieth of the subject
fiscal year and (2) by adding to the product of such multiplication,
interest on such product at the rate of five and one-half per centum per
annum for a period of six months.
 (6) "Unfunded accrued liability contribution for balance sheet
liability purposes". (i) With respect to the city's nineteen hundred
seventy-four--nineteen hundred seventy-five fiscal year, such term shall
mean a hypothetical amount which, if paid to the contingent reserve fund
in forty equal annual installments, beginning with payment of a first
installment in the city's nineteen hundred seventy-four--nineteen
hundred seventy-five fiscal year, would be the actuarial equivalent, on
the basis of interest at the rate of five and one-half per centum per
annum, of the remainder computed in the manner prescribed by items (ii)
and (iii) of this subparagraph.
 (ii) Upon the basis of the actuarial tables in effect as of July
first, nineteen hundred seventy-seven for valuation purposes and
interest at the rate of five and one-half per centum per annum, there
shall be computed, as of June thirtieth, nineteen hundred seventy-four,
the amount of the total liability for all benefits provided by the rules
and regulations, in article eleven of the retirement and social security
law and in any other law prescribing benefits payable by the retirement
system on account of all members and beneficiaries, excluding the
liability on account of future increased-take-home-pay contributions and
the liability for benefits attributable to the annuity savings fund and
the variable annuity savings fund.
 (iii) From such total liability computed pursuant to item (ii) of this
subparagraph there shall be subtracted the sum of:
 (A) the present value, as of June thirtieth, nineteen hundred
seventy-four, of all future normal costs of the retirement system,
computed pursuant to the entry age normal cost method of determining
such normal costs; and
 (B) the present value, as of June thirtieth, of all required future
payments, pursuant to subdivision six of section seven of the rules and
regulations (as then in effect), of installments of losses in excess of
installments of gains on dispositions of securities within the meaning
of such subdivision; and
 (C) the sum obtained by adding together the balance sheet liability as
of such June thirtieth, (as such liability is determined pursuant to the
provisions of subparagraph seven of paragraph (c) of this subdivision)
and the total funds on hand as of such June thirtieth, excluding the
amount in the annuity savings fund and the variable annuity savings
fund, but including the amount of any unpaid moneys appropriated
pursuant to section nine of the rules and regulations.
 (iv) With respect to each of the city's fiscal years occurring during
the period from July first, nineteen hundred seventy-five to June
thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty, such term shall mean a hypothetical
amount which, if paid to the contingent reserve fund in forty equal
annual installments, beginning with payment of a first installment in
the city's nineteen hundred seventy-five--nineteen hundred seventy-six
fiscal year, would be the actuarial equivalent, on the basis of interest
at the rate of five and one-half per centum per annum, of the remainder
computed pursuant to items (v) and (vi) of this subparagraph.
 (v) Upon the basis of the actuarial tables in effect as of July first,
nineteen hundred seventy-seven for valuation purposes and interest at
the rate of five and one-half per centum per annum, there shall be
computed, as of June thirtieth, nineteen hundred seventy-five, the
amount of the total liability for all benefits provided by the rules and
regulations, in article eleven of the retirement and social security law
and in any other law prescribing benefits payable by the retirement
system on account of all members and beneficiaries, excluding the
liability on account of future increased-take-home-pay contributions and
the liability for benefits attributable to the annuity savings fund and
the variable annuity savings fund.
 (vi) From such total liability computed pursuant to item (v) of this
subparagraph, there shall be subtracted the sum of:
 (A) the present value, as of June thirtieth, nineteen hundred
seventy-five, of all future normal costs of the retirement system,
computed pursuant to the entry age normal cost method of determining
such normal costs; and
 (B) the present value, as of such June thirtieth, of all then required
future payments, pursuant to subdivision six of section seven of the
rules and regulations (as then in effect), of installments of losses in
excess of installments of gains on dispositions of securities within the
meaning of such subdivision; and
 (C) the sum obtained by adding together the balance sheet liability as
of such June thirtieth, (as such liability is determined pursuant to the
provisions of subparagraphs eight to fourteen, inclusive of this
sub-item and the total funds on hand, as of such June thirtieth,
excluding the amount in the annuity savings fund and the variable
annuity savings fund, but including the amount of any unpaid moneys
appropriated pursuant to section nine of the rules and regulations.
 (7) "Annual contribution, for balance sheet liability purposes, on
account of amortization of losses on dispositions of certain securities
within the meaning of subdivision six of section seven of the rules and
regulations". A hypothetical annual payment to the contingent reserve
fund in each of the city's fiscal year occurring during the period
beginning on July first, nineteen hundred seventy-four and ending on
June thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty, of the amount of the excess of
installments (payable in such year) of losses on prior dispositions of
securities within the meaning of subdivision six of section seven of the
rules and regulations (related to graduated crediting of gains and
amortization of losses on dispositions of certain securities) over
installments (creditable in such year) of gains on such prior
dispositions, which annual amount shall be determined in the manner
provided for in such subdivision six.
 (8) "Annual contribution, for balance sheet liability purposes, on
account of reserves-for-increased-take-home-pay". A hypothetical annual
payment to the contingent reserve fund in each of the city's fiscal
years occurring during the period from July first, nineteen hundred
seventy-four to June thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty, of the amount
required to fulfill the public employer obligation, which accrued in
such year to make contributions on account of increased-take-home-pay.
 (9) "Annual military law contribution for balance sheet liability
purposes". A hypothetical annual payment to the contingent reserve fund
in each of the city's fiscal years occurring during the period beginning
on July first, nineteen hundred seventy-four and ending on June
thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty, of the amount required to fulfill
the public employer obligation, which accrued in such year under the
provisions of subdivision twenty of section two hundred forty-three of
the military law, to pay in behalf of members qualifying for such
benefit member contributions with respect to certain periods of military
service of such members.
 (10) "Deficiency contribution". The annual amount which, under the
provisions of paragraph f of subdivision three of section eight of the
rules and regulations, the board of education was required to pay to the
contingent reserve fund in each of the city's nineteen hundred
seventy-four--nineteen hundred seventy-five, nineteen hundred
seventy-five--nineteen hundred seventy-six and nineteen hundred
seventy-six--nineteen hundred seventy-seven fiscal years.
 (11) "Contribution on account of amortization, pursuant to subdivision
six of section seven of the rules and regulations, of losses on
dispositions of certain securities". The total annual amount by which
the sum of the installments of losses, payable pursuant to subdivision
six of section seven of the rules and regulations (as in effect prior to
July first, nineteen hundred eighty) in each of the city's fiscal years
occurring during the period from July first, nineteen hundred
seventy-four to June thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty in relation to
dispositions of securities within the meaning of such subdivision six,
exceeded the sum of the installments of gains creditable in the same
fiscal year in relation to the same disposition of securities.
 (b) (1) Notwithstanding any provision of subdivision fifteen of
section two of the rules and regulations or any other provision of the
rules and regulations or any other provision of law to the contrary, for
the purpose of any actuarial valuation, determination or appraisal which
is made pursuant to the rules and regulations or the provisions of this
subdivision sixteen and which is used to determine the amount of any
contribution required to be paid by the board of education into the
contingent reserve fund or pension fund of the retirement system in the
nineteen hundred seventy-seven--nineteen hundred seventy-eight fiscal
year of the city or in any subsequent fiscal year of the city, "regular
interest" shall mean interest as defined in this paragraph and any
definition of regular interest in such rules and regulations shall not
apply to any such actuarial valuation, determination or appraisal.
 (2) Subject to the provisions of item (ii) of subparagraph six of this
paragraph, for the purpose of any actuarial valuation, determination or
appraisal which is made pursuant to the rules and regulations or the
provisions of this subdivision and which is used to determine the amount
of any contribution required to be paid by the board of education into
the contingent reserve fund or pension fund of the retirement system in
the nineteen hundred seventy-seven--nineteen hundred seventy-eight
fiscal year of the city and in each succeeding fiscal year thereof to
and including the nineteen hundred seventy-nine--nineteen hundred eighty
fiscal year thereof, "regular interest" shall mean interest at five and
one-half per centum per annum, compounded annually.
 (3) (i) Subject to the provisions of item (ii) of subparagraph six of
this paragraph and except as otherwise provided in subparagraphs seven
to sixteen, inclusive, of paragraph (c) of this subdivision with respect
to determination of the amount of the balance sheet liability as of June
thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty and balance sheet liability
contributions, for the purpose of any actuarial valuation, determination
or appraisal which is made pursuant to the rules and regulations or the
provisions of this subdivision and which is used to determine the amount
of any contribution required to be paid by the board of education into
the contingent reserve fund of the retirement system in the nineteen
hundred eighty--nineteen hundred eighty-one fiscal year of the city and
in each succeeding fiscal year thereof to and including the nineteen
hundred eighty-one--nineteen hundred eighty-two fiscal year thereof,
"regular interest" shall mean interest at the rate of seven and one-half
per centum per annum, compounded annually.
 (ii) Subject to the provisions of item (ii) of subparagraph six of
this paragraph and except as otherwise provided in subparagraphs seven
to sixteen, inclusive, of paragraph (c) of this subdivision with respect
to determination of the amount of the balance sheet liability as of June
thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty and balance sheet liability
contributions, for the purpose of any actuarial valuation, determination
or appraisal which is made pursuant to the rules and regulations or the
provisions of this subdivision and which is used to determine the amount
of any contribution required to be paid by the board of education into
the contingent reserve fund of the retirement system in the nineteen
hundred eighty-two--nineteen hundred eighty-three fiscal year of the
city and in each succeeding fiscal year thereof to and including the
nineteen hundred eighty-seven--nineteen hundred eighty-eight fiscal year
thereof, "regular interest" shall mean interest at the rate of eight per
centum per annum, compounded annually.
 (iii) Subject to the provisions of item (ii) of subparagraph six of
this paragraph and except as otherwise provided in subparagraphs seven
to sixteen, inclusive, of paragraph (c) of this subdivision with respect
to determination of the amount of the balance sheet liability as of June
thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty and balance sheet liability
contributions, for the purpose of any actuarial valuation, determination
or appraisal which is made pursuant to the rules and regulations or the
provisions of this subdivision and which is used to determine the amount
of any contribution required to be paid by the board of education into
the contingent reserve fund of the retirement system in the nineteen
hundred eighty-eight--nineteen hundred eighty-nine fiscal year of the
city and the nineteen hundred eighty-nine--nineteen hundred ninety
fiscal year thereof, "regular interest" shall mean interest at the rate
of eight and one-quarter per centum per annum, compounded annually.
 (4) Subject to the provisions of item (ii) of subparagraph six of this
paragraph, and except as otherwise provided in subparagraphs seven to
sixteen, inclusive, of paragraph (c) of this subdivision with respect to
determination of the amount of the balance sheet liability as of June
thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty and balance sheet liability
contributions, for the purpose of any actuarial valuation, determination
or appraisal which is made pursuant to the rules and regulations or the
provisions of this subdivision and which is used to determine the amount
of any contribution required to be paid by the board of education into
the contingent reserve fund or pension fund of the retirement system in
the city's nineteen hundred ninety--nineteen hundred ninety-one fiscal
year and in any subsequent fiscal year thereof, "regular interest" shall
mean interest at such rate per annum, compounded annually, as shall be
prescribed by the legislature in section 13-638.2 of the administrative
code of the city.
 (5) On or after May first, nineteen hundred eighty-nine and no later
than October thirty-first of such year the retirement board of the
retirement system shall submit to the governor, the temporary president
and minority leader of the senate, the speaker of the assembly, the
majority and minority leaders of the assembly, the state superintendent
of financial services, the mayor of the city, and the members of the
city council thereof, the written recommendations of the retirement
board as to the rate of interest and effective period thereof which
should be established by law as "regular interest" for the purpose
specified in subparagraph four of this paragraph.
 (6) (i) Subject to the provisions of item (iv) of subparagraph three
of paragraph (c) of this subdivision, nothing contained in subparagraphs
one, two, three, four and five of this paragraph shall be construed as
prescribing, for the purpose of crediting interest to individual
accounts in the annuity savings fund or to
reserves-for-increased-take-home-pay or for any other purpose besides
that specified in such subparagraphs, a rate of regular interest other
than as prescribed by the applicable provisions of subdivision fifteen
of section two of the rules and regulations and subdivision seventeen of
this section.
 (ii) Subject to the provisions of section 13-638.2 of the
administrative code of the city, nothing contained in subparagraphs two,
three and four of this paragraph shall be construed as requiring the
original unfunded accrued liability contribution, as defined in item (i)
of subparagraph five of paragraph (c) of this subdivision, and the
revised unfunded accrued liability contribution, as defined in item (ii)
of such subparagraph, and the nineteen hundred eighty unfunded accrued
liability adjustment, as defined in subparagraph six of such paragraph
(c), and the nineteen hundred eighty-two unfunded accrued liability
adjustment, as defined in such subparagraph six, to be determined in any
manner other than as prescribed by the applicable provisions of such
items and such subparagraph six. Subject to the provisions of such
section 13-638.2, nothing contained in subparagraphs two, three and four
of this paragraph shall be construed as requiring any balance sheet
liability or balance sheet liability contribution computed pursuant to
the provisions of subparagraphs seven to sixteen, inclusive, of
paragraph (c) of this subdivision to be determined in any manner other
than as prescribed in such subparagraphs.
 (c) (1) (i) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs b and f of
subdivision three of section eight of the rules and regulations or any
other provision of the rules and regulations or any other provision of
law to the contrary;
 (A) the provisions of subparagraphs two, three, four and five of this
paragraph (c), as in effect during the period from July first, nineteen
hundred seventy-seven to June thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty, shall
govern the contributions payable by the board of education to the
contingent reserve fund of the retirement system in the city's nineteen
hundred seventy-seven--nineteen hundred seventy-eight fiscal year and in
each city fiscal year thereafter to and including the nineteen hundred
seventy-nine--nineteen hundred eighty fiscal year, and no contributions
shall be payable by the board of education to such fund in any such
fiscal year other than the contributions prescribed by the applicable
provisions of such subparagraphs two, three, four and five; and
 (B) the applicable provisions of this paragraph, as in effect on and
after July first, nineteen hundred eighty, and the provisions of
sections 13-638.2, 13-695 and 13-704 of the administrative code of the
city and any other applicable laws shall govern the contributions
payable by the board of education to the contingent reserve fund in the
city's nineteen hundred eighty--nineteen hundred eighty-one fiscal year
and in each city fiscal year thereafter, and no contributions shall be
payable by the board of education to such fund in any such fiscal year
other than the contributions prescribed by the applicable provisions of
this paragraph and such sections and laws.
 (ii) The contribution payable by the board of education to such
contingent reserve fund in the nineteen hundred seventy-six--nineteen
hundred seventy-seven fiscal year of the city, including, without
limitation, the contribution required by paragraph f of subdivision
three of section eight of the rules and regulations, shall be governed
by the applicable provisions of the rules and regulations as in effect
immediately prior to July first, nineteen hundred seventy-seven.
 (2) Subject to the provisions of law referred to in sub-item (B) of
item (i) of subparagraph one of this paragraph, the board of education
shall contribute to the contingent reserve fund:
 (i) annually an amount computed pursuant to subparagraph four of this
paragraph, to be known as the "normal contribution"; and
 (i-A) all unfunded accrued liability installments as required by
section 13-638.2 of the administrative code of the city of New York or
any other provision of law; and
 (i-B) any other payments to the contingent reserve fund as required by
applicable law; and
 (ii) in each city fiscal year during the period beginning with the
fiscal year nineteen hundred seventy-seven--nineteen hundred
seventy-eight and ending on the last day of fiscal year nineteen hundred
seventy-nine--nineteen hundred eighty, one annual installment of an
additional amount computed pursuant to item (i) of subparagraph five of
this paragraph, which shall be known as the "original unfunded accrued
liability contribution"; and
 (iii) in each city fiscal year during the period beginning with fiscal
year nineteen hundred eighty--nineteen hundred eighty-one and ending on
the last day of fiscal year two thousand fourteen--two thousand fifteen,
the annual installment, applicable to such fiscal year, of an additional
amount which shall be known as the revised unfunded accrued liability
contribution and which shall be determined as provided for in item (ii)
of subparagraph five of this paragraph; and
 (iv) in each city fiscal year during the period beginning with fiscal
year nineteen hundred eighty-one--nineteen hundred eighty-two and ending
on the last day of fiscal year two thousand twenty--two thousand
twenty-one, the annual installment, applicable to such fiscal year, of
an additional amount which shall be known as the balance sheet liability
contribution and which shall be determined as provided for in
subparagraphs seven to sixteen, inclusive, of this paragraph; and
 (v) in fiscal year nineteen hundred eighty--nineteen hundred
eighty-one, the amount of one year's interest, at the rate of seven and
one-half per centum per annum, on the amount of the balance sheet
liability as of June thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty, as determined
pursuant to the provisions of subparagraphs seven to fifteen, inclusive,
of this paragraph; and
 (vi) in each city fiscal year, beginning with fiscal year nineteen
hundred eighty--nineteen hundred eighty-one and ending on the last day
of fiscal year nineteen hundred ninety-four--nineteen hundred
ninety-five, the amount required to fulfill the public employer
obligation, which accrued in such fiscal year, to make contributions on
account of increased-take-home-pay; and
 (vii) in each city fiscal year, beginning with fiscal year nineteen
hundred eighty--nineteen hundred eighty-one and ending on the last day
of fiscal year nineteen hundred ninety-four--nineteen hundred
ninety-five, the amount required to fulfill the public employer
obligation, which accrued in such fiscal year under the provisions of
subdivision twenty of section two hundred forty-three of the military
law, to pay in behalf of members qualifying for such benefit, member
contributions with respect to certain periods of the military service of
such members.
 (3) (i) If the nineteen hundred eighty unfunded accrued liability
adjustment determined pursuant to subparagraph six of this paragraph is
a credit, the total of the amounts required to be contributed to the
contingent reserve fund in each city fiscal year, commencing with the
nineteen hundred eighty--nineteen hundred eighty-one fiscal year and
ending with the two thousand nine--two thousand ten fiscal year,
pursuant to items (i), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi) and (vii) of subparagraph
two of this paragraph shall be reduced by the amount of one annual
installment of such nineteen hundred eighty unfunded accrued liability
adjustment.
 (ii) (A) If the nineteen hundred eighty unfunded accrued liability
adjustment determined pursuant to such subparagraph six is a charge, the
board of education shall contribute in each city fiscal year, commencing
with the nineteen hundred eighty--nineteen hundred eighty-one fiscal
year and ending with the two thousand nine--two thousand ten fiscal
year, in addition to the amounts required to be contributed under the
provisions of subparagraph two of this paragraph (c), one annual
installment of such nineteen hundred eighty unfunded accrued liability
adjustment.
 (B) The total of the amounts required to be contributed to the
contingent reserve fund in each city fiscal year commencing with the
nineteen hundred eighty-two--nineteen hundred eighty-three fiscal year
and ending with the two thousand eleven--two thousand twelve fiscal year
pursuant to items (i), (iii), (iv), (vi) and (vii) of subparagraph (2)
of this paragraph (c) and the applicable provisions of item (i) of this
subparagraph (3) and sub-item (A) of this item (ii) and otherwise
pursuant to law shall be reduced by the amount of one annual installment
of the nineteen hundred eighty-two unfunded accrued liability adjustment
determined pursuant to item (vi) of subparagraph (6) of this paragraph
(c).
 (C) The total of the amounts required to be contributed to the
contingent reserve fund in each city fiscal year commencing with the
nineteen hundred eighty-five--nineteen hundred eighty-six fiscal year
and ending with the two thousand fourteen--two thousand fifteen fiscal
year pursuant to items (i), (iii), (iv), (vi) and (vii) of subparagraph
(2) of this paragraph (c) and the applicable provisions of item (i) of
this subparagraph (3) and sub-item (A) of this item (ii) and otherwise
pursuant to law shall be reduced by the amount of one annual installment
of the nineteen hundred eighty-five unfunded accrued liability
adjustment determined pursuant to item (vii) of subparagraph (6) of this
paragraph (c).
 (iii) Any amount required by the provisions of items (iii), (iv), (vi)
and (vii) of subparagraph two of this paragraph and subdivision six of
section seven of the rules and regulations to be contributed to the
contingent reserve fund in the city's nineteen hundred eighty--nineteen
hundred eighty-one fiscal year or any subsequent fiscal year shall be
payable with interest on such amount at a rate per centum per annum
equal to the rate per centum per annum required to be used for the
purpose of any actuarial valuation, determination or appraisal made to
determine the amount of the normal contribution payable to the
contingent reserve fund in such fiscal year.
 (iv) Any amount required to be contributed to the contingent reserve
fund in any fiscal year of the city preceding the nineteen hundred
eighty--nineteen hundred eighty-one fiscal year shall be deemed to have
been required to be paid with interest on such amount at a rate per
centum per annum equal to the rate per centum per annum required to be
used for the purpose of any actuarial valuation, determination or
appraisal made to determine the amount of the normal contribution
payable to the contingent reserve fund in such fiscal year.
 (v) It is hereby declared that the provisions of items (iii) and (iv)
of this subparagraph three, insofar as they relate to provisions of the
rules and regulations or of this subdivision or other laws requiring
payment of employer contributions to the retirement system prior to the
effective date of this subparagraph, express the intent of such
provisions of the rules and regulations or this subdivision or other
laws requiring such payment.
 (vi) For the purpose of effectuating the nineteen hundred eighty-eight
unfunded accrued liability adjustment provided for in section 13-638.1
of the administrative code of the city of New York, contributions to the
contingent reserve fund on account of charges shall be made by the
responsible obligor (as defined in paragraph six of subdivision a of
such section) or credits shall be allowed to such obligor against
contributions otherwise payable by such obligor, as the case may be, to
the extent and in the manner provided for in such section. The annual
determination of the normal contribution for fiscal years occurring
during the period beginning on July first, nineteen hundred eighty-eight
and ending on June thirtieth, nineteen hundred ninety-eight shall
appropriately take account of the nineteen hundred eighty-eight unfunded
accrued liability adjustment and the provisions of subparagraph four of
this paragraph (c) shall be deemed to be conformably modified for such
purpose.
 (vii) The board of education and all other responsible obligors (as
defined in paragraph ten of subdivision a of section 13-638.2 of the
administrative code of the city of New York) shall make all payments to
the retirement system required by applicable law in accordance with the
time of payment requirements set forth in paragraph (j) of this
subdivision. Any responsible obligor which does not make all or any
portion of such required payments to the retirement system in a timely
manner in fiscal year two thousand twelve--two thousand thirteen, or in
any fiscal year thereafter, shall be required to pay interest to the
retirement system on such overdue amounts, as determined by the actuary.
The actuary shall determine, at such time as he or she deems
appropriate, interest payments on such overdue amounts using a rate of
interest equivalent to the valuation rate of interest (as defined in
paragraph eleven of subdivision a of section 13-638.2 of the
administrative code of the city of New York). Responsible obligors shall
make such interest payments on overdue amounts to the retirement system
in the manner and at such time as the actuary deems appropriate.
 (4) Normal contribution. (i) Notwithstanding the succeeding
provisions of this item or the provisions of item (i-A), (ii), (iii) or
(iv) of this subparagraph, for fiscal year two thousand eleven--two
thousand twelve, and for each fiscal year thereafter, the amount of the
normal contribution payable to the contingent reserve fund shall be
determined pursuant to the provisions of item (v) of this subparagraph.
Upon the basis of the latest mortality and other tables authorized by
the applicable provisions of the rules and regulations and regular
interest, the actuary shall determine, as of June thirtieth, nineteen
hundred eighty and as of each succeeding June thirtieth, the amount of
the total liability for all benefits provided in the rules and
regulations, in articles eleven and fourteen of the retirement and
social security law and in any other law prescribing benefits payable by
the retirement system on account of all members and beneficiaries,
excluding the liability on account of future increased-take-home-pay
contributions, if any, and the liability for benefits attributable to
the annuity savings fund and to the variable annuity savings fund,
provided, however, that in determining such total liability as of June
thirtieth, nineteen hundred ninety-five and as of each succeeding June
thirtieth, the actuary shall include (A) the liability on account of
future increased-take-home-pay contributions, if any, (B) the liability
on account of future public employer obligations under the provisions of
subdivision twenty of section two hundred forty-three of the military
law, to pay in behalf of members qualifying for such benefit, member
contributions with respect to certain periods of the military service of
such members and (C) the liability for benefits attributable to the
annuity savings fund and to the variable annuity savings fund, and
provided further that in determining such total liability as of June
thirtieth, nineteen hundred ninety-nine and as of each succeeding June
thirtieth, the actuary shall include any other liability, as determined
by the actuary, for benefits attributable to the variable annuity
programs, and provided further that in determining such total liability
as of June thirtieth, two thousand and as of each succeeding June
thirtieth, the actuary shall include the amount, if any, as estimated by
the actuary, of the total liability of the retirement system on account
of payments which the retirement system may be required to make to any
other fund without a corresponding offset in the liabilities of the
retirement system.
 (i-A) Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, for
the purpose of calculating the amount of the normal contribution
annually due from the board of education to the contingent reserve fund
pursuant to item (iv) of this subparagraph in fiscal year two thousand
five--two thousand six, and in each fiscal year thereafter, both the
total liability of the retirement system, as calculated by the actuary
in accordance with item (i) of this subparagraph, and the normal rate of
contribution, as calculated by the actuary in accordance with items (ii)
and (iii) of this subparagraph, shall be determined as of June thirtieth
of the second fiscal year preceding the fiscal year in which the normal
contribution is payable, provided, however, that (A) the actuary shall
use for such calculations the mortality and other tables that are
applicable at the time he or she performs such calculations; (B) the
total funds on hand, as determined by the actuary pursuant to clause
five of sub-item (A) of item (ii) of this subparagraph, shall be
adjusted by adding to such amount the present value of all employer
contributions required to be paid into the contingent reserve fund in
the fiscal year next preceding the fiscal year in which the normal
contribution is payable, as determined by the actuary; and (C) the
present value of the prospective future salaries of all members, as
computed by the actuary for the purposes of sub-item (C) of item (ii) of
this subparagraph, shall be reduced by the present value of the salaries
expected to be paid to all members in the fiscal year next preceding the
fiscal year in which the normal contribution is payable, as determined
by the actuary.
 (ii) The normal rate of contribution shall be the rate per centum
obtained:
 (A) by adding together:
 (1) (a) the amount obtained by adding together the present value of
all required future revised unfunded accrued liability contributions and
the present value of all required future payments of the nineteen
hundred eighty unfunded accrued liability adjustment, determined
pursuant to subparagraph six of this paragraph, if such adjustment is a
charge; or
 (b) the remainder obtained by subtracting from the present value of
all required future revised unfunded accrued liability contributions,
the present value of all future installments of the nineteen hundred
eighty unfunded accrued liability adjustment required to be credited, if
such nineteen hundred eighty adjustment is a credit;
 (c) minus (whether (a) or (b) immediately preceding is applicable) the
sum of the present value of all future installments of the nineteen
hundred eighty-two unfunded accrued liability adjustment and the present
value of all future installments of the nineteen hundred eighty-five
unfunded accrued liability adjustment; and
 (2) the present value of all required future balance sheet liability
contributions, plus, in the case of the determination of the normal
contribution payable in fiscal year nineteen hundred eighty--nineteen
hundred eighty-one, the present value, as of June thirtieth, nineteen
hundred eighty, of the payment of interest on the balance sheet
liability as required by item (v) of subparagraph two of this paragraph
(c); and
 (3) the present value of all required future payments, pursuant to
subdivision six of section seven of the rules and regulations, of
installments of losses in excess of installments of gains on
dispositions of securities within the meaning of such subdivision; and
 (4) in the case of the determination of the normal contribution
payable in each fiscal year commencing with fiscal year nineteen hundred
ninety-five--nineteen hundred ninety-six, the present value of future
member contributions of all members; and
 (5) the total funds on hand, including the amount of any unpaid money
appropriated pursuant to section nine of the rules and regulations and,
in the case of the determination of the normal contribution payable in
each fiscal year commencing with fiscal year nineteen hundred
ninety-five--nineteen hundred ninety-six, including the amount in the
annuity savings fund and in the variable annuity savings fund; and
 (6) the present value of all other future installments of accrued
liability contributions to the retirement system required by the
applicable provisions of section 13-638.2 of the administrative code of
the city of New York which are not covered by the preceding paragraphs
of this subitem (A); and
 (B) by subtracting from the amount of the total liability determined
pursuant to item (i) of this subparagraph the sum resulting from the
addition prescribed by sub-item (A) of this item; and
 (C) by dividing the remainder resulting from the applicable
subtraction prescribed by sub-item (B) of this item by one per centum of
the present value of the prospective future salaries of all members, as
computed by the actuary on the basis of the latest mortality and service
tables adopted pursuant to subdivision two of section five of the rules
and regulations, and on the basis of regular interest.
 (iii) The normal rate of contribution determined by the actuary shall
not be less than zero, shall be certified by the actuary after a
valuation and shall continue in force until the next succeeding
valuation and certification. The actuary shall make a valuation, as of
June thirtieth of each year, of the assets and liabilities of the
various funds created by the rules and regulations.
 (iv)(A) The amount of the normal contribution annually due from the
board of education to the contingent reserve fund in each city fiscal
year, commencing with the nineteen hundred eighty--nineteen hundred
eighty-one fiscal year and ending with the two thousand four--two
thousand five fiscal year, shall be the amount obtained by multiplying
the normal rate of contribution, as determined by the actuary as of June
thirtieth next preceding such fiscal year, by the aggregate annual
salaries of the members on such June thirtieth next preceding such
fiscal year in which such amount is due and shall be payable in such
fiscal year next following such June thirtieth, together with such
regular interest thereon which may be due, if any, as calculated by the
actuary.
 (B) The amount of the normal contribution annually due from the board
of education to the contingent reserve fund in each city fiscal year,
commencing with the two thousand five--two thousand six fiscal year,
shall be the amount obtained by multiplying the normal rate of
contribution, as determined by the actuary as of the second June
thirtieth preceding the fiscal year in which the normal contribution is
payable, in accordance with the provisions of items (i-A), (ii) and
(iii) of this subparagraph, by the aggregate amount of the salaries
expected to be paid to the members during the fiscal year in which the
normal contribution is payable, as determined by the actuary, and such
normal contribution shall be payable in the second fiscal year following
the June thirtieth as of which the normal rate of contribution is
determined, together with such regular interest thereon which may be
due, if any, as calculated by the actuary.
 (C) In the case of the normal contribution payable in the nineteen
hundred eighty--nineteen hundred eighty-one fiscal year and in any
subsequent fiscal year, the term "regular interest," as used in this
item (iv) shall mean regular interest as defined by the applicable
provisions of subparagraph three or subparagraph four of paragraph (b)
of this subdivision.
 (v) (A) Notwithstanding the preceding items of this subparagraph or
any other provision of law to the contrary, the normal contribution
payable to the contingent reserve fund in fiscal year two thousand
eleven--two thousand twelve, and in each fiscal year thereafter, shall
be the entry age normal contribution, as determined by the actuary
pursuant to this item in a manner consistent with the entry age
actuarial cost method. The actuary shall determine the entry age normal
contribution for each such fiscal year as of June thirtieth of the
second fiscal year preceding the fiscal year in which such normal
contribution is payable, based on the latest mortality and other tables
applicable at the time he or she performs such calculations, and the
valuation rate of interest as provided for the retirement system in
paragraph two of subdivision b of section 13-638.2 of the administrative
code of the city of New York.
 (B) In calculating the entry age normal contribution payable in any
such fiscal year pursuant to this item, the actuary, in his or her
discretion, may make certain adjustments in the calculation methodology,
provided that such adjustments are generally accepted as consistent with
the entry age actuarial cost method, and are designed, in general, to
fund, on a level basis over the working lifetimes of members from their
ages at entry, the actuarial present value of benefits to which such
members are expected to become entitled, as determined by the actuary.
Such generally accepted adjustments in the calculation methodology, in
the discretion of the actuary, may include, but are not limited to, the
calculation of the entry age normal contribution (1) on an individual
member basis by calculating the amount of the entry age normal
contribution attributable to each individual member, and then adding
together such individual member amounts, (2) on an aggregate basis for
all members or (3) on any combination of an individual member basis and
an aggregate basis which is consistent with the entry age actuarial cost
method, and the preceding provisions of this sub-item.
 (C) For each such fiscal year, the actuary, in his or her discretion,
shall determine, in accordance with the provisions of sub-item (B) of
this item, the methodology for calculating the entry age normal
contribution payable for that particular fiscal year.
 (D) The methodology determined by the actuary in accordance with
sub-item (C) of this item may provide for the actuary to calculate the
entry age normal contribution on an individual member basis by (1)
multiplying the entry age normal contribution rate for each individual
member, as determined by the actuary, by the salary expected to be paid
to that member during the fiscal year in which such normal contribution
is payable, and (2) calculating the sum of the individual entry age
normal contributions attributable to all such members. The actuary, in
his or her discretion, may make any adjustments to such methodology for
determining the entry age normal contribution on an individual basis
which he or she deems appropriate, and which are consistent with the
provisions of sub-item (B) of this item.
 (E) In the alternative, the methodology determined by the actuary in
accordance with sub-item (C) of this item may provide for the actuary to
calculate the entry age normal contribution on an aggregate basis by
multiplying the entry age normal contribution rate for all members in
the aggregate, as determined by the actuary, by the aggregate amount of
the salaries expected to be paid to all members during the fiscal year
in which the normal contribution is payable. The actuary, in his or her
discretion, may make any adjustments to such methodology for determining
the entry age normal contribution on an aggregate basis which he or she
deems appropriate, and which are consistent with the provisions of
sub-item (B) of this item.
 (F) In the alternative, the methodology determined by the actuary in
accordance with sub-item (C) of this item may provide for the
calculation of the entry age normal contribution on any other basis
which the actuary deems appropriate, and which is consistent with the
entry age actuarial cost method and the provisions of sub-item (B) of
this item.
 (G) (1) Where the methodology determined by the actuary in accordance
with sub-item (C) of this item requires the determination of an entry
age normal contribution rate for each individual member in order to
calculate the entry age normal contribution for each individual member,
the actuary shall determine such rate for each such member in accordance
with the entry age actuarial cost method, and such rate, as determined
by the actuary for each such member, shall be consistent with a method
designed, in general, to fund, on a level basis over the working
lifetime of that particular member from his or her age at entry, the
actuarial present value of benefits to which such member is expected to
become entitled, as determined by the actuary.
 (2) Where the methodology determined by the actuary in accordance with
sub-item (C) of this item requires the determination of an entry age
normal contribution rate for all members in the aggregate in order to
calculate the entry age normal contribution for all members in the
aggregate, the actuary shall determine such rate in accordance with the
entry age actuarial cost method, and such rate, as determined by the
actuary, shall be consistent with a method designed, in general, to
fund, on a level basis over the working lifetimes of members from their
ages at entry, the actuarial present value of benefits to which such
members are expected to become entitled, as determined by the actuary.
 (5) Unfunded accrued liability contributions.--(i) The original
unfunded accrued liability contribution shall be an amount which, if
paid to the contingent reserve fund in forty equal annual installments,
commencing with payment of a first installment in the city's nineteen
hundred seventy-seven--nineteen hundred seventy-eight fiscal year, would
be the actuarial equivalent, on the basis of five and one-half percentum
interest and the actuarial tables in effect as of July first, nineteen
hundred seventy-seven, of the difference between (A) the accrued
liability (excluding the liability for benefits attributable to the
annuity savings fund and the variable annuity savings fund) on June
thirtieth, nineteen hundred seventy-five and (B) the total funds on
hand, excluding the amount in the annuity savings fund and the variable
annuity savings fund, but including the amount of any unpaid moneys
appropriated pursuant to section nine of the rules and regulations. No
contribution or payment to the contingent reserve fund of the retirement
system shall be made under the provisions of paragraph f of subdivision
three of section eight of the rules and regulations in the nineteen
hundred seventy-seven--nineteen hundred seventy-eight fiscal year of the
city or in any subsequent city fiscal year. The provisions of such
paragraph f shall cease to be effective on July first, nineteen hundred
seventy-seven.
 (ii) (A) The revised unfunded accrued liability contribution shall be
an amount determined as prescribed in sub-items (B), (C), (D), (E), (F),
(G), (H), (I) and (J) of this item.
 (B) To the amount of the difference constituting the unfunded accrued
liability as of June thirtieth, nineteen hundred seventy-five heretofore
determined pursuant to the provisions of this subparagraph, as in effect
on July first, nineteen hundred seventy-seven, there shall be added
interest thereon at the rate of five and one-half per centum per annum
for the period from July first, nineteen hundred seventy-five to June
thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty.
 (C) There shall be computed, in the manner provided in sub-item (D) of
this item, the discounted value of each of the installments of the
unfunded accrued liability contribution which, in the absence of the
enactment of chapter nine hundred fifty-seven of the laws of nineteen
hundred eighty-one, were payable or would have been payable in the
city's nineteen hundred seventy-seven--nineteen hundred seventy-eight,
nineteen hundred seventy-eight--nineteen hundred seventy-nine, nineteen
hundred seventy-nine--nineteen hundred eighty, nineteen hundred
eighty--nineteen hundred eighty-one and nineteen hundred
eighty-one--nineteen hundred eighty-two fiscal years.
 (D) Such discounted value of each such installment referred to in
sub-item (C) of this item shall be computed as of January first of the
city's second fiscal year preceding the fiscal year in which such
installment was payable or would have been payable and on the basis of
five and one-half per centum interest per annum on the amount of such
installment.
 (E) There shall be computed with respect to such discounted value of
each such installment, interest thereon from January first of such
second fiscal year preceding the fiscal year in which such installment
was or would have been payable to June thirtieth, nineteen hundred
eighty at the rate of five and one-half per centum per annum.
 (F) The discounted values of all of such installments with respect to
such fiscal years, computed as provided for in sub-items (C) and (D) of
this item, together with interest on each such installment as provided
for in sub-item (E) of this item, shall be added together.
 (G) From the sum computed pursuant to sub-item (B) of this item, the
sum computed pursuant to sub-item (F) of this item shall be subtracted.
 (H) With respect to each city fiscal year occurring during the period
beginning on July first, nineteen hundred eighty and ending on June
thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty-two, the revised unfunded accrued
liability contribution shall be the annual installment, applicable to
such fiscal year, of an amount which, if paid to the contingent reserve
fund in thirty-five equal annual installments, commencing with payment
of a first installment in the city's nineteen hundred eighty--nineteen
hundred eighty-one fiscal year, would be the actuarial equivalent, on
the basis of seven and one-half per centum interest per annum, of the
remainder computed pursuant to sub-item (G) of this item.
 (I) With respect to each city fiscal year occurring during the period
beginning on July first, nineteen hundred eighty-two and ending on June
thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty-eight, the revised unfunded accrued
liability contribution shall be the annual installment, applicable to
such fiscal year, of an amount which, if paid to the contingent reserve
fund in thirty-three equal annual installments, commencing with payment
of a first installment in the city's nineteen hundred
eighty-two--nineteen hundred eighty-three fiscal year, would be the
actuarial equivalent, on the basis of eight per centum interest per
annum, of the present value, as of June thirtieth, nineteen hundred
eighty-two on the basis of seven and one-half per centum interest per
annum, of those installments of the unfunded accrued liability
contribution computed pursuant to sub-item (H) of this item (ii), which
installments are hypothetically allocated by such sub-item (H) to
designated city fiscal years succeeding June thirtieth, nineteen hundred
eighty-two.
 (J) With respect to each city fiscal year occurring during the period
beginning on July first, nineteen hundred eighty-eight and ending on
June thirtieth, two thousand fifteen, the revised unfunded accrued
liability contribution shall be the annual installment, applicable to
such fiscal year, of an amount which, when paid to the contingent
reserve fund in twenty-seven equal annual installments, commencing with
payment of a first installment in the city's nineteen hundred
eighty-eight--nineteen hundred eighty-nine fiscal year, shall be the
actuarial equivalent, on the basis of eight and one-quarter per centum
interest per annum, of the present value, as of June thirtieth, nineteen
hundred eighty-eight on the basis of eight per centum interest per
annum, of those installments of the unfunded accrued liability
contribution computed pursuant to sub-item (I) of this item (ii), which
installments are hypothetically allocated by such sub-item (I) to
designated city fiscal years succeeding June thirtieth, nineteen hundred
eighty-eight.
 (6) (i) The nineteen hundred eighty unfunded accrued liability
adjustment shall be an amount determined as prescribed in items (ii),
(iii), (iv) and (v) of this subparagraph.
 (ii) (A) Upon the basis of the actuarial tables in effect as of June
thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty for valuation purposes and interest
at the rate of seven and one-half per centum per annum, there shall be
determined, as of June thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty, the amount of
the total liability for all benefits provided in the rules and
regulations, in articles eleven and fourteen of the retirement and
social security law and in any other law prescribing benefits payable by
the retirement system on account of all members and beneficiaries,
excluding the liability on account of future increased-take-home pay
contributions, if any, and the liability for benefits attributable to
the annuity savings fund and to the variable annuity savings fund.
 (B) From such total liability computed pursuant to sub-item (A) of
this item, there shall be subtracted the sum of:
 (1) the present value, as of June thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty,
of all future normal costs of the retirement system, computed pursuant
to the entry age normal cost method of determining such normal costs;
and
 (2) the present value, as of such June thirtieth, of all future
installments of the balance sheet liability contribution (as defined in
subparagraph sixteen of this paragraph); and
 (3) the present value, as of such June thirtieth, of all then required
future payments, pursuant to subdivision six of section seven of the
rules and regulations, of installments of losses in excess of
installments of gains on dispositions of securities within the meaning
of such subdivision; and
 (4) the present value, as of such June thirtieth, of future member
contributions of members subject to article fourteen of the retirement
and social security law; and
 (5) the total funds on hand as of such June thirtieth, excluding the
amount in the annuity savings fund and variable annuity savings fund,
but including the amount of any unpaid moneys appropriated pursuant to
section nine of the rules and regulations.
 (iii) (A) If the amount computed pursuant to sub-item (B) of item (ii)
of this subparagraph is larger than the amount computed pursuant to
sub-item (G) of item (ii) of subparagraph five of this paragraph, the
latter amount shall be subtracted from the former amount and the
remainder resulting from such subtraction shall constitute a charge.
 (B) If the amount computed pursuant to sub-item (B) of item (ii) of
this subparagraph is smaller than the amount computed pursuant to
sub-item (G) of item (ii) of subparagraph five of this paragraph, the
former amount shall be subtracted from the latter amount and the
remainder resulting from such subtraction shall constitute a credit.
 (iv) (A) If the remainder computed pursuant to item (iii) of this
subparagraph is a charge, the nineteen hundred eighty unfunded accrued
liability adjustment shall be an amount which, if paid to the contingent
reserve fund in thirty equal annual installments, commencing with
payment of a first installment in the city's nineteen hundred
eighty--nineteen hundred eighty-one fiscal year, would be the actuarial
equivalent, on the basis of seven and one-half per centum interest per
annum, of such remainder.
 (B) If the remainder computed pursuant to item (iii) of this
subparagraph is a credit, the nineteen hundred eighty unfunded accrued
liability adjustment shall be an amount which, if credited in thirty
equal annual installments (the first of which installments is to be
credited in the city's nineteen hundred eighty--nineteen hundred
eighty-one fiscal year) in reduction of the amounts which the board of
education would otherwise be required to pay to the contingent reserve
fund pursuant to items (i), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi) and (vii) of
subparagraph two of this paragraph, would be the actuarial equivalent,
on the basis of seven and one-half per centum interest per annum, of
such remainder.
 (v) (A) With respect to determination of the amount of contributions
payable to the contingent reserve fund in each of the city's nineteen
hundred eighty--nineteen hundred eighty-one and nineteen hundred
eighty-one--nineteen hundred eighty-two fiscal years, the annual
installment of the nineteen hundred eighty unfunded accrued liability
adjustment computed pursuant to item (iv) of this subparagraph (6),
which installment is applicable to such fiscal years, shall be applied
as a charge or a credit, as the case may be, in relation to such
contributions payable in such fiscal year.
 (B) With respect to determination of the amount of contributions
payable to the contingent reserve fund in each city fiscal year
occurring during the period beginning on July first, nineteen hundred
eighty-two and ending on June thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty-eight,
the nineteen hundred eighty unfunded accrued liability adjustment shall
be an amount which, if paid (if a charge) or credited (if a credit) in
twenty-eight equal annual installments, commencing with a payment or
credit, as the case may be, in the city's nineteen hundred
eighty-two--nineteen hundred eighty-three fiscal year, would be the
actuarial equivalent, on the basis of eight per centum interest per
annum, of the present value, as of June thirtieth, nineteen hundred
eighty-two on the basis of seven and one-half per centum interest per
annum, of those installments of the nineteen hundred eighty unfunded
accrued liability adjustment computed pursuant to item (iv) of this
subparagraph (6), which installments are hypothetically allocated by
such item (iv) to designated city fiscal years succeeding June
thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty-two.
 (C) With respect to determination of the amount of contributions
payable to the contingent reserve fund in each city fiscal year
occurring during the period beginning on July first, nineteen hundred
eighty-eight and ending on June thirtieth, two thousand ten, the
nineteen hundred eighty unfunded accrued liability adjustment shall be
an amount which, when paid (if a charge) or credited (if a credit) in
twenty-two equal annual installments, commencing with a payment or
credit, as the case may be, in the city's nineteen hundred
eighty-eight--nineteen hundred eighty-nine fiscal year, shall be the
actuarial equivalent, on the basis of eight and one-quarter per centum
interest per annum, of the present value, as of June thirtieth, nineteen
hundred eighty-eight on the basis of eight per centum interest per
annum, of those installments of the nineteen hundred eighty unfunded
accrued liability adjustment computed pursuant to sub-item (B) of this
item (v), which installments are hypothetically allocated by such
sub-item (B) to designated city fiscal years succeeding June thirtieth,
nineteen hundred eighty-eight.
 (D) With respect to determination of the amount of contributions
payable to the contingent reserve fund in each of such city fiscal years
referred to in sub-item (B) or sub-item (C) of this item (v), the annual
installment of the nineteen hundred eighty unfunded accrued liability
adjustment computed pursuant to sub-item (B) or sub-item (C) of this
item (v), which installment is applicable to such fiscal year, shall be
applied as a charge or credit, as the case may be, in relation to such
contributions payable in such fiscal year.
 (vi) (A) The nineteen hundred eighty-two unfunded accrued liability
adjustment shall be an amount determined as prescribed in sub-items (B),
(C), (D) and (E) of this item (vi).
 (B) Upon the basis of the actuarial tables in effect as of June
thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty-one for valuation purposes and
interest at the rate of seven and one-half per centum per annum, there
shall be determined, as of June thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty-two,
the amount of the actuarial accrued liability of the retirement system,
computed pursuant to the entry age normal cost method of ascertaining
such actuarial accrued liability.
 (C) Upon the basis of the actuarial tables in effect as of June
thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty-two for valuation purposes and
interest at the rate of eight per centum per annum, there shall be
determined, as of June thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty-two, the
amount of the actuarial accrued liability of the retirement system,
computed pursuant to the entry age normal cost method of ascertaining
such actuarial accrued liability.
 (D) With respect to determination of the amount of contributions
payable to the contingent reserve fund in each city fiscal year
occurring during the period beginning on July first, nineteen hundred
eighty-two and ending on June thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty-eight,
the nineteen hundred eighty-two unfunded accrued liability adjustment
shall be the applicable installments of an amount which, if credited in
thirty equal annual installments (the first of which installments is to
be credited in the city's nineteen hundred eighty-two--nineteen hundred
eighty-three fiscal year) in reduction of the amounts which the board of
education would otherwise be required to pay to the contingent reserve
fund pursuant to items (i), (iii), (iv), (vi) and (vii) of subparagraph
(2) of paragraph (c) of this subdivision sixteen or otherwise pursuant
to law, would be the actuarial equivalent, on the basis of eight per
centum interest per annum, of the excess of the amount computed pursuant
to sub-item (B) of this item (vi) over the amount computed pursuant to
sub-item (C) of this item (vi).
 (E) With respect to determination of the amount of contributions
payable to the contingent reserve fund in each city fiscal year
occurring during the period beginning on July first, nineteen hundred
eighty-eight and ending on June thirtieth, two thousand twelve, the
nineteen hundred eighty-two unfunded accrued liability adjustment shall
be an amount which, when credited in twenty-four equal annual
installments (the first of which installments is to be credited in the
city's nineteen hundred eighty-eight--nineteen hundred eighty-nine
fiscal year) in reduction of the amounts which the board of education
would otherwise be required to pay to the contingent reserve fund
pursuant to items (i), (iii), (iv), (vi) and (vii) of subparagraph (2)
of paragraph (c) of this subdivision sixteen or otherwise pursuant to
law, shall be the actuarial equivalent, on the basis of eight and
one-quarter per centum interest per annum, of the present value, as of
June thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty-eight on the basis of eight per
centum interest per annum, of those installments of the nineteen hundred
eighty-two unfunded accrued liability adjustment computed pursuant to
sub-item (d) of this item (vi), which installments are hypothetically
allocated by such sub-item (D) to designated city fiscal years
succeeding June thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty-eight.
 (vii) (A) The nineteen hundred eighty-five unfunded accrued liability
adjustment shall be an amount determined as prescribed in sub-items (B),
(C), (D) and (E) of this item (vii).
 (B) Upon the basis of the actuarial tables in effect for valuation
purposes with respect to determination of the normal contribution
payable to the contingent reserve fund in the city's nineteen hundred
eighty-four--nineteen hundred eighty-five fiscal year and interest at
the rate of eight per centum per annum, there shall be determined as of
June thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty-five, the amount of the
actuarial accrued liability of the retirement system, computed pursuant
to the entry age normal cost method of ascertaining such actuarial
accrued liability.
 (C) Upon the basis of the actuarial tables in effect for valuation
purposes with respect to determination of the normal contribution
payable to the contingent reserve fund in the city's nineteen hundred
eighty-five--nineteen hundred eighty-six fiscal year and interest at the
rate of eight per centum per annum, there shall be determined, as of
June thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty-five, the amount of the
actuarial accrued liability of the retirement system, computed pursuant
to the entry age normal costs method of ascertaining such actuarial
accrued liability.
 (D) With respect to determination of the amount of contributions
payable to the contingent reserve fund in each city fiscal year
occurring during the period beginning on July first, nineteen hundred
eighty-five and ending on June thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty-eight,
the nineteen hundred eighty-five unfunded accrued liability adjustment
shall be the applicable installments of an amount which, if credited in
thirty equal annual installments (the first of which installments is to
be credited in the city's nineteen hundred eighty-five--nineteen hundred
eighty-six fiscal year) in reduction of the amounts which the board of
education would otherwise be required to pay to the contingent reserve
fund pursuant to items (i), (iii), (iv), (vi) and (vii) of subparagraph
(2) of this paragraph (c) or otherwise pursuant to law, would be the
actuarial equivalent, on the basis of eight per centum interest per
annum, of the excess of the amount computed pursuant to sub-item (B) of
this item (vii) over the amount computed pursuant to sub-item (C) of
this item (vii).
 (E) With respect to determination of the amount of contributions
payable to the contingent reserve fund in each city fiscal year
occurring during the period beginning on July first, nineteen hundred
eighty-eight and ending on June thirtieth, two thousand fifteen, the
nineteen hundred eighty-five unfunded accrued liability adjustment shall
be an amount which, when credited in twenty-seven equal annual
installments (the first of which installments is to be credited in the
city's nineteen hundred eighty-eight--nineteen hundred eighty-nine
fiscal year) in reduction of the amounts which the board of education
would otherwise be required to pay to the contingent reserve fund
pursuant to items (i), (iii), (iv), (vi) and (vii) of subparagraph (2)
of this paragraph (c) or otherwise pursuant to law, shall be the
actuarial equivalent, on the basis of eight and one-quarter per centum
interest per annum, of the present value, as of June thirtieth, nineteen
hundred eighty-eight on the basis of eight per centum interest per
annum, of those installments of the nineteen hundred eighty-five
unfunded accrued liability adjustment computed pursuant to sub-item (D)
of this item (vii), which installments are hypothetically allocated by
such sub-item (D) to designated fiscal years succeeding June thirtieth,
nineteen hundred eighty-eight.
 (7) The balance sheet liability as of June thirtieth, nineteen hundred
seventy-four shall be the sum of twenty-five million, eight hundred two
thousand, nine hundred seventy-two dollars ($25,802,972), consisting of
the sum of:
 (i) the discounted value, as of June thirtieth, nineteen hundred
seventy-four, of the sum of eleven million, fifty thousand, eight
hundred eighty-eight dollars ($11,050,888), which constituted the amount
payable to the contingent reserve fund in the city's nineteen hundred
seventy-four--nineteen hundred seventy-five fiscal year by the board of
education in fulfillment of its obligations to make contributions to the
retirement system payable in such fiscal year, such discounting being
calculated on the basis of interest at the rate of five and one-half per
centum per annum and a discount period of six months extending
retroactively from January first, nineteen hundred seventy-five to June
thirtieth, nineteen hundred seventy-four and such discounted value being
the sum of ten million, seven hundred fifty-eight thousand, nine hundred
seventy-nine dollars ($10,758,979); and
 (ii) the discounted value, as of June thirtieth, nineteen hundred
seventy-four, of the sum of sixteen million, three hundred two thousand,
thirty-eight dollars ($16,302,038), which constituted the amount payable
into the contingent reserve fund in the city's nineteen hundred
seventy-five--nineteen hundred seventy-six fiscal year by the board of
education in fulfillment of its obligations to make contributions to the
retirement system payable in such fiscal year, such discounting being
calculated on the basis of interest at the rate of five and one-half per
centum per annum and a discount period of eighteen months extending
retroactively from January first, nineteen hundred seventy-six to June
thirtieth, nineteen hundred seventy-four, and such discounted value
being the sum of fifteen million, forty-three thousand, nine hundred
ninety-three dollars ($15,043,993).
 (8) The balance sheet liability as of each June thirtieth succeeding
June thirtieth, nineteen hundred seventy-four to and including June
thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty, shall be determined as provided for
in subparagraphs nine to sixteen, inclusive, of this paragraph.
 (9) To the amount of the balance sheet liability as of June thirtieth
next preceding the June thirtieth (which last-mentioned June thirtieth
is hereinafter referred to as the "subject June thirtieth") as of which
the balance sheet liability is being determined as provided for in
subparagraph eight of this paragraph, there shall be added one year's
interest on such amount at the rate of five and one-half per centum per
annum.
 (10) With respect to the city's fiscal year ending on the subject June
thirtieth (hereinafter referred to as the "subject fiscal year") there
shall be added together the contribution components hereinafter
specified in this subparagraph, which components, for the purposes of
subparagraphs eight to sixteen, inclusive, of this paragraph, are
hypothetically deemed to have accrued in the subject fiscal year and to
have been payable therein, as follows:
 (i) the amount of the normal contribution for balance sheet liability
purposes (as defined in subparagraph five of paragraph (a) of this
subdivision); and
 (ii) the amount of the applicable installment of the unfunded accrued
liability contribution for balance sheet liability purposes (as defined
in subparagraph six of paragraph (a) of this subdivision); and
 (iii) the amount of the annual contribution, for balance sheet
liability purposes, on account of amortization of losses on dispositions
of certain securities within the meaning of subdivision six of section
seven of the rules and regulations (as defined in subparagraph seven of
paragraph (a) of this subdivision); and
 (iv) the amount of the annual contribution, for balance sheet
liability purposes, on account of reserves-for-increased-take-home pay
(as defined in subparagraph eight of paragraph (a) of this subdivision);
and
 (v) the amount of the annual military law contribution for balance
sheet liability purposes (as defined in subparagraph nine of paragraph
(a) of this subdivision).
 (11) To the amount resulting from the addition prescribed by
subparagraph ten of this paragraph (c), there shall be added interest
thereon at the rate of five and one-half per centum per annum from
January first of the subject fiscal year to June thirtieth of such
fiscal year.
 (12) The amount computed pursuant to subparagraph nine of this
paragraph in relation to the balance sheet liability as of June
thirtieth next preceding the subject June thirtieth (together with one
year's interest on such balance sheet liability) shall be added to the
amount computed pursuant to subparagraph ten of this paragraph in
relation to the subject fiscal year.
 (13) From the amount computed pursuant to subparagraph twelve of this
paragraph, there shall be subtracted the sum of:
 (i) The total amount of the sums paid to the contingent reserve fund
during the subject fiscal year by the board of education on account of
its obligations, which accrued during the city's second fiscal year
preceding the subject fiscal year to provide:
 (A) the normal contribution payable in the subject fiscal year under
the provisions of subparagraphs two and three of this paragraph, as then
in effect; and
 (B) the installment of the deficiency contribution (as defined in
subparagraph ten of paragraph (a) of this subdivision) or the
installment of the original unfunded accrued liability contribution (as
defined in item (i) of subparagraph five of this paragraph), as the case
may be, payable in the subject fiscal year; and
 (C) the amount of the contribution on account of amortization,
pursuant to subdivision six of section seven of the rules and
regulations, of losses on dispositions of certain securities (as defined
in subparagraph eleven of paragraph (a) of this subdivision) payable in
the subject fiscal year; and
 (D) the amount payable in the subject fiscal year on account of
reserves-for-increased-take-home pay; and
 (E) the amount payable in the subject fiscal year in behalf of members
pursuant to subdivision twenty of section two hundred forty-three of the
military law; plus
 (ii) interest on such total amount referred to in item (i) of this
subparagraph thirteen at the rate of five and one-half per centum per
annum from January first of the subject fiscal year to June thirtieth
thereof.
 (14) The remainder resulting from the subtraction prescribed by
subparagraph thirteen of this paragraph shall be the balance sheet
liability as of June thirtieth of the subject fiscal year.
 (15) The balance sheet liability as of June thirtieth, nineteen
hundred eighty shall be the amount resulting from the successive
computations of the balance sheet liability as of each June thirtieth
succeeding June thirtieth, nineteen hundred seventy-four up to and
including June thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty as prescribed by
subparagraphs eight to fourteen, inclusive, of this paragraph.
 (16) The balance sheet liability contribution payable in the city's
nineteen hundred eighty-one--nineteen hundred eighty-two fiscal year
shall be the first annual installment of an amount which, if paid to the
contingent reserve fund in forty equal annual installments, commencing
with payment of a first installment in the city's nineteen hundred
eighty-one--nineteen hundred eighty-two fiscal year, would be the
actuarial equivalent, as of June thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty-one,
on the basis of seven and one-half per centum interest per annum, of an
amount equal to the balance sheet liability as of June thirtieth,
nineteen hundred eighty.
 (16-a) The balance sheet liability contribution payable in each city
fiscal year during the period beginning on July first, nineteen hundred
eighty-two and ending on June thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty-eight
shall be one annual installment of an amount which, if paid to the
contingent reserve fund in thirty-nine equal annual installments,
commencing with a first payment in the city's nineteen hundred
eighty-two--nineteen hundred eighty-three fiscal year, would be the
actuarial equivalent, as of June thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty-two,
on the basis of eight per centum interest per annum, of the present
value, as of June thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty-two on the basis of
seven and one-half per centum interest per annum, of those installments
of the balance sheet liability contribution computed pursuant to
subparagraph (16) of this paragraph (c), which installments are
hypothetically allocated by such subparagraph (16) to designated city
fiscal years succeeding June thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty-two.
 (16-b) The balance sheet liability contribution payable in each city
fiscal year during the period beginning on July first, nineteen hundred
eighty-eight and ending on June thirtieth, two thousand twenty-one shall
be one annual installment of an amount which, when paid to the
contingent reserve fund in thirty-three equal annual installments,
commencing with a first payment in the city's nineteen hundred
eighty-eight--nineteen hundred eighty-nine fiscal year, shall be the
actuarial equivalent, as of June thirtieth, nineteen hundred
eighty-eight, on the basis of eight and one-quarter per centum interest
per annum, of the present value, as of June thirtieth, nineteen hundred
eighty-eight on the basis of eight per centum interest per annum, of
those installments of the balance sheet liability contribution computed
pursuant to subparagraph (16-a) of this paragraph (c), which
installments are hypothetically allocated by such subparagraph (16-a) to
designated city fiscal years succeeding June thirtieth, nineteen hundred
eighty-eight.
 (17) Notwithstanding any provision of the rules and regulations or any
other provision of law to the contrary, whenever the retirement board,
on the recommendation of the actuary, shall determine that it is
necessary to increase the reserves held in the annuity reserve fund, the
pension reserve fund or the pension fund, such board may direct that the
amount so needed shall be transferred thereto from the contingent
reserve fund.
 (d) (1) During the period commencing on July first, nineteen hundred
seventy-seven and ending on June thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty,
special interest at the rate of one and one-half per centum per annum,
compounded annually, shall be allowed with respect to the individual
account of each member in the annuity savings fund of the retirement
system.
 (2) Subject to the provisions of paragraph (f) of this subdivision,
during the period commencing on July first, nineteen hundred eighty and
ending on June thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty-two, special interest
at the rate of three and one-half per centum per annum, compounded
annually, shall be allowed with respect to the individual account of
each member in the annuity savings fund.
 (3) (i) Subject to the provisions of paragraph (f) of this
subdivision, during the period commencing on July first, nineteen
hundred eighty-two and ending on July thirty-first, nineteen hundred
eighty-three, special interest at the rate of four per centum per annum,
compounded annually, shall be allowed with respect to the individual
account of each member in the annuity savings fund.
 (ii) Subject to the provisions of paragraph (f) of this subdivision,
during the period commencing on August first, nineteen hundred
eighty-three and ending on June thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty-five,
special interest at the rate of one per centum per annum, compounded
annually, shall be allowed with respect to the individual account of
each member in the annuity savings fund.
 (iii) Subject to the provisions of paragraph (f) of this subdivision,
during the period commencing on July first, nineteen hundred eighty-five
and ending on June thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty-eight, special
interest at the rate of one per centum per annum, compounded annually,
shall be allowed with respect to the individual account of each member
in the annuity savings fund.
 (iv) Subject to the provisions of paragraph (f) of this subdivision,
during the period commencing on July first, nineteen hundred
eighty-eight and ending on June thirtieth, nineteen hundred ninety,
special interest at the rate of one and one-quarter per centum per
annum, compounded annually, shall be allowed with respect to the
individual account of each member in the annuity savings fund.
 (4) Such special interest provided for by subparagraphs (1), (2) and
(3) of this paragraph shall be credited to such individual account of
each member entitled thereto in the same manner and at the same time as
regular interest is required to be credited to such account with respect
to the same period of time. Such special interest shall not be
considered in determining rates of contributions of members. Nothing
contained in this paragraph shall be construed as applicable to any
member who is subject to the provisions of article fourteen or article
fifteen of the retirement and social security law.
 (e) (1) Subject to the provisions of paragraph (f) of this
subdivision, in determining the reserve-for-increased-take-home-pay of
each member entitled to such a reserve, additional interest at the rate
of one and one-half per centum per annum compounded annually shall be
included for each city fiscal year occurring during the period beginning
on July first, nineteen hundred seventy-seven and ending on June
thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty.
 (2) Subject to the provisions of paragraph (f) of this subdivision, in
determining the reserve-for-increased-take-home-pay of each member
entitled to such a reserve, additional interest at the rate of three and
one-half per centum per annum compounded annually shall be included for
each city fiscal year occurring during the period beginning on July
first, nineteen hundred eighty and ending on June thirtieth, nineteen
hundred eighty-two.
 (3) (i) Subject to the provisions of paragraph (f) of this subdivision
in determining the reserve-for-increased-take-home-pay of each member
entitled to such a reserve, additional interest at the rate of four per
centum per annum compounded annually shall be included for each city
fiscal year and portion thereof occurring during the period beginning on
July first, nineteen hundred eighty-two and ending on July thirty-first,
nineteen hundred eighty-three.
 (ii) Subject to the provisions of paragraph (f) of this subdivision,
in determining the reserve-for-increased-take-home-pay of each member
entitled to such a reserve, additional interest at the rate of one per
centum per annum compounded annually shall be included for each city
fiscal year and portion thereof occurring during the period beginning on
August first, nineteen hundred eighty-three and ending on June
thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty-five.
 (iii) Subject to the provisions of paragraph (f) of this subdivision,
in determining the reserve-for-increased-take-home-pay of each member
entitled to such a reserve, additional interest at the rate of one per
centum per annum compounded annually shall be included for each city
fiscal year occurring during the period beginning on July first,
nineteen hundred eighty-five and ending on June thirtieth, nineteen
hundred eighty-eight.
 (iv) Subject to the provisions of paragraph (f) of this subdivision,
in determining the reserve-for-increased-take-home-pay of each member
entitled to such a reserve, additional interest at the rate of one and
one-quarter per centum per annum compounded annually shall be included
for each city fiscal year occurring during the period beginning on July
first, nineteen hundred eighty-eight and ending on June thirtieth,
nineteen hundred ninety.
 (4) Additional interest shall not be considered in determining rates
of contribution of members. Nothing contained in this paragraph (e)
shall be construed as applicable to any member who is subject to the
provisions of article fourteen or article fifteen of the retirement and
social security law.
 (f) (1) The provisions of subparagraph (2) of paragraph (d) of this
subdivision and of subparagraphs (1) and (2) of paragraph (e) of this
subdivision, to the extent that any of such provisions grants special or
additional interest, as the case may be, for any period prior to July
thirty-first, nineteen hundred eighty-two, shall not apply to any person
who was not a member on such July thirty-first and shall not apply to
any person to whom, on such July thirty-first, a deferred retirement
allowance or any part of such a retirement allowance was payable
pursuant to the provisions of section thirty-two of the rules and
regulations. Nothing contained in paragraphs (d) and (e) of this
subdivision shall be construed as granting special or additional
interest, as the case may be, to any person with respect to any period
wherein such person was not a member entitled to be credited with
regular interest for the same period or was not a discontinued member
entitled to be credited, as a discontinued member, with regular interest
for the same period.
 (2) (i) The provisions of item (i) of subparagraph (3) of paragraph
(d) of this subdivision sixteen, to the extent that such item grants
special interest for any period prior to December sixteenth, nineteen
hundred eighty-two, and the provisions of item (i) of subparagraph (3)
of paragraph (e) of this subdivision, to the extent that such item
grants additional interest for any period prior to such date, shall not
apply to any person who was not a member on such date and shall not
apply to any person to whom, on such date, a deferred retirement
allowance or any part of such a retirement allowance was payable
pursuant to the provisions of section thirty-two of the rules and
regulations.
 (ii) The provisions of item (iv) of subparagraph (3) of paragraph (d)
of this subdivision sixteen, to the extent that such item grants special
interest for any period prior to the date of enactment of this item (ii)
of this subparagraph (2) of this paragraph (f) (as such date is
certified, pursuant to section forty-one of the legislative law), and
the provisions of item (iv) of subparagraph (3) of paragraph (e) of this
subdivision, to the extent that such item grants additional interest for
any period prior to such date shall not apply to any person who was not
a member on such date and shall not apply to any person to whom, on such
date, a deferred retirement allowance or any part of such a retirement
allowance was payable pursuant to the provisions of section thirty-two
of the rules and regulations.
 (3) Nothing contained in paragraphs (d) and (e) of this subdivision
shall be construed as granting special or additional interest, as the
case may be, to any person with respect to any period wherein such
person was not a member entitled to be credited with regular interest
for the same period or was not a discontinued member entitled to be
credited, as a discontinued member, with regular interest for the same
period.
 (g) (1) As used in this paragraph, the term "funds" shall mean the
funds created in accordance with the provisions of the rules and
regulations other than the variable annuity funds provided for by the
rules and regulations.
 (2) Subject to the provisions of subparagraph (4) of this paragraph,
in addition to regular interest annually allowed for the period from
July first, nineteen hundred seventy-seven to June thirtieth, nineteen
hundred eighty on the mean amount for the preceding year in each of the
funds created in accordance with the provisions of the rules and
regulations, there shall be annually allowed with respect to such period
supplementary interest at the rate of one and one-half per centum per
annum on such mean amount for the preceding year in each of such funds.
Such supplementary interest shall be annually credited to such funds at
the same time and in the same manner as regular interest was credited to
such funds with respect to such period.
 (3) Subject to the provisions of subparagraph (4) of this paragraph,
in addition to regular interest annually allowed for the period from
July first, nineteen hundred eighty to June thirtieth, nineteen hundred
eighty-two on the mean amount for the preceding year in each of the
funds created in accordance with the provisions of the rules and
regulations, there shall be annually allowed with respect to such period
supplementary interest at the rate of three and one-half per centum per
annum on such mean amount for the preceding year in each of such funds.
Such supplementary interest shall be annually credited to such funds at
the same time and in the same manner as regular interest is credited to
such funds with respect to such period.
 (4) (i) Subject to the provisions of subparagraph (5) of this
paragraph (g), in addition to regular interest annually allowed for the
period from July first, nineteen hundred eighty-two to July
thirty-first, nineteen hundred eighty-three on the mean amount for the
preceding year in each of the funds provided for in accordance with the
provisions of the rules and regulations, there shall be annually allowed
with respect to such period supplementary interest at the rate of four
per centum per annum on such mean amount for the preceding year in each
of such funds. Such supplementary interest shall be annually credited
to such funds at the same time and in the same manner as regular
interest is credited to such funds with respect to such period.
 (ii) Subject to the provisions of subparagraph (5) of this paragraph,
in addition to regular interest annually allowed for the period from
August first, nineteen hundred eighty-three to June thirtieth, nineteen
hundred eighty-five on the mean amount for the preceding year in each of
the funds provided for in accordance with the provisions of the rules
and regulations, there shall be annually allowed with respect to such
period supplementary interest at the rate of one per centum per annum on
such mean amount for the preceding year in each of such funds. Such
supplementary interest shall be annually credited to such funds at the
same time and in the same manner as regular interest is credited to such
funds with respect to such period.
 (iii) Subject to the provisions of subparagraph (5) of this paragraph
(g), in addition to regular interest annually allowed for the period
from July first, nineteen hundred eighty-five to June thirtieth,
nineteen hundred eighty-eight on the mean amount for the preceding year
in each of the funds provided for in accordance with the provisions of
the rules and regulations, there shall be annually allowed with respect
to such period supplementary interest at the rate of one per centum per
annum on such mean amount for the preceding year in each of such funds.
Such supplementary interest shall be annually credited to such funds at
the same time and in the same manner as regular interest is credited to
such funds with respect to such period.
 (iv) Subject to the provisions of subparagraph (5) of this paragraph
(g), in addition to regular interest annually allowed for the period
from July first, nineteen hundred eighty-eight to June thirtieth,
nineteen hundred ninety on the mean amount for the preceding year in
each of the funds provided for in accordance with the provisions of the
rules and regulations, there shall be annually allowed with respect to
such period supplementary interest at the rate of one and one-quarter
per centum per annum on such mean amount for the preceding year in each
of such funds. Such supplementary interest shall be annually credited to
such funds at the same time and in the same manner as regular interest
is credited to such funds with respect to such period.
 (5) The provisions of subparagraphs (2), (3) and (4) of this paragraph
shall not apply to or affect (i) the allowance of interest on or the
crediting of interest to accounts of members or discontinued members in
the annuity saving fund or (ii) the allowance of interest on or the
crediting of interest to reserves-for-increased-take-home-pay of members
or discontinued members or (iii) the determination of the amount of any
benefit payable to any member or beneficiary.
 (h-1) The allowance of special interest, additional interest and
supplementary interest, if any, with respect to any fiscal year of the
city beginning on or after July first, nineteen hundred ninety shall be
governed by the applicable provisions of section 13-638.2 of the
administrative code of the city.
 (h-2) The provisions of paragraph (d) of this subdivision, as such
paragraph applies to the contributions made by a member and the benefits
provided thereby, shall apply separately and independently to the
tax-deferred annuity net contributions, if any, of such member and the
benefits provided thereby, except as otherwise provided by section
thirty-three of the rules and regulations.
 (h-3) The provisions of subdivisions f and h of section 13-638.2 of
the administrative code of the city (to the extent that such
subdivisions f and h apply to this retirement system), as such
subdivisions f and h apply to the contributions made by a member and the
benefits provided thereby, shall apply separately and independently to
the tax-deferred annuity net contributions, if any, of such member and
the benefits provided thereby, except as otherwise specified in section
thirty-three of the rules and regulations.
 (i) (1) Notwithstanding the provisions of section nine of the rules
and regulations or any other provision of the rules and regulations or
any other law to the contrary, but subject to the provisions of
subparagraphs two, three and four of this paragraph, all income,
interest and dividends derived from deposits and investments authorized
by the rules and regulations, which income, interest and dividends were
heretofore or are hereafter received during any fiscal year commencing
on or after July first, nineteen hundred eighty, shall be used in such
fiscal year for the purposes hereinafter specified in this subparagraph
(to the extent that such income, interest and dividends are sufficient
for such purposes), in the order of priority herein stated, as follows:
 (A) first, to pay into the funds of the retirement system the amounts
of regular interest which are required to be paid into such funds in
such fiscal year by reason of being required to be allowed to such funds
pursuant to the provisions of paragraph a of subdivision two of section
seven of the rules and regulations, and to pay into such funds the
amounts of supplementary interest, if any, required to be so paid in
such fiscal year under the provisions of paragraph (g) of this
subdivision, and to pay into the annuity savings fund the amounts of
special interest, if any, required to be so paid in such fiscal year
under the provisions of paragraph (d) of this subdivision, and to pay
into the contingent reserve fund the amounts of additional interest, if
any, required to be paid in such fiscal year under the provisions of
paragraph (e) of this subdivision;
 (B) second, to pay into the contingent reserve fund the amount of any
losses in excess of gains (i) which net losses the retirement system
sustained during such fiscal year by reason of sales or other
dispositions of securities, and (ii) for which net losses the retirement
system is required to be reimbursed in such fiscal year, and (iii) to
which net losses subdivision six of section seven of the rules and
regulations, relating to graduated crediting of gains and amortization
of losses on dispositions of certain securities, does not apply;
 (C) third, if the total amount of such income, interest and dividends
received during such fiscal year is in excess of the total amount
required to make, in such fiscal year, the payments prescribed by items
(A) and (B) of this subparagraph, the amount of such excess shall be
paid into the contingent reserve fund and shall become a part of the
assets of such fund.
 (2) (A) Notwithstanding any other provision of this subdivision or any
other law to the contrary, the term "all income, interest and dividends
derived from deposits and investments", as used in paragraph (f) of this
subdivision (as such subdivision was in effect prior to July first,
nineteen hundred eighty), shall be construed, in relation to disposition
of all income, interest and dividends received by the retirement system
in each of the city's nineteen hundred seventy-six--nineteen-hundred
seventy-seven and nineteen hundred seventy-seven--nineteen hundred
seventy-eight obligations fiscal years (as such fiscal years were
defined by paragraph (a) of this subdivision prior to such July first)
as meaning the remainder obtained by subtracting from such income,
interest and dividends the sum of (i) the amounts of regular,
supplementary and special interest required to be allowed and paid into
the appropriate funds of the retirement system in such fiscal year
pursuant to the applicable provision of subdivision two of section seven
of the rules and regulations and this subdivision and (ii) the amount of
any losses in excess of gains (1) which net losses were sustained by the
retirement system during such fiscal year and which net losses were
sustained by reason of sales or other dispositions of securities, and
(2) to which net losses the provisions of subdivision six of section
seven of the rules and regulations do not apply.
 (B) for the purposes of the order of priority governing the
disposition of such remainder in the payment fiscal year with respect to
each such obligations fiscal year (as such disposition was prescribed by
the provisions of this subdivision as in effect during each such payment
fiscal year) the provisions of items (A) and (B) of subparagraph (i) of
such paragraph (f) shall be deemed to have been inapplicable and the
order of priority for such disposition shall be first, the use set forth
in item (C) of such subparagraph, second, the use set forth in item (D)
of such subparagraph, third, the use set forth in item (E) of such
subparagraph and fourth, the use set forth in item (F) of such
subparagraph, as such items were in effect during such payment fiscal
year.
 (3) (a) All income, interest and dividends which were derived from
deposits and investments authorized by the rules and regulations and
which were received during each of the city's nineteen hundred
seventy-eight--nineteen hundred seventy-nine and nineteen hundred
seventy-nine--nineteen hundred eighty fiscal years shall be used in each
such fiscal year for the purposes hereinafter stated in this
subparagraph, in the order of priority herein stated, as follows:
 (A) first, (i) to pay into the funds of the retirement system the
amounts of regular interest which are required to be paid into such
funds in such fiscal year wherein such income, interest and dividends
were received, which interest is so payable by reason of being required
to be allowed to such funds in such fiscal year pursuant to the
provisions of paragraph a of subdivision two of section seven of the
rules and regulations and (ii) to pay into such funds the amounts of
supplementary interest required to be so paid in such fiscal year under
the applicable provisions of paragraph (d) of this subdivision, and
(iii) to pay into the annuity savings fund the amounts of special
interest required to be so paid in such fiscal year under the applicable
provisions of paragraph (d) of this subdivision, and (iv) to pay into
the contingent reserve fund the amounts of additional interest required
to be paid in such fiscal year under the applicable provisions of
paragraph (e) of this subdivision;
 (B) second, to pay into the contingent reserve fund the amount of any
losses in excess of gains (i) which net losses were sustained by the
retirement system during such fiscal year in which such income, interest
and dividends were received and which net losses were sustained by
reason of sales or other dispositions of securities, and (ii) for which
net losses the retirement system is required to be reimbursed in such
fiscal year, and (iii) to which net losses subdivision six of section
seven of the rules and regulations, relating to graduated crediting of
gains and amortization of losses on dispositions of certain securities,
does not apply; and
 (C) third, to pay into the contingent reserve fund the amount, if any,
by which,
 (i) the total of all losses which the retirement system sustained
during such fiscal year by reason of sales of securities within the
meaning of subdivision six of section seven of the rules and regulations
and which the board of education would otherwise be required to amortize
pursuant to such subdivision, exceeds
 (ii) the total of all gains which were realized during such fiscal
year by reason of sales of securities within the meaning of such
subdivision and which would otherwise be required by such subdivision to
be credited in favor of the board of education in installments.
 (b) If the total amount of such income, interest and dividends
received during each such fiscal year referred to in item (a) of this
subparagraph is in excess of the total amount required to make, in the
same fiscal year, the payments prescribed by sub-items (A), (B) and (C)
of such item (a), the amount of such excess shall be paid into the
contingent reserve fund as of June thirtieth of such fiscal year and
shall become a part of the assets of such fund as of such date.
 (4) Nothing contained in subparagraphs one, two and three of this
paragraph shall be construed as applicable to income, interest and
dividends resulting from deposits or investments made under the variable
annuity program of the retirement system.
 (j)(1) The board of education or the New York city school construction
authority shall make monthly payments, in twelve equal installments,
with respect to the respective obligations which such board or authority
incurs to pay sums to the retirement system.
 (2) In the city's nineteen hundred eighty--nineteen hundred eighty-one
fiscal year and in each city fiscal year thereafter, the equal monthly
payments shall be in respect of obligations which accrue in such fiscal
year and shall be made in such fiscal year on or before the last day of
each month.
 (2-a) Where a responsible obligor (as defined in paragraph ten of
subdivision a of section 13-638.2 of the administrative code of the city
of New York) is required to make payments to the retirement system
pursuant to applicable provisions of law in fiscal year two thousand
twelve--two thousand thirteen, and in any fiscal year thereafter, and
the provisions of this paragraph or the provisions of any other
applicable law do not otherwise specifically require such responsible
obligor to make such payments by a particular date or dates during such
fiscal year, such responsible obligor shall make such payments either
(i) in total on or before January first of such fiscal year, or (ii) in
twelve equal monthly installments, as determined by the actuary, with
each monthly installment to be paid on or before the last day of each
month.
 (3) The retirement board of the retirement system may waive the
requirements of the foregoing provisions of this paragraph with respect
to time of payment to such system, provided that any such waiver of time
of payment in any instance shall not apply to the time of subsequent
payments unless there shall be a subsequent waiver.
 17. (a) For the purposes of this subdivision, the terms "rules and
regulations" and "retirement system" shall have the meanings set forth
in subparagraphs three and four, respectively, of paragraph (a) of
subdivision sixteen of this section.
 (b) The following terms, as used in this subdivision, shall have the
following meanings, unless a different meaning is plainly required by
the context:
 (1) "Member." Any person included in the membership of the retirement
system as provided in section three of the rules and regulations.
 (2) "Actuarial equivalent benefit." Any benefit which pursuant to the
rules and regulations or by law is required to be an actuarial
equivalent or pursuant to the rules and regulations or by law is
required to be determined on the basis of an actuarial equivalent.
 (3)(i) "Seven percent member for actuarial equivalent benefit
purposes." A member who meets all of the following conditions:
 (A) paragraph (c) of this subdivision (relating to the definition of
members to whom regular interest at seven per centum per annum,
compounded annually, applies) applies to such member; and
 (B) an actuarial equivalent benefit (other than a variable annuity
program benefit) has become payable by the retirement system to or on
account of such member; and
 (C) it is provided by a resolution adopted by the retirement board (A)
that a mortality table which does not differentiate on the basis of sex
shall be used to calculate such actuarial equivalent benefit or a
portion of such benefit, or (B) that the modified Option 1 pension
computation formula (as defined in subparagraph thirteen of this
paragraph) shall be used to calculate such actuarial equivalent benefit.
 (ii) Except in cases to which the modified Option 1 pension
computation formula applies pursuant to a resolution adopted by the
retirement board, nothing contained in sub-item (C) of item (i) of this
subparagraph shall be construed as referring to or including any
calculation of an actuarial equivalent benefit (or portion of such
benefit) payable to any person where such calculation is required by
retirement board resolution to be made through the use of a
sex-differentiated mortality table.
 (4) "Tier I member." A member whose benefits (other than a
supplemental retirement allowance) are prescribed by the rules and
regulations and who is not subject to the provisions of article eleven,
article fourteen or article fifteen of the retirement and social
security law.
 (5) "Tier II member." A member who is subject to the provisions of
article eleven of the retirement and social security law.
 (6) "Tier III member." A member who is subject to the provisions of
article fourteen of the retirement and social security law.
 (7) "Tier IV member." A member who is subject to the provisions of
article fifteen of the retirement and social security law.
 (8) "Tier III member entitled to a vested benefit." A Tier III member
who is entitled to a deferred vested benefit under the provisions of
section five hundred sixteen of the retirement and social security law.
 (9) "Tier IV member entitled to a vested benefit." A Tier IV member
who is entitled to a deferred vested benefit under the provisions of
section six hundred twelve of the retirement and social security law.
 (10) "Education service." Service as a paid official or employee of
the board of education of the city of New York as now constituted, or of
any prior board, body or agency of which it is the successor in school
affairs in the territory now comprised within the city and school
district of New York, or the New York city school construction
authority, and allowable as provided in section four of the rules and
regulations.
 (11) "Discontinued member." A fifty-five-year-increased-servicefraction member (as defined in subdivision thirty-one of section two of
the rules and regulations) who has discontinued education-service and
has a vested right to a deferred retirement allowance under the
provisions of section thirty-two of the rules and regulations.
 (12) "Variable annuity program benefit." Any benefit under the
variable annuity program of the retirement system which is payable from
the variable annuity reserve fund or the variable pension reserve fund.
 (13) (i) "Modified Option 1 pension computation formula." The method
of computing the pension component of an Option 1 retirement allowance
payable to a Tier I member and the amount of the Option 1 benefit
payable to the beneficiary or estate of such member who selected or
selects (or is deemed to have selected) Option 1 as to such pension
component, which method of computation is as prescribed by the
succeeding items of this subparagraph.
 (ii) The initial reserve for such pension component shall be computed
through use of mortality tables which do not differentiate on the basis
of sex (hereinafter referred to as "gender-neutral mortality tables")
and an interest assumption consisting of regular interest of seven per
centum per annum, compounded annually.
 (iii) Solely for the purpose of use as the minuend from which the
payments of such pension component to such member are subtracted in
order to determine the amount of the Option 1 benefit payable, upon such
member's death, to such member's beneficiary or estate by reason of such
Option 1 selection in relation to such pension component, the present
value of such member's maximum pension, as it was at the time of such
member's retirement, shall be deemed to be the greatest of:
 (A) such present value determined on the basis of gender-neutral
nortality tables and an interest assumption consisting of regular
interest of seven per centum per annum, compounded annually; or
 (B) such present value determined on the basis of the female mortality
tables and the regular interest applicable to such member in effect
immediately prior to the date of enactment (as certified pursuant to
section forty-one of the legislative law) of this subdivision; or
 (C) such present value determined on the basis of the male mortality
tables and the regular interest applicable to such member in effect
immediately prior to the date of enactment of this subdivision.
 (iv) The pension component payable to such member shall be computed on
the basis of gender-neutral mortality tables and an interest assumption
consisting of regular interest of seven per centum per annum, compounded
annually, so that:
 (A) the present value, as it was at the time of such member's
retirement, of such component; plus
 (B) the present value, as it was at the time of such member's
retirement, of the amount payable to such member's Option 1 beneficiary
or estate upon the death of the member as provided for by the applicable
provisions of item (v) of this subparagraph;
shall be equal to the Option 1 initial reserve determined for such
pension component with respect to such member pursuant to the provisions
of item (ii) of this subparagraph.
 (v) Where such member dies before he or she has received payments on
account of such pension component equal to the present value of such
member's maximum pension as computed pursuant to item (iii) of this
subparagraph, the Option 1 benefit payable to the beneficiary or estate
of such deceased member, by reason of such Option 1 selection in
relation to such pension component, shall be the remainder obtained by
subtracting from such present value determined pursuant to such item
(iii) in relation to such pension component, the total of such Option 1
payments on account of such pension component received by or payable to
such member for the period prior to his or her death.
 (vi) In relation to the Option 1 benefits determined pursuant to the
method of computation set forth in this subparagraph by reason of
discontinuance of education service by a discontinued member, the phrase
"time of such member's retirement" as set forth in items (iii) and (iv)
of this subparagraph, shall be deemed, for the purposes of this
subparagraph, to mean the date of commencement of the retirement
allowance of such discontinued member.
 (14) "Selection of mode of benefit." The choice made by a member (as
permitted by and pursuant to the requirements of the rules and
regulations or applicable law governing such choice by such member) as
to whether the maximum amount of his or her retirement allowance or a
component thereof shall be payable or such retirement allowance or a
component thereof shall be payable under an option selected by the
member. The term "selection of mode of benefit" shall include a case
where the maximum retirement allowance or a maximum component thereof
becomes payable because of a member's omission, within the time
permitted by the rules and regulations or applicable law, to select the
maximum benefit or an option.
 (15) "Best-of-three-computations method." (i) A method (as prescribed
by a resolution of the retirement board of the retirement system) under
which a retirement allowance (or portion thereof) payable to a member is
required to be determined for such member so that:
 (A) if such retirement allowance (or portion thereof) does not include
a variable annuity program benefit, such retirement allowance is the
greatest of:
 (1) such retirement allowance (or portion thereof) determined on the
basis of gender-neutral mortality tables and regular interest at the
rate of seven per centum per annum; or
 (2) such retirement allowance (or portion thereof) determined on the
basis of female mortality tables and the regular interest applicable to
such member as of a time prescribed in such resolution; or
 (3) such retirement allowance (or portion thereof) determined on the
basis of male mortality tables and the regular interest applicable to
such member as of a time prescribed in such resolution; and
 (B) if such retirement allowance (or portion thereof) includes a
variable annunity program benefit, then the part of such retirement
allowance (or portion thereof) other than any variable annuity program
benefit is determined in the manner provided for by sub-item (A) of this
item and such variable annuity program benefit (or portion thereof) is
the greatest of:
 (1) such variable annuity program benefit (or portion thereof)
determined on the basis of gender-neutral mortality tables and a uniform
rate of interest of four percent, as such rate of interest is provided
for in section forty-four of the rules and regulations; or
 (2) such variable annuity program benefit (or portion thereof)
determined on the basis of female mortality tables and such uniform rate
of interest of four percent; or
 (3) such variable annuity program benefit (or portion thereof)
determined on the basis of male mortality tables and such uniform rate
of interest of four percent.
 (ii) Where, under the provisions of any such resolution of the
retirement board, the modified Option 1 pension computation formula (as
defined in subparagraph thirteen of this paragraph) applies to any
member, the term, "best-of-three-computations method," where used in
relation to such member, shall be deemed to include such modified Option
1 pension computation formula, to the extent that such formula governs
the determination of the pension component (or portion thereof) of such
member's retirement allowance.
 (16) "Person entitled to a recomputation of benefits." Any person who
meets all of the conditions stated below in this subparagraph:
 (i) such person, during the period beginning on August first, nineteen
hundred eighty-three and ending on the date next preceding the date of
enactment (as such termination date of eligibility for option
re-selection (as defined in subparagraph nineteen of this paragraph),
(A) retired or retires for age or service or superannuation or for
ordinary or accident disability, or (B) discontinued or discontinues
education service so as to become a discontinued member, or (C)
terminated or terminates employment so as to become a Tier III member
entitled to a vested benefit or a Tier IV member entitled to a vested
benefit; and
 (ii) such person's retirement allowance (or portion thereof), by
reason of such retirement or discontinuance of education service or
termination of employment, is required by a resolution adopted by the
retirement board to be re-determined pursuant to (A) the
best-of-three-computations method (as defined in subparagraph fifteen of
this paragraph), or (B) the gender-neutral computations method (as
defined in subparagraph eighteen of this paragraph); and
 (iii) a first payment (if such person, at the time of retirement,
discontinuance of education service or termination of employment, was a
Tier I member, Tier II member or Tier III member) on account of his or
her retirement allowance (as such retirement allowance was determined
prior to the termination date of eligibility for option re-selection)
was made prior to such termination date of eligibility for option
re-selection; or (if such person, at the time of retirement, or
termination of employment, was a Tier IV member), his or her effective
date of retirement (or date of commencement of benefits, if he or she
was a Tier IV member entitled to a vested benefit) occurred prior to the
termination date of eligibility for option re-selection.
 (17) "Joint and survivor option." (i) Any option under which, at the
time when such option is selected, a choice is made which includes both:
 (A) a benefit payable for the lifetime of the retired or vested member
by whom or in whose behalf such option is selected; and
 (B) a benefit (1) which consists of an amount equal to or constituting
a percentage of such retired or vested member's benefit and (2) which is
payable for the lifetime of a designated beneficiary selected at the
time when such option is selected.
 (ii) In any case where an option described in item (i) of this
subparagraph includes a provision prescribing that if the designated
beneficiary predeceases such retired or vested member, a maximum benefit
shall become payable to such member, such option shall nevertheless be
deemed to be a joint and survivor option.
 (18) "Gender-neutral computations method." A method (as prescribed by
a resolution of the retirement board of the retirement system) under
which a retirement allowance (or portion thereof) payable to a member is
required to be determined in the following manner:
 (i) if such retirement allowance (or portion thereof) does not include
a variable annuity program benefit, such retirement allowance (or
portion thereof) is determined on the basis of gender-neutral mortality
tables and regular interest at the rate of seven per centum per annum,
without reference to any other actuarial mortality or interest
assumption; or
 (ii) if such retirement allowance (or portion thereof) includes a
variable annuity program benefit, then the part of such retirement
allowance (or portion thereof) other than any variable annuity program
benefit is determined in the manner provided for by item (i) of this
subparagraph, and such variable annuity program benefit (or portion
thereof) is determined on the basis of gender-neutral mortality tables
and a uniform rate of interest of four percent (as such rate of interest
is provided for in section forty-four of the rules and regulations),
without reference to any other actuarial mortality or interest
assumption.
 (19) "Termination date of eligibility for option re-selection" shall
mean October first, nineteen hundred eighty-seven, provided that if the
executive director of the retirement system certifies to the retirement
board that as of such October first, or any later termination date which
the retirement board may establish pursuant to the provisions of this
subparagraph nineteen, it will not be administratively feasible to
process benefits (including conversion from fixed to variable benefits
and vice versa) under the best-of-three-computations method (as defined
in subparagraph fifteen of this paragraph (b)) and/or the gender-neutral
computations method (as defined in subparagraph eighteen of this
paragraph (b)) for any persons who are entitled, pursuant to law and/or
retirement board resolution, to benefits so computed, then the
retirement board, by resolution, may extend the termination date of
eligibility for option re-selection, as applicable to such persons, to a
later date, provided further, however, that any such extension or
extensions directed by the retirement board upon such certification or
certifications shall not result in any such extended termination date
later than eighteen months after October first, nineteen hundred
eighty-seven. In the event that any such extension is directed by a
resolution of the retirement board adopted prior to the date of
enactment of this subparagraph nineteen, such extension, upon the
enactment of this subparagraph, shall be valid and effective as of the
date of adoption of such resolution in the same manner and to the same
extent as if such enactment had occurred before such date of adoption.
 (c) Notwithstanding any provision of subdivision fifteen of section
two of the rules and regulations or any other law to the contrary,
commencing on August first, nineteen hundred eighty-three, and
continuing thereafter, "regular interest", in the cases of persons who
were members on July thirty-first, nineteen hundred eighty-three or who
thereafter became or become members, shall mean, subject to the
provisions of paragraphs (d), (e), (f), (g), (h), (i), (j), (k), (l),
(m), (n) and (o) of this subdivision, interest at seven per centum per
annum, compounded annually.
 (d) (1) (i) Subject to the provisions of items (ii) and (iii) of this
subparagraph, regular interest at the rate of seven per centum per
annum, compounded annually, shall be used as the actuarial interest
assumption for determining any actuarial equivalent benefit (other than
a variable annuity program benefit) payable to or on account of any
seven percent member for actuarial equivalent benefit purposes.
 (ii) Where an actuarial equivalent benefit is required by retirement
board resolution to be determined for any seven percent member for
actuarial equivalent benefit purposes through the use of the modified
Option 1 pension computation formula (as defined in subparagraph
thirteen of paragraph (b) of this subdivision), the actuarial interest
assumptions used in making such determination shall be as prescribed in
such formula.
 (iii) Where it is provided by board resolution that a portion of an
actuarial equivalent benefit shall be determined for any seven percent
member for actuarial equivalent benefit purposes on the basis of
gender-neutral mortality tables, and that the remainder of such benefit
shall be determined on the basis of mortality tables which are not
gender-neutral, regular interest at the rate of seven per centum per
annum, compounded annually, shall be used as the actuarial interest
assumption for determining the portion of such benefit required by such
resolution to be determined on the basis of gender-neutral mortality
tables and such rate of regular interest shall not apply to the
determination of the remainder of such benefit.
 (2) Notwithstanding that the process of determining whether a member
is a seven percent member for actuarial equivalent benefit purposes may
include, for the purpose of ascertaining the highest applicable benefit,
alternative hypothetical benefit calculations utilizing a rate of
regular interest other than such rate of seven per centum, nothing
contained in paragraph (c) of this subdivision or in subparagraph one of
this paragraph shall be construed as requiring that in the determination
of any actuarial equivalent benefit (other than a variable annuity
program benefit) payable to or on account of any member who is not a
seven percent member for actuarial equivalent benefit purposes, any rate
of interest be used other than regular interest, as prescribed by the
applicable provisions of subdivision fifteen of section two of the rules
and regulations.
 (e) The provisions of subparagraph one of paragraph (d) of this
subdivision shall not apply to any person who, prior to August first,
nineteen hundred eighty-three, retired as a member of the retirement
system for age or service or superannuation or for ordinary or accident
disability and who was such a retiree immediately prior to such August
first; provided, however, that where any such retiree retired pursuant
to subdivision two of section ten of the rules and regulations or
retired for ordinary or accident disability, and such retiree re-entered
or re-enters education service and on or after July thirty-first,
nineteen hundred eighty-three, was or is restored to membership in the
retirement system, the provisions of such subparagraph one, from and
after such date of restoration to membership, shall apply to such
restored member with respect to determination of any actuarial
equivalent benefit which is both (1) a benefit to which he or she became
or becomes entitled upon his or her subsequent retirement or subsequent
discontinuance of service so as to qualify for benefits, and (2) a
benefit which is not a continuation, without change, of a benefit which
had previously become payable to him or her by reason of his or her
prior retirement; provided further that nothing contained in the
preceding provisions of this paragraph shall be construed as making
subparagraph one of such paragraph (d) applicable to any such member who
was not or is not a seven percent member for actuarial equivalent
benefit purposes at such time of subsequent retirement or subsequent
discontinuance of service.
 (f) (1) Subject to the provisions of subparagraph two of this
paragraph, the provisions of subparagraph one of paragraph (d) of this
subdivision shall not apply to any Tier I or Tier II member who, (A)
prior to August first, nineteen hundred eighty-three discontinued
service under such circumstances that such member became a discontinued
member and acquired a vested right to receive a retirement allowance
pursuant to section thirty-two of the rules and regulations (and, in the
case of a Tier II member, article eleven of the retirement and social
security law), and (B) was such a discontinued member immediately prior
to such August first.
 (2) If such a discontinued member returned or returns to education
service and on or after July thirty-first, nineteen hundred eighty-three
and before payability of his or her retirement allowance as such member
began or begins, again became or becomes an active member pursuant to
the applicable provisions of such section thirty-two, the provision of
subparagraph one of such paragraph (d) shall apply to him or her on and
after the date of such resumption of active membership; provided that
nothing contained in the preceding provisions of this subparagraph shall
be construed as making the provisions of subparagraph one of such
paragraph (d) applicable to any such member who was not or is not a
seven percent member for actuarial equivalent benefit purposes at the
time of subsequent retirement or subsequent discontinuance of service so
as to qualify for benefits.
 (3) Subject to the provisions of subparagraph four of this paragraph,
the provisions of subparagraph one of paragraph (d) of this subdivision
shall not apply to any Tier III or Tier IV member who, (i) prior to
August first, nineteen hundred eighty-three, terminated employment under
such circumstances that such member became a Tier III member entitled to
a vested benefit or a Tier IV member entitled to vested benefit and (ii)
had such status immediately prior to such August first.
 (4) If a member who became entitled to a vested benefit as described
in subparagraph three of this paragraph returned or returns to
education-service and, on or after July thirty-first, nineteen hundred
eighty-three and before payability of his or her vested benefit began or
begins, resumed or resumes status as an active member of the retirement
system, the provisions of subparagraph one of paragraph (d) of this
subdivision shall apply to him or her on and after the date of such
resumption of active membership, providing that nothing contained in the
preceding provisions of this subparagraph shall be construed as making
the provisions of subparagraph one of such paragraph (d) applicable to
any such member who was not or is not a seven percent member for
actuarial equivalent benefit purposes at the time of subsequent
retirement or of subsequent discontinuance of service so as to qualify
for benefits.
 (g)(1) Subject to the provisions of subparagraph two of this paragraph
and to the provisions of paragraph (i) of this subdivision, the
selection of mode of benefit (as defined in subparagraph fourteen of
paragraph (b) of this subdivision) which, prior to the termination date
of eligibility for option re-selection (as defined in subparagraph
nineteen of paragraph (b) of this subdivision), a person entitled to a
recomputation of benefits (as defined in subparagraph sixteen of such
paragraph (b)) made or makes in relation to the retirement allowance (or
any component thereof) which became or becomes payable to him or her
prior to such termination date of eligibility for option re-selection,
shall be the selection of mode of benefit applicable to the recomputed
retirement allowance (or any corresponding component thereof) to which
he or she is entitled under the best-of-three-computations method or the
gender-neutral computations method, and any such person entitled to a
recomputation of benefits pursuant to the best-of-three-computations
method or the gender-neutral computations method shall not be entitled
to make any change in such selection of mode of benefit.
 (2) (i) Notwithstanding the provisions of subparagraph one of this
paragraph, a person entitled to a recomputation of benefits shall be
entitled, to the extent and in the manner prescribed in the succeeding
items of this subparagraph, to change the original selection of mode of
benefit applicable to the retirement allowance (or any component
thereof) which became or becomes payable to him or her prior to the
termination date of eligibility for option re-selection.
 (ii) In any case where the original selection of mode of benefit of a
person entitled to a recomputation of benefits was a selection of a
joint and survivor option (as defined in subparagraph seventeen of
paragraph (b) of this subdivision), no change from such original
selection of a joint and survivor option may be made under this
subparagraph to any other selection of mode of benefit if the designated
beneficiary selected with respect to such joint and survivor option by
such person entitled to a recomputation is not alive at the time of
filing of the form whereby such person entitled to a recomputation seeks
to change, pursuant to this subparagraph, his or her original selection
of such joint and survivor option.
 (iii) Except for a change of selection of mode of benefit prohibited
by item (ii) of this subparagraph, any original selection of mode of
benefit may be changed pursuant to this subparagraph to another
selection of mode of benefit, provided all of the conditions set forth
in items (iv), (vi) and (viii) of this subparagraph are met.
 (iv) Subject to the provisions of items (vii) and (viii) of this
subparagraph, a person entitled to a recomputation of benefits may,
pursuant to this subparagraph, effect any such permissible change of his
or her original selection of mode of benefit by executing, acknowledging
and filing with the retirement system, within the applicable period of
time prescribed by item (vi) of this subparagraph, a new selection of
mode of benefit. If the original selection of mode of benefit of the
person filing such new selection was a selection of a joint and survivor
option, such new selection shall be void and of no effect unless (a) the
designated beneficiary named in such original selection of a joint and
survivor option signs and acknowledges, in the form for such new
selection of mode of benefit, a consent to such changed selection of
mode of benefit, and (b) such original designated beneficiary is alive
on the date of filing of such new selection.
 (v) The retirement system shall mail to each person entitled to a
recomputation of benefits a letter showing amounts of benefits, as
recomputed for such person under the best-of-three-computations method
or the gender-neutral computations method, for modes of benefit other
than joint and survivor options, together with a statement advising such
person that upon request, the amounts of recomputed benefits under joint
and survivor options will be provided.
 (vi) The period of time within which any such person entitled to a
recomputation may file a new selection of mode of benefit as provided
for in items (iii) and (iv) of this subparagraph shall be sixty days
after the date of issuance set forth in such letter mailed to such
person pursuant to item (v) of this subparagraph; provided, however,
that if, pursuant to the request of such person, a later letter setting
forth benefits information in relation to a new selection of a mode of
benefit is mailed to such person by the retirement system, such period
of time for filing a new selection of mode of benefit shall be thirty
days after the date of issuance set forth in such later letter.
 (vii) Upon the filing of a new selection of mode of benefit pursuant
to this subparagraph by any such person entitled to a recomputation,
such new selection shall be irrevocable and such person shall not be
entitled to file any other selection of mode of benefit with respect to
such retirement allowance (or any component thereof) which became
payable to him or her prior to the termination date of eligibility for
option re-selection.
 (viii) No new selection of mode of benefit filed pursuant to the
preceding items of this subparagraph shall be valid or effective as a
change of mode of benefit or for any other purpose unless the person
entitled to a recomputation of benefits who files such new selection is
alive on the date (hereinafter referred to as the "validating date")
three hundred sixty-five days after the date of filing of such new
selection of mode of benefit. If such person filing such new selection
of mode of benefit is alive on the validating date with respect to such
new selection, such new selection shall become valid and effective on
such validating date; provided, however, that from and after the
effective date of retirement of such person making such valid and
effective new selection of mode of benefit (if he or she retired for age
or service or superannuation or for ordinary or accident disability) or
from and after the date on which payability of the original benefits of
such person began (if he or she was a discontinued member or
discontinued sanitation member or Tier III member entitled to a vested
benefit or Tier IV member entitled to a vested benefit), such new
selection of mode of benefit shall supersede such original selection of
mode of benefit and shall apply to and govern the amount of benefits
payable to such person or to his or her designated beneficiary or
estate.
 (h) Subject to the provisions of paragraph (i) of this subdivision, in
any case where a member of the retirement system who retired before
August first, nineteen hundred eighty-three pursuant to subdivision two
of section ten of the rules and regulations or for ordinary or accident
disability re-entered or re-enters its membership on or after July
thirty-first, nineteen hundred eighty-three, nothing contained in
paragraphs (c), (d) and (e) of this subdivision shall be construed as
authorizing or permitting him or her to change any selection of mode of
benefit (as defined in subparagraph fourteen of paragraph (b) of this
subdivision) made by him or her with respect to any benefit which, upon
his or her subsequent retirement or discontinuance of service so as to
qualify for benefits, is payable to him or her as a continuation,
without change, of a benefit which had previously become payable to him
or her by reason of his or her prior retirement.
 (i) Nothing contained in paragraph (g) or paragraph (h) of this
subdivision shall be construed as preventing:
 (1) any person (A) who, during the period beginning on August first,
nineteen hundred eighty-three and ending on the date next preceding the
date of enactment (as certified pursuant to section forty-one of the
legislative law) of this paragraph retired or retires pursuant to
subdivision two of section ten of the rules and regulations or for
ordinary or accident disability and (B) who is subject to such paragraph
(g) and (C) who on or after July thirty-first, nineteen hundred
eighty-three, re-entered or re-enters education service and again became
or becomes a member of the retirement system; or
 (2) any re-entered member referred to in such paragraph (h); upon his
or her subsequent retirement, from exercising any right, which any other
applicable law or any provision of the rules and regulations grants to
him or her under such circumstances, to make a selection of mode of
benefit (as defined in subparagraph fourteen of paragraph (b) of this
subdivision).
 (j) Notwithstanding any provisions of paragraph (c) of this
subdivision prescribing a rate of regular interest of seven per centum
per annum, compounded annually, for specified members described in such
paragraph, the rate of regular interest which shall be applied to fix
the rate of interest on any loan to any such member eligible to borrow
shall be four per centum per annum, compounded annually.
 (k) (1) Where any variable annuity program benefit (as defined in
subparagraph twelve of paragraph (b) of this subdivision) which is an
actuarial equivalent benefit (as defined in subparagraph two of such
paragraph (b)) is payable to any person by reason of:
 (i) the retirement of a member for age or service or superannuation or
for ordinary or accident disability, where such retirement occurred on
or after August first, nineteen hundred eighty-three or hereafter
occurs; or
 (ii) discontinuance of service or termination of employment of a
member, where such discontinuance or termination occurred or occurs on
or after such August first under such circumstances that such member
became or becomes (A) a discontinued member possessing a vested right to
receive a retirement allowance pursuant to section thirty-two of the
rules and regulations (and, in the case of a Tier II member, article
eleven of the retirement and social security law) or (B) a Tier III
member entitled to a vested benefit or a Tier IV member entitled to a
vested benefit; or
 (iii) the death, on or after such August first, of a member:
the rate of interest used to determine such variable annuity program
benefit shall be that prescribed by section forty-four of the rules and
regulations.
 (2) The retirement board may by resolution direct that different
computations, based on different mortality tables, shall be used to
determine separate portions of a variable annuity program benefit
payable as described in subparagraph one of this paragraph.
 (1) In any case where any provision of this subdivision has the
effect, in relation to any person, of amending, modifying or
supplementing any provision of the rules and regulations referred to in
subdivision f of section thirty-three of the rules and regulations
(relating to the tax-deferred annuity program of the retirement system),
such provisions of the rules and regulations, for the purpose of
applying such subdivision f to such person, shall be deemed to include
such amendment, modification or supplementation.
 (m) Modified Option 1 pension computation formula. (1) The retirement
board may by resolution direct that under such circumstances as are
designated in such resolution, benefits under Option 1 which consist of
or are derived from the pension component of a retirement allowance and
which are payable to or on account of members who:
 (i) became members prior to the date of enactment (as certified
pursuant to section forty-one of the legislative law) of this
subdivision; and
 (ii) retired or retire on or after August first, nineteen hundred
eighty-three, for age or service or superannuation or for ordinary or
accident disability, or on or after such August first, discontinued or
discontinue service so as to become discontinued members; shall be
determined under the modified Option 1 pension computation formula.
 (2) If the retirement board makes a direction for use of such formula
pursuant to the provisions of subparagraph one of this paragraph, it may
also direct by resolution:
 (i) that any member who is subject to the modified Option 1 pension
computation formula may elect, at such time and in accordance with such
procedures as are prescribed in such resolution, that such formula shall
not apply to such member and that the initial reserve determined for the
purpose of providing the benefits payable by reason of his or her
selection of Option 1 and the pension component of his or her Option 1
retirement allowance shall be determined on the basis of gender-neutral
mortality tables and regular interest of seven per centum per annum,
compounded annually; and
 (ii) that the benefit payable, upon the death of the member making
such election, to his or her beneficiary or estate shall be the
difference between such Option 1 initial reserve and the total of the
payments of such pension component received by or payable to such member
for the period prior to his or her death; and
 (iii) that where any member subject to the modified Option 1 pension
computation formula retired before the effective date of the retirement
board resolution adopted pursuant to subparagraph one of this paragraph,
and where the first payment on account of the retirement allowance of
any discontinued member subject to such formula was made before the
effective date of such resolution, such retiree or discontinued member,
within such period of time after such effective date and in accordance
with such procedures as are prescibed in such resolution, may elect the
method of Option 1 benefit determination set forth in items (i) and (ii)
of this subparagraph.
 (3) In any case where, pursuant to board resolution, a benefit is
required to be determined under the modified Option 1 pension
computation formula and the determination of such benefit is also
required by a board resolution adopted pursuant to item (iii) of
subparagraph one of paragraph (d) of this subdivision to reflect
different computations of separate portions of such benefits the methods
of computation under the modified Option 1 pension computation formula
shall be appropriately adjusted so as to give effect to the provisions
of such resolution adopted pursuant to such item (iii).
 (n) Any reference in this subdivision to retirement for service shall
be deemed, for the purpose of this subdivision, to include retirement
pursuant to the provisions of subdivision two of section ten of the
rules and regulations.
 (o) The rate of regular interest applicable to determination of the
rate of member contribution of any member whose last membership began
prior to the date of enactment (as certified pursuant to section
forty-one of the legislative law) of this subdivision shall be the rate
of regular interest which was applicable, under the provisions of the
rules and regulations in effect prior to such date of enactment, to the
determination of the rate of member contribution of such member, and
nothing contained in the preceding paragraphs of this subdivision shall
be construed as applicable to the determination of the rate of member
contribution of any such member whose last membership so began or as
changing or affecting the rate of member contribution of any such
member.
 (p) (1) In any case where:
 (i) a conversion of a fixed benefit or portion thereof to a variable
benefit is elected pursuant to section forty-two of the rules and
regulations; and
 (ii) pursuant to any provision of law and/or the rules and regulations
and/or any resolution of the retirement board adopted thereunder, the
rate of regular interest and/or the mortality tables which were required
to be used in the actuarial determination of such fixed benefit being
converted, are different from the rate of regular interest and/or
mortality tables would have been required to be used to determine a like
variable benefit as of the same date (hereinafter referred to as the
"calculation date") as of which such fixed benefit was required to be
determined as an actuarial equivalent; the composition of the variable
portion of each instalment of benefit for each month of the conversion
period shall be determined in the manner prescribed in subparagraph two
of this paragraph (p).
 (2) The amount, in units, of the variable portion for any such
conversion month to which subparagraph one of this paragraph applies
shall be equal to the number of units in the previous month's variable
portion, if any, plus a number of units which is the actuarial
equivalent, as of the calculation date, of the fixed portion converted
each month. Such actuarial equivalent units for each such month shall be
determined on the basis of the unit value for such month, in accordance
with a scientific formula which recognizes the difference in the rates
of regular interest and/or mortality tables referred to in subparagraph
one of this paragraph.
 (3) In any case where:
 (i) a conversion of a variable benefit is elected pursuant to section
forty-two of the rules and regulations; and
 (ii) pursuant to any provision of law and/or the rules and regulations
and/or any resolution of the retirement board adopted thereunder, the
rate of regular interest and/or mortality tables which were required to
be used in the actuarial determination of such variable benefit being
converted are different from the rate of regular interest and/or
mortality tables which would have been required to be used to determine
a like fixed benefit as of the same date (hereinafter referred to as the
"calculation date") as of which such variable benefit was required to be
determined as an actuarial equilvalent; the composition of the fixed
portion of each instalment of benefit for each month of the conversion
period shall be determined in the manner prescribed in subparagraph four
of this paragraph.
 (4) The amount of the fixed portion for any such conversion month to
which subparagraph three of this paragraph applies shall be equal to the
previous month's fixed portion, if any, plus a fixed amount which is the
actuarial equivalent, as of the calculation date, of the number of units
converted each month. Such actuarial equivalent fixed amount for each
such month shall be determined on the basis of the unit value for such
month, in accordance with a scientific formula which recognizes the
difference in the rates of regular interest and/or mortality tables
referred to in subparagraph three of this paragraph.
 (q) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, an option
selection made pursuant to this subdivision and the rules and
regulations governing such choice previously filed by a member or
retired member may be changed no later than thirty days following the
date of payability of his or her retirement allowance. A retired member
who has been retired for disability may change an option selection
previously filed no later than (1) thirty days following the date on
which such member's application for disability retirement was approved
by the retirement board or (2) thirty days following the date on which
such retiree was retired for disability, whichever is later.
 18. (a) The following terms, as used in this subdivision, shall have
the following meanings, unless a different meaning is plainly required
by the context:
 (1) "Board of education". The board of education of a city.
 (2) "Board of education retirement system". The board of education
retirement system established pursuant to the provisions of this section
in a city.
 (3) "City". A city having a population of one million or more.
 (4) "Rules and regulations". The rules and regulations for the
government, management and control of the board of education retirement
system adopted pursuant to the provisions of this section.
 (5) "Provisional employee". Any person employed by the board of
education on the basis of a provisional appointment pursuant to section
sixty-five of the civil service law.
 (6) "Education service". Service as a paid official or employee of the
board of education or the New York city school construction authority,
and allowable as provided in section four of the rules and regulations
or, in the case of a tier II member or a tier IV member, allowable
pursuant to the provisions which respectively govern the service credit
of such a member of the board of education retirement system.
 (7) "Former provisional employee". Any person permanently employed by
the board of education:
 (i) who is a transferred contributor in the New York city employees'
retirement system pursuant to section B3-57.0 or 13-188 of the
administrative code of the city of New York; and
 (ii) who first acquired membership in the New York city employees'
retirement system as a provisional employee of the board of education;
and
 (iii) whose last period of permanent employment by the board of
education was immediately preceded by his employment by the board of
education as a provisional employee.
 (8) "Tier II member". A member of a public retirement system who is
subject to the provisions of article eleven of the retirement and social
security law.
 (9) "Tier IV member". A member of a public retirement system who is
subject to the provisions of article fifteen of the retirement and
social security law.
 (b) (1) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (a) of subdivision
one of this section or any provision of the rules and regulations or any
other provision of law to the contrary, membership in the board of
education retirement system shall include any provisional employee in
education service who elects to become a member in the manner prescribed
by the applicable provisions of subparagraph two, subparagraph three or
subparagraph four of this paragraph.
 (2) Any such provisional employee who is not a member of the New York
city employees' retirement system at the time he or she elects to become
a member of the board of education retirement system may make such an
election of membership by filing with the board of education retirement
system a duly executed and acknowledged application for membership.
 (3) Any such provisional employee who is a member of the New York city
employees' retirement system at the time he or she elects to become a
member of the board of education retirement system may make such an
election of membership by filing simultaneously with the board of
education retirement system a duly executed and acknowledged application
for membership and a duly executed and acknowledged request that his or
her membership and service credit in the New York city employees'
retirement system be transferred to the board of education retirement
system.
 (4)(i) Beginning July first, two thousand twenty-four, upon the entry
into employment of any employee eligible to elect membership in the
retirement system pursuant to subparagraphs one, two and three of this
paragraph or any other applicable provision of law, and provided such
employee is not a member in the retirement system or any other public
retirement system of the city or state of New York as of such entry date
in covered employment, such employee shall be enrolled in the retirement
system effective ninety-one days after the commencement of employment.
Notwithstanding the preceding, if such employee files with the
retirement system an application to opt out of membership within ninety
days after commencement of employment, the retirement system shall
refrain from enrolling such employee unless and until such employee
subsequently files an application for membership with the retirement
system, or is otherwise subsequently mandated to enroll by the rules and
regulations of the retirement system or any applicable law. The employer
and the applicable union for the retirement system shall jointly provide
written notice to the employee informing the employee that he or she has
the option to opt-out of the automatic enrollment program. Such notice
shall be provided to the employee on three occasions: on or before the
thirtieth day, the sixtieth day and the ninetieth day prior to automatic
enrollment in the retirement system. The automatic enrollment of
eligible employees as provided for in this subparagraph shall not be
construed to modify the right of eligible employees to join the
retirement system as of the first date of covered employment by filing
an application for membership with the retirement system. The employer
shall inform the employee in writing of the right to join the system as
well as the fact that the employee shall be enrolled in the retirement
system on the ninety-first day after commencement of employment, unless
such employee files with the retirement system an application to opt out
of membership prior to such date. Any eligible employee who elects to
opt out of membership in the retirement system within the ninety day
period shall retain the right to join such system by subsequently filing
an application for membership so long as such employee remains in
covered employment.
 (ii) Every current employee who is eligible for membership in the
retirement system on July first, two thousand twenty-four, and who is
not a member in the retirement system or any other public retirement
system of the city or state of New York, shall be enrolled in the
retirement system effective October first, two thousand twenty-four,
unless such employee files with the retirement system an application to
opt out of membership before October first, two thousand twenty-four.
Such automatic enrollment in the retirement system shall not be
construed to waive any of the eligibility requirements for previous
service credit.
 (iii) The automatic enrollment of eligible employees as provided for
in this subparagraph shall not be construed to modify the rights and
obligations of any employee whose participation in the retirement system
is mandated by the rules and regulations of the retirement system or any
applicable law, and such mandated members may not opt out of membership.
 (iv) If an employee who is automatically enrolled in the retirement
system pursuant to the provisions of this paragraph is a member of a
union, the retirement system shall provide written notice to the union
of the employee's enrollment within thirty days of the employee's
enrollment in the retirement system.
 (v) The provisions of this subparagraph shall apply to full-time
employees and part-time employees. The provisions of this subparagraph
shall not apply to provisional employees.
 (c) (1) Notwithstanding the provisions of section B3-57.0 or 13-188 of
the administrative code of the city of New York or any provision of the
rules and regulations or any other provision of law to the contrary,
membership in the board of education retirement system shall include any
former provisional employee who, while employed in education service,
elects to become a member in the manner prescribed by subparagraph two
of this paragraph.
 (2) Any such former provisional employee may make such an election of
membership by filing simultaneously with the board of education
retirement system, within six months after the date of enactment (as
certified pursuant to section forty-one of the legislative law) of this
subdivision, a duly executed and acknowledged application for membership
and a duly executed and acknowledged request that his or her membership
and service credit in the New York city employees' retirement system be
transferred to the board of education retirement system.
 (d) Any election of membership in the board of education retirement
system made pursuant to paragraph (b) or paragraph (c) of this
subdivision shall be irrevocable.
 (e) (1) Upon the filing of a request for a transfer with the board of
education retirement system as provided for in subparagraph three of
paragraph (b) of this subdivision or subparagraph two of paragraph (c)
of this subdivision, the board of education retirement system shall file
such request for a transfer with the New York city employees' retirement
system. Upon the filing of such request for a transfer with the New York
city employees' retirement system, such retirement system shall make a
transfer of reserves and accumulated contributions to the board of
education retirement system in the manner required by section
forty-three of the retirement and social security law.
 (2) Nothing contained in the preceding provisions of this subdivision
or of any other law shall be construed (i) as imposing any restriction
under the third sentence of subdivision d of such section forty-three on
the determination of the salary base for benefit computation purposes
with respect to any person whose membership and service credit are
transferred to the board of education retirement system pursuant to the
applicable preceding provisions of this subdivision, or (ii) as making
the last sentence of such subdivision d applicable to any such
transferee.
 (3) Any employee of the board of education of the city of New York who
is a member of the New York city employees' retirement system may elect
to transfer membership to the New York city board of education
retirement system. Any election pursuant to this section shall be made
no later than the one hundred eightieth day next succeeding the date on
which the provisions hereof become effective by filing a written notice
thereof with the administrative head of the New York city employees'
retirement system, and the New York city board of education retirement
system, and, once made and filed, such election shall be irrevocable.
Where an employee of the board of education becomes a member of the New
York city board of education retirement system pursuant to this section,
the New York city employees' retirement system shall make a transfer of
reserves, contributions, and credits to the New York city board of
education retirement system in the manner required by section
forty-three of the retirement and social security law.
 (f) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (a) of subdivision one
of this section or any provision of the rules and regulations or any
other provision of law to the contrary, membership in the board of
education retirement system shall include any person employed by the New
York city police department in the title of school crossing guard who
becomes a member in the manner prescribed by the provisions of
subdivision g of section 13-638.4 of the administrative code of the city
of New York or by the provisions of subparagraph four of paragraph (b)
of this subdivision.
 (g)(1) For purposes of this paragraph, the terms "career pension plan
member", "career pension plan position" and "fifty-five-year-increasedservice-fraction member" shall have the meanings set forth in paragraphs
twenty-eight, twenty-nine and thirty-one, respectively, of section two
of the rules and regulations.
 (2) For purposes of this paragraph, the term "fractional plan member"
shall mean a member of the board of education retirement system holding
a career pension plan position who is not a career pension plan member
or a fifty-five-year-increased-service-fraction member, and who is not
subject to the provisions of article eleven, fourteen or fifteen of the
retirement and social security law.
 (3) Notwithstanding any provision of this section or any other
provision of law to the contrary, effective October first, nineteen
hundred ninety-three, the rules and regulations shall be deemed to be
amended so as to provide that any fractional plan member in education
service on such date, who holds a career pension plan position on such
date, shall, on such date, be deemed to have elected to become a career
pension plan member under the same terms and conditions, and with the
same rights, benefits, privileges and obligations as are applicable to
similarly situated members of the New York city employees' retirement
system, as provided in subdivision m of section 13-162 of the
administrative code of the city of New York, as enacted by the act which
added this paragraph.
 (h) (1) For the purposes of this paragraph, including, without
limitation, the use, pursuant to subparagraph two of this paragraph, of
the provisions of paragraphs one, two and three of subdivision c of
section 13-162 of the administrative code of the city of New York and
subparagraph (a) of paragraph four of such subdivision (as amended by
the provisions of the chapter of the laws of nineteen hundred
ninety-five which added this paragraph) to prescribe certain of the
additional rights, privileges, benefits and obligations hereunder, of
career pension plan members and increased-service-fraction members, the
following items of this subparagraph one shall apply:
 (i) the terms "career pension plan", "career pension plan member",
"career pension plan position" and
"fifty-five-year-increased-service-fraction-member" shall have the
meanings set forth in paragraphs twenty-seven, twenty-eight, twenty-nine
and thirty-one, respectively, of section two of the rules and
regulations;
 (ii) the term "city-service", as used in the provisions of subdivision
c of such section 13-162 referred to in the opening paragraph of this
paragraph one shall be deemed to mean "education-service", as defined in
subparagraph six of paragraph (a) of this subdivision;
 (iii) the term "career pension plan qualifying service", as used in
such provisions of subdivision c of section 13-162, shall mean
"creditable career pension plan service" as defined in paragraph
thirty-eight of section two of the rules and regulations;
 (iv) the pension referred to in item (ii) of subparagraph (a) of
paragraph four of such subdivision c of section 13-162 shall be deemed
to mean the pension referred to in subdivision seven of section twelve
of the rules and regulations; and
 (v) the provisions of subparagraph (b) of paragraph four of
subdivision c of such section 13-162 shall be deemed inapplicable to
career pension plan members and
fifty-five-year-increased-service-fraction members who are subject to
the provisions of this paragraph.
 (2) Notwithstanding any provision of the rules and regulations or this
section or any other provision of law to the contrary, the rules and
regulations shall be deemed to be amended so as to provide that on and
after the effective date of this paragraph:
 (i) each career pension plan member, subject to the succeeding
subparagraphs of this paragraph, shall have the same additional rights,
privileges, benefits and obligations and be subject to the same
additional terms and conditions with respect to withdrawing his or her
election to be a career pension plan member as are provided for in
relation to a similarly situated career pension plan member of the New
York city employees' retirement system by the chapter of the laws of
nineteen hundred ninety-five which added this paragraph; and
 (ii) each fifty-five-year-increased-service-fraction member, subject
to the succeeding subparagraphs of this paragraph, shall have the same
additional rights, privileges, benefits and obligations and be subject
to the same additional terms and conditions with respect to electing to
be a career pension plan member as are provided for in relation to a
similarly situated fifty-five-year-increased-service-fraction member of
the New York city employees' retirement system by the chapter of the
laws of nineteen hundred ninety-five which added this paragraph.
 (3) In any case where a member effects a change in his or her
retirement plan pursuant to the preceding subparagraphs of this
paragraph, his or her normal rate of member contribution as a member of
such changed plan shall be fixed pursuant to the appropriate provisions
of the rules and regulations with respect to rates of member
contribution of members of such changed plan.
 (4) Nothing contained in subparagraph two of this paragraph shall be
construed as diminishing or impairing:
 (i) any right granted to any career pension plan member by the
provisions of paragraph ten of subdivision m of section 13-162 of the
administrative code of the city of New York, where the provisions of
such paragraph ten are made applicable to such member by paragraph (g)
of this subdivision; and
 (ii) any right granted to a career pension plan member by subparagraph
(a) of paragraph one of subdivision c of section thirty of the rules and
regulations to withdraw from the career pension plan.
 (5) Notwithstanding any provision of the rules and regulations or this
section or any other provision of law to the contrary, the rules and
regulations shall be deemed to be amended so as to provide that:
 (i) subject to the provisions of item (ii) of this subparagraph five,
in any case where, on or after the effective date of this paragraph, a
fifty-five-year-increased-service-fraction member dies in service while
such a member, after completing twenty or more years of creditable
career pension plan service, such member shall be deemed to have died as
a career pension plan member, if status as such a career pension plan
member at the time of his or her death would result in a benefit larger
than the benefit which would be payable if such member died while a
fifty-five-year-increased-service-fraction member; and
 (ii) in any case where a member referred to in item (i) of this
subparagraph five is a Tier II member at the time of his or her death,
any change in the plan membership of such member pursuant to such item
(i) shall not change, alter or affect the applicability of article
eleven of the retirement and social security law to such member.
 (i) A retired member of the board of education retirement system shall
have the right, at any time after the retired member's retirement, to
execute and file a dues deduction authorization card with such
retirement system authorizing the deduction from the retired member's
retirement allowance of membership dues and the payment thereof to a
retiree organization of which the retired member certifies he or she is
then a member and which the retired member certifies is then affiliated
with either an employee organization certified or recognized as the
collective bargaining representative of all employees in the negotiating
unit of which the retired member was a part prior to his or her
retirement or an employee organization with which such employee
organization is then affiliated. The comptroller shall thereafter deduct
from the retirement allowance of such retired member the amount of
membership dues required to be paid by such retired member, and shall
transmit the sum so deducted to said retiree organization. Such
authorization shall continue in effect until revoked in writing by such
retired member.
 (j) Notwithstanding any other provision of law or rule, a retired
member of the board of education retirement system of the city of New
York shall be permitted to repay the outstanding balance of a loan taken
pursuant to the rules and regulations of the retirement system at any
time. Benefits payable after the repayment of the loan shall not be
subject to any actuarial reduction imposed as a result of an outstanding
balance.
 ** 19. Pick up of Tier I and Tier II member contributions by the
employer. (a) For the purposes of this subdivision:
 (1) The terms "board of education," "rules and regulations" and
"retirement system" shall have the meanings set forth in subparagraphs
one, three and four, respectively, of paragraph (a) of subdivision
sixteen of this section; and
 (2) the terms "member," "Tier I member" and "Tier II member" shall
have the meanings set forth in subparagraphs one, four and five,
respectively, of subparagraph (b) of subdivision seventeen of this
section.
 (b) the following terms, as used in this subdivision, shall have the
following meanings, unless a different meaning is plainly required by
the context:
 (1) "Basic rate of contribution as a Tier I or Tier II member." (i)
Subject to the provisions of clauses (ii) and (iii) of this subparagraph
one, the term "basic rate of contribution as a Tier I or Tier II member"
shall mean the proportion of the earnable compensation of a Tier I
member or Tier II member required by the provisions of subparagraph (i)
of paragraph f of subdivision one of section eight of the rules and
regulations and any other applicable provisions of the rules and
regulations or law to be deducted from the personal compensation of such
member as his or her member contributions, exclusive of any increase in
such contributions resulting from an election by such member pursuant to
law to effect such an increase, or any decrease in such contributions on
account of any program for increased-take-home-pay or pursuant to
subdivision one of section one hundred thirty-eight-b of the retirement
and social security law (relating to election to decrease member
contributions by contributions due on account of social security
coverage).
 (ii) In any case where it is provided in the rules and regulations
that the deduction from a member's compensation on account of member
contributions required to be made by a Tier I member or Tier II member
shall not be in excess of fifteen per centum unless the member so
elects, and such member makes such election, any per centum of such
deduction in excess of fifteen per centum with respect to such member
shall not be included in such member's basic rate of contribution as a
Tier I or Tier II member.
 (iii) In any case where a Tier I member or Tier II member who is a
fifty-five-year-increase-service-fraction member (as defined in
subdivision thirty-one of section two of the rules and regulations) has
elected or elects, pursuant to paragraph g of subdivision one of section
eight of the rules and regulations, to contribute to the retirement
system at a rate one per centum less than such member's normal rate of
contribution, such member's basic rate of contribution as a Tier I or
Tier II member, during any period wherein such election is in effect,
shall be one per centum less than such member's normal rate of
contribution as a fifty-five-year-increased-service-fraction member. In
any case where any such member elects pursuant to such paragraph g to
discontinue such reduction, such election to discontinue shall not be
deemed, for the purposes of subparagraph four of this paragraph (b) to
be an election to increase member contributions above the level
prescribed by the member's basic rate of contribution as a Tier I or
Tier II member, and upon such discontinuance, such member's basic rate
of contribution as a Tier I or Tier II member shall be his or her normal
rate of contribution as a fifty-five-year-increased-service-fraction
member.
 (2) "Contributing Tier I or Tier II member." With respect to any
payroll period as to which the status of a Tier I member or Tier II
member as to required member contributions is to be determined, the term
"contributing Tier I or Tier II member" shall mean any Tier I member or
Tier II member other than any Tier I member or Tier II member who is not
required to contribute during such payroll period because of his or her
then currently effective election, pursuant to subparagraph f of
paragraph one of section eight of the rules and regulations, not to
contribute.
 (3) "Employer responsible for pick up." The public employer by which a
Tier I member or Tier II member is employed.
 (4) "Tier I or Tier II member contributions eligible for pick up by
the employer." (i) With respect to any payroll period for a contributing
Tier I or Tier II member (as defined in subparagraph two of this
paragraph (b)), the amount of member contributions which, in the absence
of a pick up program applicable to such member pursuant to this
subdivision, would be required by law to be deducted, on account of such
member's basic rate of contribution as a Tier I or Tier II member (as
defined in subparagraph one of this paragraph), from the personal
compensation of such member for such payroll period, after (A) giving
effect to any reduction in such contributions required under any program
for increased-take-home-pay or pursuant to subdivision one of section
one hundred thirty-eight-b of the retirement and social security law and
(B) excluding any deductions from such compensation (or redeposits,
restorations or payments) on account of (1) loans or withdrawal of
excess contributions or (2) any election by any such member, pursuant to
any applicable provision of the rules and regulations, to increase his
or her member contributions above the level prescribed by his or her
basic rate of contribution as a Tier I or Tier II member or (3) any
other cause not attributable to the member's basis rate of contribution
as a Tier I or Tier II member after reduction in such rate, if any, as
described in item (A) of this clause (i).
 (ii) If no deductions on account of any such member's basic rate of
contribution as a Tier I or Tier II member are required by the rules and
regulations to be made from the personal compensation of such member for
any payroll period, such member shall not have, for such payroll period,
any Tier I or Tier II member contributions eligible for pick up by the
employer. The amount of Tier I or Tier II member contributions eligible
for pick up by the employer of any Tier I member or Tier II member for
any payroll period shall be determined solely on the basis of personal
compensation paid to such member for such payroll period by his or her
public employer. A Tier I member or Tier II member shall not have any
Tier I or Tier II member contributions eligible for pick up by the
employer with respect to any payroll period for which he or she is not
paid personal compensation by his or her public employer.
 (5) "Starting date for pickup." The first day of the first whole
payroll period commencing after the date which is sixty days after the
internal revenue service shall have issued a ruling that member
contributions picked up pursuant to this subdivision are not includible
as gross income for federal income tax purposes until distributed or
made available.
 (c) Notwithstanding any other provision of the law to the contrary, on
and after the starting date for pick up, the employer responsible for
pick up shall pick up and pay into the annuity savings fund (subject to
the provisions of subparagraph four of paragraph (f) of this
subdivision) the Tier I or Tier II member contributions eligible for
pick up by the employer which each Tier I member and Tier II member
would otherwise be required to make on and after such starting date.
 (c-1) Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the
employer responsible for pick up shall, in the case of a member who is a
participant in the age fifty-five improved benefit retirement program
(as defined in paragraph ten of subdivision a of section four hundred
forty-five-d of the retirement and social security law), pick up and pay
to the retirement system all additional member contributions which
otherwise would be required to be deducted from such member's
compensation pursuant to paragraph three of subdivision d of such
section four hundred forty-five-d, and shall effect such pick up on each
and every payroll of such participant for each and every payroll period
with respect to which such paragraph three otherwise would require such
deductions.
 (c-2) Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the
employer responsible for pick up shall, in the case of a member who is a
participant in the age fifty-five retirement program (as defined in
paragraph ten of subdivision a of section four hundred forty-five-i of
the retirement and social security law), pick up and pay to the
retirement system all additional member contributions which otherwise
would be required to be deducted from such member's compensation
pursuant to paragraph three of subdivision d of section four hundred
forty-five-i of the retirement and social security law, and shall effect
such pick up on each and every payroll of such participant for each and
every payroll period with respect to which such paragraph three
otherwise would require such deductions.
 (d) An amount equal to the amount of such picked up contributions
shall be deducted by the employer responsible for pick up from the
personal compensation of such member (as such compensation would be in
the absence of a pick up program applicable to him or her hereunder) and
shall not be paid to such member. Such deduction shall be effected by
means of subtraction from such member's current personal compensation
(as so defined), or offset against future pay increases, or a
combination of such methods.
 (e) (1) * The member contributions and additional member contributions
picked up pursuant to this subdivision for any Tier I member or Tier II
member shall be paid by the employer responsible for pick up in lieu of
an equal amount of the member contributions and additional member
contributions otherwise required to be paid by such member under the
provisions of the rules and regulations or the retirement and social
security law, and shall be deemed to be and treated as employer
contributions pursuant to subsection h of section four hundred fourteen
of the United States internal revenue code, as amended, for the
purposes, under federal law, for which such subsection h so classifies
such picked up contributions. Subject to the provisions of paragraph (d)
of this subdivision, for all other purposes, including but not limited
to:
 * NB Effective until notice of ruling by Internal Revenue Service per
ch. 627/2007 §22
 * The member contributions and additional member contributions picked
up pursuant to this subdivision for any Tier I member or Tier II member
shall be paid by the employer responsible for pick up in lieu of an
equal amount of the member contributions and additional member
contributions otherwise required to be paid by such member under the
provisions of the rules and regulations or the retirement and social
security law, including any member contributions required to be made for
the purchase of credit for previous service or credit for military
service pursuant to subparagraph three of this paragraph, provided,
however, that contributions picked up for the purchase of credit for
military service shall be deposited in the employer contribution account
in accordance with subdivision four of section one thousand of the
retirement and social security law, and shall be deemed to be and
treated as employer contributions pursuant to subsection h of section
four hundred fourteen of the United States internal revenue code, as
amended, for the purposes, under federal law, for which such subsection
h so classifies such picked up contributions. Subject to the provisions
of paragraph (d) of this subdivision, for all other purposes, including
but not limited to:
 * NB Takes effect upon notice of ruling by Internal Revenue Service
per ch. 627/2007 §22
 (i) the obligation of such member to pay New York state and New York
city income and/or wages or earnings taxes and the withholding of such
taxes; and
 (ii) the determination of the amount of such member's Tier I or Tier
II member contributions eligible for pick up by the employer or
additional member contributions required to be picked up pursuant to
paragraph c-one or c-two of this subdivision; and
 (iii) the determination of the amount of any retirement allowance or
other retirement system benefit payable to or on account of such member
or any other retirement system right, benefit or privilege of such
member;
the amount of the member contributions and additional member
contributions picked up pursuant to this subdivision shall be deemed to
be a part of the employee personal compensation of such member and such
member's gross personal compensation (as it would be in the absence of a
pick up program applicable to him or her hereunder) shall not be deemed
to be changed by such member's participation in such program.
 (2) Nothing contained in subparagraph one of this paragraph (e) shall
be construed as superseding the provisions of section four hundred
thirty-one of the retirement and social security law or any similar
provision of law which limits the salary base for computing retirement
benefits payable by a public retirement system.
 * (3) Employer pick-up of contributions in respect of previous service
or military service. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any
member eligible to purchase credit for previous service with a public
employer pursuant to this section or to purchase credit for military
service pursuant to article twenty of the retirement and social security
law, may elect to purchase any or all of such service by executing a
periodic payroll deduction agreement where and to the extent such
elections are permitted by the retirement system by rule or regulation.
Such agreement shall set forth the amount of previous service or
military service being purchased, the estimated total cost of such
service credit, and the number of payroll periods in which such periodic
payments shall be made. Such agreement shall be irrevocable, shall not
be subject to amendment or modification in any manner, and shall expire
only upon completion of payroll deductions required therein.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, any member who has entered into such a
payroll deduction agreement and who terminates employment prior to the
completion of the payments required therein shall be credited with any
service as to which such member shall have paid the contributions
required under the terms of the agreement.
 * NB Takes effect upon notice of ruling by Internal Revenue Service
per ch. 627/2007 §22
 (f) (1) For the purpose of determining the retirement system rights,
benefits and privileges of any Tier I member or Tier II member whose
Tier I or Tier II member contributions eligible for pick up by the
employer are picked up pursuant to this subdivision (including the
procurement of loans by any such member), such picked up member
contributions, subject to the provisions of subparagraph four of this
paragraph (f), shall be deemed to be and treated (i) as member
contributions made by such member pursuant to law and (ii) as a part of
such member's accumulated deductions.
 (2) For the purpose of determining the retirement system rights,
benefits and privileges of any member who is a participant in the age
fifty-five improved benefit retirement program (as defined in paragraph
ten of subdivision a of section four hundred forty-five-d of the
retirement and social security law), the additional member contributions
of such participant picked up pursuant to paragraph (c-one) of this
subdivision shall be deemed to be and treated as a part of such member's
additional member contributions under subdivision d of such section four
hundred fifty-five-d.
 (2-a) For the purpose of determining the retirement system rights,
benefits and privileges of any member who is a participant in the age
fifty-five retirement program (as defined in paragraph ten of
subdivision a of section four hundred forty-five-i of the retirement and
social security law), the additional member contributions of such
participant picked up pursuant to paragraph c-two of this subdivision
shall be deemed to be and treated as a part of such member's additional
member contributions under subdivision d of section four hundred
forty-five-i of the retirement and social security law.
 (3) Interest on contributions picked up for any Tier I member or Tier
II member pursuant to this subdivision (other than additional member
contributions picked up pursuant to paragraph c-one or c-two of this
subdivision) shall accrue in favor of the member and be payable to the
retirement system at the same rate, for the same time periods, in the
same manner and under the same circumstances as interest would be
required to accrue in favor of the member and be payable to the
retirement system on such contributions if they were made by such member
in the absence of a pick up program applicable to such member under the
provisions of this section.
 (4) Where member contributions of any Tier I member or Tier II member
are picked up and paid into the annuity savings fund pursuant to this
section, such picked up contributions shall be credited to a separate
account within the individual account of such member in such fund, so
that a separate record of the amount of such picked up contributions is
maintained.
 (5) For the purpose of determining the retirement system rights,
benefits and privileges of any Tier I member or Tier II member who is a
participant in a variable annuity program of the retirement system, his
or her picked up member contributions shall, to the extent and in the
proportions appropriate pursuant to his or her election to participate
in such program, be deemed to be and treated as a part of his or her
accumulated deductions and/or credits in his or her account in the
variable annuity savings fund. A separate record shall be kept showing
any such variable annuity savings fund account credits attributable to
any such picked up contributions.
 (6) Nothing contained in this paragraph (f) shall be construed as
granting member contributions or additional member contributions picked
up under this subdivision any status, under federal law, other than as
employer contributions, pursuant to subsection h of section four hundred
fourteen of the United States internal revenue code, for the federal
purposes for which such subsection h so classifies such picked up
contributions.
 (g) No member whose member contributions or additional member
contributions are required to be picked up pursuant to this subdivision
shall have any right to elect that such pick up, with accompanying
deduction from the personal compensation of such member as prescribed by
paragraph (d) of this subdivision, shall not be effectuated.
 ** NB Expires per ch. 681/92 § 16
 * 20. (a) For the purposes of this subdivision, the terms "rules and
regulations" and "retirement system" shall have the meanings set forth
in subparagraphs three and four, respectively, of paragraph (a) of
subdivision sixteen of this section.
 (b) The following terms, as used in this subdivision, shall have the
following meanings, unless a different meaning is plainly required by
the context:
 (1) "Tax-deferred annuity program". The tax-deferred annuity program
established pursuant to the provisions of section thirty-one hundred
nine-A of this chapter and section thirty-three of the rules and
regulations.
 (2) "Annuity savings fund". The annuity savings fund under the
tax-deferred annuity program.
 (3) "Annuity reserve fund". The annuity reserve fund under the
tax-deferred annuity program.
 (4) "Variable annuity savings fund". The variable annuity savings fund
under the tax-deferred annuity program.
 (5) "Variable annuity reserve fund". The variable annuity reserve fund
under the tax-deferred annuity program.
 (6) "Tax-deferred annuity account". The tax-deferred annuity account
maintained in the tax-deferred annuity program by a participant in such
program.
 (c) (1) Notwithstanding any provision of the rules and regulations or
any other provision of law to the contrary, a participant in the
tax-deferred annuity program who, pursuant to the applicable provisions
of the rules and regulations and/or the retirement and social security
law, retires for service or disability, or who discontinues service with
a vested right to receive a deferred retirement allowance, may elect to
defer commencement of the distribution of his or her tax-deferred
annuity account to the latest date permitted by the provisions of
section 403(b) of the internal revenue code pertaining to the
commencement of distribution of tax-deferred annuities, by filing an
election for such deferral of distribution with the retirement system
during the time period which:
 (i) for a service retiree, commences on the day such person's
application for service retirement is filed with the retirement system,
and which ends on the day prior to the effective date of retirement; or
 (ii) for a disability retiree, commences on the day such person
receives notification from the retirement system that it has approved
his or her retirement for disability, and which ends on the thirtieth
day after such receipt of notification; or
 (iii) for a member who discontinues service with a vested right to
receive a deferred retirement allowance, commences thirty days prior to
the date of such discontinuance of service, and which ends on the day
such retirement allowance becomes payable pursuant to the applicable
provisions of the rules and regulations and/or the retirement and social
security law.
 (2) A participant in the tax-deferred annuity program who, pursuant to
the provisions of subparagraph one of this paragraph, has elected to
defer commencement of the distribution of his or her tax-deferred
annuity account to the latest date for distribution referred to in such
subparagraph one may revoke such election by filing a revocation of such
election with the retirement system at any time prior to such latest
date. Where a participant has made such a revocation, the distribution
of his or her tax-deferred annuity account shall be made thereafter in
accordance with the applicable provisions of the rules and regulations.
 (3) Where a participant in the tax-deferred annuity program has
elected, pursuant to the provisions of subparagraph one of this
paragraph, to defer commencement of the distribution of his or her
tax-deferred annuity account to the latest date for distribution
referred to in such subparagraph one, the application of any provision
of the rules and regulations which requires the transfer of his or her
tax-deferred annuity account from the annuity savings fund to the
annuity reserve fund and/or from the variable annuity savings fund to
the variable annuity reserve fund upon the retirement of such
participant shall be delayed until the commencement of distribution of
his or her tax-deferred annuity account pursuant to such retirement and,
upon such commencement of distribution, such account shall be so
transferred in accordance with such provision.
 (4) Where a participant has made an election pursuant to the
provisions of subparagraph one of this paragraph, the distribution of
the entire amount in such participant's tax-deferred annuity account,
including any portion of such amount to be distributed pursuant to an
option for the payment of retirement benefits selected by such
participant pursuant to the rules and regulations or an applicable
provision of the retirement and social security law, shall not extend
beyond the maximum period permitted by the provisions of section 403(b)
of the internal revenue code pertaining to the distribution of
tax-deferred annuities.
 (d) The rules and regulations may be amended pursuant to the
procedures set forth in subdivision two of this section to establish
rules and regulations governing the borrowing by a participant in the
tax-deferred annuity program of contributions accumulated in his or her
tax-deferred annuity account, provided that in establishing and
administering such rules and regulations, no action shall be taken that
would render the tax-deferred annuity program in violation of section
403(b) of the internal revenue code.
 (e) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, or any rule or
regulation, or the provisions of any retirement board resolution to the
contrary:
 (1) on or after the first business day immediately following the
effective date of this paragraph, interest shall be allowed at the rate
of seven percent per annum, compounded annually, on the tax-deferred
accounts in the annuity savings fund of participants (i) who hold a
position represented by the recognized teacher organization for
collective bargaining purposes, or (ii) who held such a position at the
time they retired or discontinued service with vested rights to a
retirement allowance and elected to defer commencement of distribution
of their tax-deferred accounts in accordance with paragraph (c) of this
subdivision; and
 (2) the provisions of subparagraph one of this paragraph shall not
affect the rate of interest being charged on new loans from the
tax-deferred annuity program, and the rate of interest that was being
charged on such loans immediately prior to the effective date of this
paragraph shall be used for new loans from the tax-deferred annuity
program made on or after the effective date of this paragraph, unless
the rules and regulations governing loans from the tax-deferred annuity
program are amended pursuant to paragraph (d) of this subdivision to
establish a different rate of interest applicable to such loans; and
 (3) where a participant in the tax-deferred annuity program has
elected to transfer all or a portion of the amount credited to his or
her tax-deferred account in the annuity savings fund to a tax-deferred
account in the variable annuity savings fund, the retirement system
shall effectuate such transfer as expeditiously as is administratively
feasible.
 * NB There are 2 sub 20's
 * 20. Eligible rollover distributions. (a) For the purposes of this
subdivision, the terms "rules and regulations" and "retirement system"
shall have the meanings set forth in subparagraphs three and four of
paragraph (a) of subdivision sixteen of this section.
 (b) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in section
twenty-six of the rules and regulations, in the event that, under the
terms of this section or the rules and regulations, a person becomes
entitled to a distribution from the retirement system which constitutes
an "eligible rollover distribution" within the meaning of paragraph
thirty-one of subsection a of section four hundred one of the internal
revenue code, such distributee may elect, subject to any rules and
regulations adopted pursuant to paragraph (c) of this subdivision, to
have such distribution, or a portion thereof, paid directly to an
"eligible retirement plan" within the meaning of paragraph thirty-one of
subsection a of section four hundred one of the internal revenue code.
 (c) The retirement board is authorized to adopt such written
administrative procedures as it finds to be necessary in administering
the provisions of this subdivision, provided that they are not
inconsistent with the applicable provisions of the internal revenue code
and the rules and regulations thereunder.
 * NB There are 2 sub 20's
 21. Certain distributions and transfers by participants in the
tax-deferred annuity program. (a) For the purposes of this subdivision:
 (1) the terms "rules and regulations" and "retirement system" shall
have the meanings set forth in subparagraphs three and four of paragraph
(a) of subdivision sixteen of this section; and
 (2) the term "tax-deferred annuity program" shall mean the program
authorized by section three thousand one hundred nine-A of this chapter
as set forth in section thirty-three of the rules and regulations of the
retirement system.
 (b) (1) Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, in
the event that a person becomes entitled to a distribution from the
tax-deferred annuity program which constitutes an "eligible rollover
distribution" within the meaning of paragraph thirty-one of subsection a
of section four hundred one of the internal revenue code (as such
section is made applicable to the tax-deferred annuity program by
paragraph ten of subsection b of section four hundred three of the
internal revenue code), the person may elect, subject to any rules and
regulations adopted pursuant to paragraph (c) of this subdivision, to
have such distribution, or a portion thereof, paid directly to an
eligible retirement plan within the meaning of paragraph thirty-one of
subsection a of section four hundred one of the internal revenue code.
 (2) Nothing contained in section twenty-six or section thirty-three of
the rules and regulations shall be construed to prohibit a participant
in the tax-deferred annuity program from electing to transfer all or a
portion of his or her tax-deferred annuity net contributions to another
annuity contract described in subsection b of section four hundred three
of the internal revenue code where a non-taxable trustee-to-trustee
transfer of tax-deferred annuities is permitted by subsection b of
section four hundred three of such code and the applicable rules,
regulations and rulings thereunder.
 (c) The retirement board is authorized to adopt such written
administrative procedures as it finds to be necessary in administering
the provisions of this subdivision provided that they are not
inconsistent with the applicable provisions of the internal revenue code
and the rules and regulations thereunder.
 22. (a) For the purposes of this subdivision, the terms "rules and
regulations" and "retirement system" shall have the meanings set forth
in subparagraphs three and four, respectively, of paragraph (a) of
subdivision sixteen of this section, and the terms "Tier I member",
"Tier II member", "education service" and "discontinued member" shall
have the meanings set forth in subparagraphs four, five, ten and eleven,
respectively, of paragraph (b) of subdivision seventeen of this section,
and the term "fifty-five-year-increased-service-fraction member" shall
have the meaning set forth in paragraph thirty-two of section two of the
rules and regulations.
 (b) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, subdivision a of
section thirty-two of the rules and regulations shall be deemed to be
amended to provide that any member of the retirement system who:
 (1) discontinues education service on or after July first, nineteen
hundred sixty-eight, other than by death, retirement or dismissal; and
 (2) is a fifty-five-year-increased-service-fraction member at the time
of such discontinuance; and
 (3) (i) prior to such discontinuance, completed five or more years of
allowable service; and
 (4) does not withdraw his or her accumulated deductions in whole or in
part; shall have a vested right to receive a deferred retirement
allowance as provided in section thirty-two of the rules and
regulations.
 (c) Nothing contained in paragraph (b) of this subdivision shall
change, alter or affect the applicability of the provisions of article
eleven of the retirement and social security law to any Tier II member
who becomes a discontinued member pursuant to the provisions of
paragraph (b) of this subdivision.
 (d) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a Tier I discontinued
member with ten or more years of credited service in the retirement
system who dies before a retirement benefit becomes payable and who is
otherwise not entitled to a death benefit from the retirement system
shall be deemed to have died on the last day that he or she was in
service upon which his or her membership was based for purposes of
eligibility for the payment of a death benefit pursuant to the
provisions of section twenty of the rules and regulations. The death
benefit payable in such case shall be one-half of that which would have
been payable had such member died on the last day that service was
rendered.
 23. (a) The following terms, as used in this subdivision, shall have
the following meanings, unless a different meaning is plainly required
by the context:
 (1) "BERS" or "retirement system". The board of education retirement
system of the city of New York established pursuant to the provisions of
this section.
 (2) "BERS rules and regulations". The rules and regulations for the
government, management and control of BERS adopted pursuant to the
provisions of this section.
 (3) "Retirement board". The board established as the head of the
retirement system pursuant to sections five and five-a of the BERS rules
and regulations.
 (b)(1) In addition to the powers conferred upon it by the BERS rules
and regulations or by any other provision of law, the retirement board
shall, on or before April first of each year, establish a budget
sufficient to fulfill the powers, duties and responsibilities set forth
in the BERS rules and regulations and any other provision of law which
sets forth the benefits of members of the retirement system. Said budget
shall also include the amounts withheld for the purpose of paying the
expenses attributable to the tax-deferred annuity program pursuant to
the provisions of subdivision b of section thirty-three of the BERS
rules and regulations, and the amounts deposited in the variable annuity
expense fund pursuant to the provisions of subdivision 1 of section
thirty-six of the BERS rules and regulations. The retirement board
shall, if necessary, draw upon the assets of the retirement system to
fund the portion of such budget which is not derived from subdivision b
of section thirty-three of the BERS rules and regulations and
subdivision 1 of section thirty-six of the BERS rules and regulations,
provided that such action shall be subject to the provisions of
subparagraphs two, three, four and five of this paragraph and paragraphs
(c), (d), (e) and (f) of this subdivision. The provisions of this
subdivision shall not be applicable to the payment of investment
expenses pursuant to section 13-705 of the administrative code of the
city of New York and nothing contained herein shall be construed as
abolishing, limiting or modifying any power of the retirement board to
provide for the payment of investment expenses pursuant to section
13-705 of such code.
 (2) If a budget has not been adopted by the commencement of the new
fiscal year, the budget for the preceding fiscal year shall be deemed to
have been extended for the new fiscal year until such time as a new
budget is adopted.
 (3) Any budget in effect pursuant to subparagraph one or two of this
paragraph shall be modifiable during such succeeding fiscal year.
 (4) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the retirement board
shall have the power either directly or by delegation to the executive
director of the retirement system to obtain by employment or by contract
the goods, property and services necessary to fulfill its powers within
the appropriation authorized by the retirement board pursuant to
subparagraph one of this paragraph.
 (5) The provisions of chapter seventeen of the New York city charter
shall continue to apply to the retirement system and the retirement
system shall constitute an agency for the purposes of such chapter
seventeen. The retirement board shall not obtain any legal services by
the retention of employees or by contract unless the corporation counsel
shall consent thereto.
 (6) All contracts for goods or services entered into by the retirement
system shall be procured as described for school districts in article
five-A of the general municipal law. The retirement board shall be the
governing body as described in such law.
 (7) The provisions of subparagraphs four and six of this paragraph
shall not apply to any contract or contracts relating to the variable
annuity funds and tax-deferred annuity program pursuant to sections
thirty-three and thirty-six of the BERS rules and regulations.
 (c) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (a) of subdivision one
of this section or any other provision of law or any provision of the
BERS rules and regulations to the contrary, any resolution of the
retirement board which establishes a budget or modifies a budget
pursuant to the provisions of subparagraph one or three of paragraph (b)
of this subdivision shall require the concurrence of at least one
retirement board member who is appointed to the board of education by
the mayor of the city of New York, and as otherwise required by law. The
provisions of this paragraph shall apply only to resolutions of the
retirement board which establish or modify a budget pursuant to this
subdivision, and nothing contained in this paragraph shall be construed
to apply to any other vote of the retirement board. No assets of the
retirement system shall be drawn upon pursuant to the provisions of
subparagraph one of paragraph (b) of this subdivision unless authorized
by a budget or budget modification established by a resolution of the
retirement board.
 (d) Employment by the retirement system shall constitute education
service for the purposes of the BERS rules and regulations and any other
provision of law which governs the crediting of service for members of
the retirement system; provided, however, that nothing contained herein
shall be construed as granting membership rights in the retirement
system to a contractor of the retirement system or such contractor's
employees.
 (e) Whenever the assets of the retirement system are drawn upon
pursuant to the provisions of subparagraph one of paragraph (b) of this
subdivision, all monies so withdrawn shall be made a charge to be paid
by each participating employer otherwise required to make contributions
to the retirement system no later than the end of the fiscal year next
succeeding the time period during which such assets were drawn upon,
provided, however, that where such charge is for assets so withdrawn in
fiscal year two thousand four--two thousand five or in any fiscal year
thereafter, such charge shall be paid by each such participating
employer no later than the end of the second fiscal year succeeding the
time period during which such assets were drawn upon. The actuary for
the retirement system shall calculate and allocate to each such
participating employer its share of such charge by multiplying such
charge by a fraction, the numerator of which shall consist of the total
salaries of the employees of each participating employer as of the June
thirtieth succeeding the withdrawal of assets and the denominator of
which shall consist of the total salaries of members of the retirement
system as of such June thirtieth. All charges to be paid pursuant to
this subdivision shall be paid at the regular rate of interest utilized
by the actuary in determining employer contributions to the retirement
system pursuant to the provisions of paragraph two of subdivision b of
section 13-638.2 of the administrative code of the city of New York.
 (f) The funds withdrawn from the retirement system shall not be
utilized for any purpose other than the budget established by the
retirement board. All expenditures of the retirement system shall be
subject to audit by the comptroller of the city of New York, who may
make recommendations, including but not limited to, procedures designed
to improve accounting and expenditure control. All expenditures of the
retirement system shall be reported to the mayor's office of management
and budget and the budgetary office of all participating employers.
 (g) The executive director of the retirement system, who shall be
appointed by the retirement board, shall perform such duties as may be
conferred upon him or her by the chairperson of the retirement board, by
resolution adopted by the retirement board, or by law.
 * 24. (a) The following terms, as used in this subdivision, shall have
the following meanings, unless a different meaning is plainly required
by the context:
 (1) "Board of education". The board of education of a city.
 (2) "City". A city having a population of one million or more.
 (3) "Retirement system". The board of education retirement system
established pursuant to the provisions of this section in a city.
 (4) "Rules and regulations". The rules and regulations for the
government, management and control of the retirement system adopted
pursuant to this section.
 (5) "Retirement board". The retirement board of the retirement system
provided for in section five-a of the rules and regulations.
 (6) "Retirement benefits". Benefits payable to a beneficiary by the
retirement system which are subject to the limitations imposed by
section 415(b) of the Internal Revenue Code.
 (7) "Beneficiary". A person who is receiving retirement benefits from
the retirement system.
 (8) "Excess benefit plan". The excess benefit plan established by this
subdivision for the sole purpose of paying benefits as permitted under
section 415(m) of the Internal Revenue Code.
 (9) "Eligible participant". A beneficiary who is entitled to
replacement benefits from the excess benefit plan for a plan year in
accordance with paragraphs (d) and (e) of this subdivision.
 (10) "Replacement benefits". The benefits payable by the excess
benefit plan to an eligible participant as determined pursuant to
paragraph (e) of this subdivision.
 (11) "Internal Revenue Code". The Federal Internal Revenue Code of
1986, as amended.
 (12) "Plan year". The limitation year of the retirement system as
provided in section six hundred twenty of the retirement and social
security law.
 (b) There is hereby established an excess benefit plan, the sole
purpose of which shall be to provide replacement benefits, as permitted
by section 415(m) of the Internal Revenue Code, to beneficiaries whose
annual retirement benefits have been reduced because such benefits
exceed the limitations imposed by section 415(b) of the Internal Revenue
Code. The excess benefit plan shall be administered by the retirement
board.
 (c) There is hereby established a fund to be known as the excess
benefit fund which shall be maintained for the sole purpose of providing
replacement benefits to eligible participants in the excess benefit plan
established by this subdivision, as permitted under section 415(m) of
the Internal Revenue Code. Such fund shall consist of such employer
contributions as shall be made thereto pursuant to paragraph (f) of this
subdivision. Such contributions to the excess benefit fund shall be held
separate and apart from the assets held by the other funds of the
retirement system, provided, however, that the assets of the excess
benefit fund may be invested with the other retirement system assets,
but such excess benefit fund assets shall be accounted for separately
from the other retirement system assets.
 (d) All beneficiaries of the retirement system whose retirement
benefits for a plan year are being reduced because of section 415(b) of
the Internal Revenue Code shall be eligible participants in the excess
benefit plan for that plan year. Participation in the excess benefit
plan shall be determined for each plan year. No beneficiary of the
retirement system shall be an eligible participant in the excess benefit
plan for any plan year for which his or her retirement benefits are not
reduced because of section 415(b) of the Internal Revenue Code.
 (e)(1) For each plan year in which a beneficiary is an eligible
participant in the excess benefit plan, such eligible participant shall
receive replacement benefits from the excess benefit plan equal to the
difference between the full amount of the retirement benefits otherwise
payable to the eligible participant for that plan year prior to any
reduction because of section 415(b) of the Internal Revenue Code, and
the retirement benefits payable to the eligible participant for that
plan year as reduced because of section 415(b) of the Internal Revenue
Code. No replacement benefits for any plan year shall be paid pursuant
to this paragraph to any beneficiary who is not receiving retirement
benefits from the retirement system for that plan year.
 (2) Replacement benefits pursuant to this subdivision shall be paid at
the same time and in the same manner as the retirement benefits which
are being replaced. At no time shall an eligible participant be
permitted directly or indirectly to defer compensation under the excess
benefit plan.
 (f)(1) The required employer contributions to the excess benefit fund
for each plan year shall be an amount, as determined by the actuary,
which is necessary to pay the total amount of replacement benefits that
are payable pursuant to this subdivision to eligible participants for
that plan year.
 (2) Such required employer contributions shall be paid into the excess
benefit fund from an allocation of the employer contribution amounts
paid by the board of education and other public employers pursuant to
the applicable provisions of subdivision sixteen of this section and
other applicable provisions of law. Such allocation of employer
contribution amounts shall be paid into the excess benefit fund at such
times and in such amounts as determined by the actuary.
 (3) The benefit liabilities of the excess benefit plan shall be funded
on a plan year to plan year basis, provided, however, that any employer
contributions to the excess benefit fund, including any investment
earnings on such contributions, which are not used to pay replacement
benefits for the current plan year shall be used to pay replacement
benefits for future plan years.
 (g) The right of an eligible participant to receive replacement
benefits pursuant to this subdivision, and the replacement benefits
received pursuant to this subdivision, shall be exempt from any state or
municipal tax, and shall not be subject to execution, garnishment,
attachment or any other process whatsoever, and shall be unassignable,
except as otherwise specifically provided for benefits payable by the
retirement system.
 * NB There are 2 sb 24's
 * 24. Notwithstanding any provisions of the rules or regulations or
any other provision of law to the contrary, in a city having a
population of one million or more, the board of education shall adopt a
resolution amending the provisions governing any retirement system
adopted pursuant to or subject to the provisions of this section to the
extent necessary to grant a retired member the right, at any time after
his or her retirement, to execute and file a dues deduction
authorization card with the member's retirement system authorizing the
payment of voluntary contributions to the political committee, as
defined in section fourteen-one hundred of the election law, of such
member's employee organization; (or a retirees' association chartered by
the member's employee organization) provided such organization is
certified or recognized pursuant to article fourteen of the civil
service law as the representative of employees in the negotiation unit
in which such member was employed. Such authorization shall continue in
effect until revoked in writing by such member. The comptroller shall
determine the cost of administrative deductions for voluntary
contributions to the political committees; and the cost incurred by the
retirement system in administering such contributions shall be paid from
the funds of the political committee.
 * NB There are 2 sb 24's
 25. (a) For the purposes of this subdivision, the terms "rules and
regulations" and "retirement system" shall have the meanings set forth
in subparagraphs three and four, respectively, of paragraph (a) of
subdivision sixteen of this section.
 (b) Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the
rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this section shall be deemed
to be amended to provide that a member of the retirement system shall be
deemed to have died as the natural and proximate result of an accident
sustained in the performance of duty upon which his or her membership is
based, and not as a result of willful negligence on his or her part,
provided that such member was in active service upon which his or her
membership is based at the time that such member was ordered to active
duty pursuant to Title 10 of the United States Code, with the armed
forces of the United States or to service in the uniformed services
pursuant to Chapter 43 of Title 38 of the United States Code, and such
member died while on such active duty or service in the uniformed
services on or after June fourteenth, two thousand five while serving on
such active military duty or in the uniformed services.
 (c) Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the
rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this section shall be deemed
to be amended to provide that any requirement that applications for
accidental disability be filed within a limited time period after the
happening of such accident shall not apply to a vested member
incapacitated as a result of a qualifying World Trade Center condition
as defined in section two of the retirement and social security law.
 (d)(1)(i) Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary,
the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this section shall be
deemed to be amended to provide that if any condition or impairment of
health is caused by a qualifying World Trade Center condition as defined
in section two of the retirement and social security law, it shall be
presumptive evidence that it was incurred in the performance and
discharge of duty and the natural and proximate result of an accident
not caused by such member's own willful negligence, unless the contrary
be proved by competent evidence.
 (ii) The New York city board of education retirement board is hereby
authorized to promulgate rules and regulations to implement the
provisions of this paragraph.
 (2)(i) Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the
rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this section shall be deemed
to be amended to provide that if a member who participated in World
Trade Center rescue, recovery or cleanup operations as defined in
section two of the retirement and social security law, and subsequently
retired on a service retirement, an ordinary disability retirement, an
accidental disability retirement, a performance of duty disability
retirement, or was separated from service with a vested right to
deferred payability of a retirement allowance and subsequent to such
retirement or separation is determined by the head of the retirement
system or applicable medical board to have a qualifying World Trade
Center condition, as defined in section two of the retirement and social
security law, upon such determination by the New York city board of
education retirement board or applicable medical board, it shall be
presumed that such disability was incurred in the performance and
discharge of duty as the natural and proximate result of an accident not
caused by such member's own willful negligence, and that the member
would have been physically or mentally incapacitated for the performance
and discharge of duty of the position from which he or she retired or
vested had the condition been known and fully developed at the time of
the member's retirement or separation from service with vested rights,
unless the contrary is proven by competent evidence.
 (ii) The New York city board of education retirement board shall
consider a reclassification of the member's retirement or vesting as an
accidental disability retirement effective as of the date of such
reclassification.
 (iii) Such member's retirement option shall not be changed as a result
of such reclassification.
 (iv) The member's former employer at the time of the member's
retirement shall have an opportunity to be heard on the member's
application for reclassification by the New York city board of education
retirement board according to procedures developed by the New York city
board of education retirement board.
 (v) The New York city board of education retirement board is hereby
authorized to promulgate rules and regulations to implement the
provisions of this paragraph.
 (e) Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the
rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this section shall be deemed
to be amended to provide that if a retiree or vestee who: (1) has met
the criteria of paragraph (d) of this subdivision and retired on a
service or disability retirement, would have met the criteria if not
already retired on an accidental disability, or was separated from
service with a vested right to deferred payability of a retirement
allowance; and (2) has not been retired for more than twenty-five years;
and (3) dies from a qualifying World Trade Center condition, as defined
in section two of the retirement and social security law, as determined
by the applicable head of the retirement system or applicable medical
board, then unless the contrary be proven by competent evidence, such
retiree or vestee shall be deemed to have died as a natural and
proximate result of an accident sustained in the performance of duty and
not as a result of willful negligence on his or her part. Such retiree's
or vestee's eligible beneficiary, as set forth in title twenty-one of
the rules and regulation, shall be entitled to an accidental death
benefit as provided by title twenty-one of the rules and regulations,
however, for the purposes of determining the salary base upon which the
accidental death benefit is calculated, the retiree or vestee shall be
deemed to have died on the date of his or her retirement or separation
from service with vested rights. Upon the retiree's or vestee's death,
the eligible beneficiary shall make a written application to the head of
the retirement system within the time for filing an application for an
accidental death benefit as set forth in title twenty-one of the rules
and regulations requesting conversion of such retiree's service, vested
right or disability retirement benefit to an accidental death benefit.
At the time of such conversion, the eligible beneficiary shall
relinquish all rights to the prospective benefits payable under the
service or disability retirement benefit, or vested right to such
benefit, including any post-retirement death benefits, since the
retiree's or vestee's death. If the eligible beneficiary is not the only
beneficiary receiving or entitled to receive a benefit under the service
or disability retirement benefit (including, but not limited to,
post-retirement death benefits or benefits paid or payable pursuant to
the retiree's option selection), or that will be eligible under the
vested right the accidental death benefit payments to the eligible
beneficiary will be reduced by any amounts paid or payable to any other
beneficiary.
 (f) Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the
rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this section shall be deemed
to be amended to provide that if a member who: (1) has met the criteria
of paragraph (d) of this subdivision; (2) dies in active service or
after separating from service with a vested right to deferred payability
of a retirement allowance, but prior to the payability of that
retirement allowance; and (3) dies from a qualifying World Trade Center
condition, as defined in section two of the retirement and social
security law, as determined by the applicable head of the retirement
system or applicable medical board, then unless the contrary be proven
by competent evidence, such member shall be deemed to have died as a
natural and proximate result of an accident sustained in the performance
of duty and not as a result of willful negligence on his or her part.
Such member's eligible beneficiary, as set forth in title twenty-one of
the rules and regulations shall be entitled to an accidental death
benefit provided he or she makes written application to the head of the
retirement system as set forth in title twenty-one of the rules and
regulations.
 § 2575-a. Transfer of certain board of education administrative
employees' to school clerical services of the board of education of the
city of New York. Notwithstanding any other provision of this law to
the contrary, any employee who has completed at least twenty years of
continuous board of education administrative service, or other service
as a member of the board of education retirement system, and having
accepted appointment to the school clerical or pedagogical service of
the board of education of the city of New York, may continue membership
in the board of education retirement system and shall be permitted to
contribute to such system and receive credit for services rendered to
the school clerical or pedagogical service of the board of education of
the city of New York as if such service was education service.
 § 2575-b. Transfer of attendance teachers and specially certificated
attendance officers to the New York City teachers' retirement system.
Any attendance teacher or specially certificated attendance officer who
is a member of the board of education retirement system of the City of
New York shall have the right to transfer his membership to the
teachers' retirement system of the City of New York. In order to effect
such transfer, such member must given notice to the board of education
retirement system of the City of New York, on or before December
thirty-first, nineteen hundred sixty-nine, of his intention to transfer
to the said teachers' retirement system. Upon receipt of such notice,
the board of education retirement system shall transfer to such
teachers' retirement system the reserves, including the reserve for
increased take-home pay, on such member's benefits in the manner
provided by section forty-three of the retirement and social security
law. The former system shall also transfer to the latter system the
member's accumulated deductions which shall become such member's
accumulated deductions in the latter system. A person so transferring
shall be deemed to have been a member of the system to which he has
transferred during the entire period of membership service credited to
him in the system from which he has transferred. Such transferee shall
be entitled to all the rights, privileges and benefits of the system to
which he has transferred. Upon his retirement, the mortality table in
effect in the teachers' retirement system of the City of New York on the
date when he last became a member of the board of education retirement
system shall apply.
 § 2575-c. Transfer of the director of attendance, assistant director
of attendance, chief attendance officer, division supervising attendance
officers and district supervising attendance officers, supervisors of
school social workers to the New York city teachers' retirement system.
Any director of attendance, assistant director of attendance, chief
attendance officer, division supervising attendance officers, and
district supervising attendance officers, supervisors of school social
workers who are members of the board of education retirement system of
the city of New York shall have the right to transfer his membership to
the teachers' retirement system of the city of New York. In order to
effect such transfer, such member must give notice to the board of
education retirement system of the city of New York, on or before
December thirty-first, nineteen hundred seventy, of his intention to
transfer to said teachers' retirement system. Upon receipt of such
notice, the board of education retirement system shall transfer to such
teachers' retirement system the reserves, including the reserve for
increased take home pay, or such member's benefits in the manner
provided by section forty-three of the retirement and social security
law. The former system shall also transfer to the latter system the
member's accumulated deductions which shall become such member's
accumulated deductions in the latter system. A person so transferring
shall be deemed to have been a member of the system to which he has
transferred during the entire period of membership service credited to
him in the system from which he has transferred. Such transferee shall
be entitled to all the rights, privileges and benefits of the system to
which he has transferred. Upon his retirement, the mortality table in
effect in the teachers' retirement system of the city of New York on the
date when he last became a member of the board of education retirement
system shall apply.
 § 2575-d. Payment of benefits by board of education retirement system
of the city of New York in cases where workmen's compensation is or may
be payable; reimbursement of such retirement system from workmen's
compensation awards. The rules and regulations for the government,
management and control of the board of education retirement system of
the city of New York may be amended pursuant to the provisions of
subdivision two of section twenty-five hundred seventy-five of this
chapter to provide that:
 (1) the retirement board of such retirement system, pending the final
determination of a claim for workmen's compensation benefits, may
authorize payment of all or any part of benefits which are payable under
such rules and regulations and with respect to which benefits
limitations or restrictions based on workmen's compensation benefits are
applicable under such rules and regulations; and
 (2) in the event that such authorization is granted by the retirement
board, such retirement system shall be entitled to reimbursement out of
the unpaid installment or installments of compensation due under the
workmen's compensation law provided that claim therefor is filed with
the workmen's compensation board, together with proof of the fact and
amount of payment.
 § 2575-e. Eligibility of retirees for membership in the board of
education retirement system of the city of New York. Notwithstanding
any inconsistent provision of sections 13-267 and 13-379 of the
administrative code of the city of New York, or any other provision of
this chapter, or the code, or any other law, a person otherwise eligible
for membership in the board of education retirement system of the city
of New York, who files with the board a statement duly executed and
acknowledged consenting for the period of his or her active membership
in the system to the suspension of all present benefits provided wholly
or partly by the city through any other retirement system or pension
fund and consenting and agreeing to membership and to the deductions for
annuity purposes prescribed in this chapter shall be a member of the
board of education retirement system of the city of New York. Upon the
subsequent retirement of such person from the board of education
retirement system of the city of New York, he or she shall receive
benefits based on creditable service not included in the service upon
which his or her retirement allowance or pension from such other
retirement system or pension fund is or would be based, and, upon such
subsequent retirement, payment of the benefits provided through such
other retirement system or pension fund, which had been suspended, shall
be resumed.
 § 2575-f. Transfer of employees represented by the united federation
of teachers to the New York city teachers' retirement system. Any
employee represented by the united federation of teachers who is a
member of the New York city board of education retirement system shall
have the right to transfer their membership to the teachers' retirement
system of the City of New York. To affect such a transfer, a member must
give notice to the New York city board of education retirement system,
within one year of such member becoming eligible for membership in the
said teachers' retirement system, of such member's intention to transfer
to the said teachers' retirement system. Membership in the united
federation of teachers is not required to be covered under this section.
Upon receipt of such notice, the New York city board of education system
shall transfer to such teachers' retirement system the reserve on such
members' benefits in the manner provided by subdivisions c and d of
section forty-three of the retirement and social security law and
notwithstanding subdivision l of such section. The former system shall
also transfer to the latter system the member's contributions, which
shall become such member's contributions in the latter system. A person
so transferring shall be deemed to have been a member of the system to
which such member has transferred during the entire period of membership
service credited to such member in the system from which such member has
transferred. Such transferee shall be entitled to all the rights,
privileges and benefits of the system to which they have transferred.
 § 2576. Annual estimate. 1. The board of education in each city having
a population of less than one million shall prepare annually an itemized
estimate for the current or ensuing fiscal year of such sum of money as
it may deem necessary for the purposes stated in this section, after
crediting thereto the amount anticipated in the next apportionment of
school funds from the state and the estimated amount to be received from
all other sources. Such itemized estimate in such cities shall be filed
at such times and in such manner as city departments or officers are
required to submit estimates for such departments or officers. The board
of education in each other city shall prepare annually an itemized
estimate for the ensuing fiscal year and file the same on or before the
first day of September. Such estimates shall be for the following
purposes:
 a. The salary of the superintendent of schools, associate, district or
assistant or other superintendents, examiners, directors, supervisors,
principals, teachers, lecturers, special instructors, claims auditors,
deputy claims auditors, medical inspectors, nurses, attendance officers,
clerks, custodians and janitors and the salary, fees or compensation of
all other employees appointed or employed by said board of education. In
addition, the expenses of personnel utilized to fulfill the internal
audit function pursuant to section twenty-one hundred sixteen-b of this
title.
 b. The other necessary incidental and contingent expenses, including
ordinary repairs to buildings and the purchase of fuel and light,
supplies, textbooks, school apparatus, books, furniture and fixtures and
other articles and service necessary for the proper maintenance,
operation and support of the schools, libraries and other educational,
social or recreational affairs and interests under its management and
direction. The provisions of this section in regard to the purchase of
light shall not apply to a city having a population of one million or
more.
 c. The remodelling or enlarging of buildings under its control and
management, the construction of new buildings for uses authorized by
this chapter and the furnishing and equipment thereof, the purchase of
real property for new sites, additions to present sites, playgrounds or
recreation centers and other educational or social purposes, and to meet
any other indebtedness or liability incurred under the provisions of
this chapter or other statutes, or any other expenses which the board of
education is authorized to incur. Nothing contained in this chapter
shall prevent the financing, in whole or in part, of any expenditure
enumerated in this subdivision pursuant to the local finance law.
 2. In the city school districts of Syracuse, Rochester and Yonkers
such estimate shall be filed with the mayor or city manager. Such
officer shall place such estimate before the board of estimate and
apportionment or other similar body at the same time and in the same
manner as estimates from city departments or officers are placed before
said board or body, and such estimate shall thereafter be subject to the
same consideration, action and procedure as all other estimates from
city departments or officers and said board or body may increase,
diminish or reject any item contained in said estimate, except for fixed
charges for which the city is liable and subject to the limitations
provided by subdivision five-b of this section. When such estimate is
adopted, the said board or body shall file it with the common council.
 4. In the city school district of Buffalo such estimate shall be filed
with the officer authorized to receive other department estimates and
the same acted on by such officer and by the council of such city in the
same manner and with the same effect as other department estimates
except that such actions shall be subject to the limitations provided by
subdivision five-b of this section. The council is also authorized, in
its discretion, to include in such budget a sum for any of the purposes
enumerated in paragraph c of subdivision one of this section, and any
further amount for such purposes as may be authorized by a tax election
held in such city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. After the
adoption of such budget the council shall cause the amount thereof to be
included in the tax and assessment roll of the city and the same shall
be collected in the same manner and at the same time as other taxes of
the city are collected, and placed to the credit of the board of
education.
 * 5. In the city school district of the city of New York, such
estimate shall be filed with the mayor. Actions on such estimates shall
be subject to the limitations provided by subdivision five-a of this
section. The board of education shall administer all moneys appropriated
or available for educational purposes in the city, subject to the
provisions of law relating to the audit and payment of salaries and
other claims by the comptroller.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2026
 * 5. In a city which had, according to the federal census of nineteen
hundred forty, a population of one million or more such estimate shall
be filed with the mayor. If the total amount requested in such estimate
shall be equivalent to or less than an amount equal to the average
proportion of the total expense budget of such city, as amended,
appropriated for the purposes of the city school district of such city
in the three fiscal years of such city immediately preceding the year
for which said estimate is filed, the city shall appropriate such
amount. If the total amount contained in such estimate shall exceed the
amount so computed, such estimate shall, as to such excess, be subject
to such consideration and such action by the board of estimate, the
council, and the mayor as that taken upon departmental estimates
submitted to the mayor. The city is authorized to make additional
appropriations for educational purposes authorized by this chapter. The
board of education shall administer all moneys appropriated or available
for educational purposes in the city, subject to the provisions of law
relating to the audit and payment of salaries and other claims by the
comptroller.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2026
 5-a. a. For the purposes of this subdivision, the terms:
 (i) "city funds" shall mean funds of the city of New York derived from
any source except funds contained within the capital budget and funds
derived from any federal, state or private sources over which the city
has no discretion.
 (ii) "city amount" shall mean the total amount of expenditures funded
by city funds for the support of the city school district of the city of
New York, not including city payments to bond or note holders for debt
service or payments for pension benefits for employees of such district,
as contained within the budget as adopted by the city of New York.
 (iii) "base year" shall mean the fiscal year immediately preceding the
fiscal year for which the budget referred to in subparagraph (ii) of
this paragraph is adopted. The initial base year shall be fiscal year
ending June thirtieth, two thousand three.
 b. The city amount in a budget adopted by the council pursuant to
section two hundred fifty-four of the New York city charter shall not be
less than the city amount appropriated in the base year as determined at
the time of adoption of the budget for the ensuing fiscal year and shall
be consistent with the requirements of the certification described in
subdivision six of section two hundred eleven-d of this chapter.
Provided, however, in the event the total amount of city funds relied
upon to balance such budget is lower than the total amount of city funds
appropriated in the base year, determined at the time of adoption of
such budget pursuant to a process developed by the department in
consultation with the city of New York and the labor organization
representing teachers that identifies a methodology for the allocation
of appropriations between fiscal years and prescribes a form upon the
approval of the director of budget for the certifications required by
this subdivision, the city amount may be reduced by up to the same
percentage as the overall percentage decrease in city funds between the
base year and the ensuing fiscal year. Before such budget may be
certified pursuant to section two hundred fifty-six of the New York city
charter, the mayor of the city of New York and an independent certified
public accountant shall certify to the commissioner, in a form
prescribed by the commissioner upon the approval of the director of
budget, that the city amount appropriated in such budget is (i) in
compliance with this paragraph; (ii) consistent with the requirements of
subdivision six of section two hundred eleven-d of this chapter; and
(iii) sufficient to ensure individual schools can meet the class size
compliance targets set forth in subdivision two of section two hundred
eleven-d of this chapter. If a budget is adopted pursuant to section two
hundred fifty-four of the New York city charter or certified pursuant to
section two hundred fifty-six of such charter in violation of this
paragraph, the council shall have sixty days to adopt a budget compliant
with this paragraph and have such budget certified in accordance with
the provisions of this paragraph. Should the budget not be adopted and
certified within sixty days, the amount by which the budget is
non-compliant shall be withheld from the foundation aid allotment until
such time as the budget is certified as compliant with this paragraph.
 c. Actual budget expenditures shall be certified in October following
the close of the fiscal year to ensure compliance with paragraph b of
this subdivision. If the budget expenditures are not compliant with
paragraph b of this subdivision, the council will appropriate funds in
the amount of the discrepancy as part of the November modification,
pursuant to subdivision b of section one hundred seven of the New York
city charter.
 5-b. a. For the purposes of this subdivision, the terms:
 (i) "city funds" shall mean funds of each city having a population of
one hundred twenty-five thousand or more inhabitants and less than one
million inhabitants derived from any source except funds contained
within the capital budget, funds from county sales tax revenues shared
with such city, funds derived from any federal source and funds derived
from any state or private sources over which the city has no discretion,
as defined pursuant to regulations developed by the commissioner and
approved by the director of the budget.
 (ii) "city amount" shall mean the total amount of expenditures funded
by city funds for the support of the city school district of each city
having a population of one hundred twenty-five thousand or more
inhabitants and less than one million inhabitants, not including city
payments to bond or note holders for debt service payments of such
district, as contained within the budget as adopted by such city.
 (iii) "base year" shall mean the fiscal year immediately preceding the
fiscal year for which the budget referred to in subparagraph (ii) of
this paragraph is adopted. The initial base year shall be the fiscal
year ending June thirtieth, two thousand seven.
 b. The city amount shall not be less than the city amount appropriated
in the base year determined at the time of adoption of the budget for
the ensuing fiscal year, and shall not be less than the city amount
expended in the base year determined as of the end of the school year.
Provided, however, in the event the total amount of city funds relied
upon to balance such budget is lower than the total amount of city funds
appropriated in the base year, as determined at the time of adoption of
such budget, the city amount may be reduced by up to the same percentage
as the overall percentage decrease in city funds between the base year
and the ensuing fiscal year.
 c. Upon the enactment of a city budget, for the two thousand nine--two
thousand ten school year budget and annually thereafter, the chief
executive officer of the city, as defined pursuant to subdivision five-a
of section 2.00 of the local finance law, shall annually certify to the
commissioner, in a form prescribed by the commissioner upon approval of
the director of the budget, as to the city amount in such budget, the
city amount in the base year, and that the city amount appropriated in
such budget is in compliance with paragraph b of this subdivision.
 d. The school district audit report certified to by an independent
certified public accountant or an independent accountant pursuant to
section twenty-one hundred sixteen-a of this title for the two thousand
eight--two thousand nine school year budget and annually thereafter
shall include a certification by the accountant, in a form prescribed by
the commissioner upon approval of the director of the budget, as to the
city amount expended in the school year covered by such audit report,
the city amount in the prior school year, and that the city amount
expended in the school year covered by such audit report is in
compliance with paragraph b of this subdivision.
 6. A board of education may, to meet emergencies which may arise,
submit a special estimate in which items for extraordinary expenses may
be submitted to meet such emergencies. Such estimate shall contain a
complete statement of the purposes for which the items are requested and
the necessity therefor. The same method of procdure shall be followed in
submitting such estimate and such estimate shall be subject to the same
consideration and action as is required in the submission, consideration
and action upon the regular annual estimate submitted by a board of
education. The common council or other legislative body in such city
shall have power to make the appropriations requested by a board of
education in such special estimate.
 7. A board of education shall not incur a liability or an expense
chargeable against the funds under its control or the city for any
purpose in excess of the amount appropriated or available therefor or
otherwise authorized by law.
 8. In a city in which, under the statutes in effect prior to June
eighth, nineteen hundred seventeen, it was provided that the estimate of
expenditures for the support and maintenance of the public schools of
the city shall not be less than a specified per capita sum, based on the
number of pupils enrolled in the public schools of the city, the amount
authorized or required to be included in the estimate of school
expenditures as provided in this article shall not be less than the per
capita sum specified in such statute.
 9. In any city in which the annual estimate and budget of the board of
education is subject to change by some other city authority, such annual
budget shall give detailed schedules for all purposes and shall indicate
the entire amount to be expended by the board of education for school
purposes, including the amount to be levied for debt service on account
of bonds, notes or certificates of indebtedness issued for school
purposes, whether the amount to be expended is on account of local
revenues or to be derived from state aid. The total amount on account of
local revenues and the total amount to be derived from state aid shall
be separately indicated. In any such city having a population of less
than one million the annual estimate and budget shall contain a
statement of the amount of revenues over and above those set forth in
the budget for the preceding year, which the board of education
estimates it will receive in the current year. Any surplus funds shall
at the close of the fiscal year be transferred to an existing capital
fund or appropriated by the proper authority to other school purposes.
 10. In any city with a population of one million or more, amounts
appropriated to effectuate the implementation of a five-year educational
facilities capital plan for such city shall be appropriated as a single
item in such city's capital budget in accordance with subdivision four
of section twenty-five hundred ninety-p of this chapter.
 § 2577. Annual financial report. In any city in which the annual
financial report of the fiscal officer, board of estimate and
apportionment, or other official, board or body of the city, does not
contain information required by this section, the board of education
shall annually cause to be published in the official paper of such city
or in pamphlet form for general distribution, a full and detailed
account of all moneys received by the board of education for its account
and use, and all moneys expended therefor giving the items of receipts
and expenditures in full. Such annual report, unless the same is
otherwise annually published as provided herein, shall also contain a
full and complete statement of any bonds issued the preceding year for
school purposes and the disposition made or to be made of the proceeds
of such bonds.
 § 2579. Payment of obligations. 1. If a city shall issue obligations
for any of the purposes enumerated in paragraph c of subdivision one of
section twenty-five hundred seventy-six of this chapter, the principal
and interest of such obligations shall be paid out of moneys raised by
tax therefor in the same manner as other school moneys are raised, when
such obligations and the interest thereon shall become due and payable.
 2. If a city having a population of four hundred thousand or more but
less than one million shall issue obligations to defray, in whole or in
part, the expense of the construction, improvement and equipment of
school buildings or the purchase or acquisition of school sites, the
proceeds of the sale of such bonds shall be paid into the treasury of
the city and placed to the credit of the board of education. As such
obligations become due the municipal authorities of the city shall
include in the tax levy, and assess upon the property of the city, the
amount necessary to pay such bonds and interest thereon.
 3. In a city having a population of one million or more, such city may
in its discretion annually cause to be raised such sums of money as may
be required for the purposes enumerated in paragraph c of subdivision
one of section twenty-five hundred seventy-six of this article, in the
manner provided by law for the raising of money for such purposes.
 § 2580. Funds; custody and disbursement. 1. Public moneys apportioned
to a city by the state and all funds raised or collected by the
authorities in a city for school purposes or to be used by the board of
education for any purpose authorized in this chapter, or any other funds
belonging to a city and received from any source whatsoever for similar
purposes, shall be paid into the treasury of such city and shall be
credited to the board of education. The funds so received into such
treasury shall be kept separate and distinct from any other funds
received into the said treasury. The officer having the charge thereof
shall give such additional security for the safe custody thereof as the
corporate authorities of such city shall require.
 2. Such funds shall be disbursed by authority of the board of
education upon written orders drawn on the city treasurer or other
fiscal officer of the city. Such orders shall be signed by the
superintendent of schools and the secretary of the board of education or
such other officers as the board may authorize. If a claims auditor
shall have been appointed, orders shall be signed by the claims auditor;
provided, however, that the board may require, in addition, the
signature of such other officer or officers as it may by resolution
direct. Orders shall be numbered consecutively and shall specify the
purpose for which they are drawn and the person or corporation to whom
they are payable.
 3. Fixed salaries, principal of and interest on indebtedness and
amounts becoming due upon lawful contracts for periods exceeding one
year may be disbursed without prior audit of the board of education. By
resolution duly adopted, the board may determine to enter into a
contract to provide for the deposit of the periodic payroll of the
school district in a bank or trust company for disbursal by it in
accordance with provisions of section ninety-six-b of the banking law.
 4. It shall be unlawful for a city treasurer or other officer having
the custody of such city funds to permit their use for any purpose other
than that for which they are lawfully authorized; they shall be paid out
only on audit of the board of education or as otherwise provided herein.
Payments from such funds shall be made only by checks signed by the
treasurer or other custodian of such moneys and payable to the person or
persons entitled thereto and countersigned either by the comptroller, or
in a city having no comptroller, by an officer designated by the officer
or body having the general control of the financial affairs of such
city. The board of education of such city shall make, in addition to
such classification of its funds and accounts as it desires for its own
use and information, such further classification of the funds under its
management and control and of the disbursements thereof as the
comptroller of the city, or the officer or body having the general
control of the financial affairs of such city, shall require, and such
board shall furnish such data in relation to such funds and their
disbursements as the comptroller or such other financial officer or body
of the city shall require.
 § 2581. Certain corporate schools entitled to participate in funds of
board of education of city of New York. The corporate schools entitled
to participate in the funds of the board of education of the city of New
York are as follows: The schools established and maintained by the Five
Points House of Industry, the industrial schools established and
maintained under the charge of the Children's Aid Society in the city of
New York, the schools of the American Female Guardian Society, the Roman
Catholic Orphan Asylum, the Brooklyn Home for Children, the Orphan Home
and the Convent of Mercy, and the Child Care Center (formerly
Tuberculosis Preventorium for children). The New York Institute for the
Blind shall receive a ratable proportion of the fund for every blind
pupil in such institution without regard to age.
 Such schools shall be subject to the general supervision of the board
of education of the city of New York, but shall be under the immediate
direction of their respective trustees, managers and directors.
 § 2582. Trustees of corporate schools entitled to participate in funds
of the board of education of the city of New York may convey to city of
New York and be merged. The trustees, managers and directors of any of
the corporate schools of the city of New York entitled to participate in
the apportionment of the funds of the board of education of such city
may, at any time, convey their school houses and sites to the city of
New York and transfer any of their schools to the board of education of
such city on terms and in a manner to be agreed upon and prescribed by
such board of education, so as either to merge such corporate schools in
the public schools or adopt them as public schools and the same shall
then be public schools.
 § 2583. Certain schools to report as to moneys and attendance;
accidental omission to report. The board of education of the city of
New York shall require from the officers conducting schools by
appointment of the board, and from the trustees, managers or directors
of the corporate schools entitled to participate in the funds of the
board of education of the city of New York, an annual report in writing
dated the thirty-first day of December, which shall be signed and
certified by a majority of such officers, trustees, managers or
directors, and which report shall state: the whole number of schools
within their jurisdiction; the length of time each school shall have
been kept open; the whole number of pupils over four and under
twenty-one years of age who shall have been taught free of expense to
such pupils in their schools, during the year ending with the date of
the report, which number shall be ascertained by adding to the number of
children on register at the commencement of each year, the number
admitted during that year, which shall be considered the total for that
year; the average number that has actually attended such schools during
the year, to be ascertained by the teachers keeping an exact account of
the number of pupils present every school day or half day, which, being
added together, and divided by four hundred sixty, or if less than a
year by the number of school sessions, shall be considered the average
of attending pupils, which average shall be affirmed or sworn to by the
principal teacher of the school; a detailed statement of the amount of
moneys received or expended for their respective schools during the
year, from or by the commissioner of finance of such city, and of the
purposes for and the manner in which the same shall have been expended;
a particular account of the state of the schools, and of the property
and affairs of each school under their care; the titles of all books
used; and such other information as such board of education shall
require.
 In making the apportionment among the several schools no share shall
be alloted by such board to any school or society from which no
sufficient annual report shall have been received for the year ending on
the last day of December immediately preceding the apportionment.
Whenever an apportionment of the funds of the board of education of the
city of New York shall not be made to any school, in consequence of any
accidental omission to make any report required by law or to comply with
any other regulation or provision of law, the board of education of such
city, in its discretion, may direct an apportionment to be made to such
school according to the equitable circumstances of the case, to be paid
out of the funds of the board of education on hand, or if such funds
shall have been distributed, out of the funds to be received in a
succeeding year.
 § 2584. Bonds of employees. The board of estimate and apportionment
of a city, or in a city having no board of estimate and apportionment,
the body or officer performing the duties performed by a board of
estimate and apportionment, which may now legally require bonds of
employees may continue to require bonds of such employees in such amount
as such board of estimate and apportionment or other body or officer
shall determine. In all other cities bonds may be required of such
employees by the board of education. The premiums on such bonds shall
be paid by the city.
 § 2585. Continuation in office of boards, bureaus, teachers,
principals and other employees, et cetera. 1. Except as otherwise
provided herein the boards, bureaus, teachers, principals, supervisors,
superintendents, heads of departments, assistants to principals,
examiners, supervisors of lectures, directors and all other officers and
employees of the school systems or of boards of education of the several
cities of the state, lawfully appointed or assigned before June eighth,
nineteen hundred seventeen, shall continue to hold their respective
positions for the term for which they were appointed or until removed as
provided in subdivision five of section twenty-five hundred twenty-three
of this article.
 2. If a board of education abolishes an office or position and creates
another office or position for the performance of duties similar to
those performed in the office or position abolished, the person filling
such office or position at the time of its abolishment shall be
appointed to the office or position thus created without reduction in
salary or increment, provided the record of such person has been one of
faithful, competent service in the office or position he has filled.
 3. Whenever a board of education abolishes a position under this
chapter, the services of the teacher having the least seniority in the
system within the tenure of the position abolished shall be
discontinued.
 4. If an office or position is abolished or if it is consolidated with
another position without creating a new position, the person filling
such position at the time of its abolishment or consolidation shall be
placed upon a preferred eligible list of candidates for appointment to a
vacancy that then exists or that may thereafter occur in an office or
position similar to the one which such person filled without reduction
in salary or increment, provided the record of such person has been one
of faithful, competent service in the office or position he has filled.
The persons on such preferred list shall be reinstated or appointed to
such corresponding or similar positions in the order of their length of
service in the system.
 * 5. (a) The use of artificial intelligence systems as defined by
section one hundred three-e of the state technology law shall not affect
(i) the existing rights of employees pursuant to an existing collective
bargaining agreement, or (ii) the existing representational
relationships among employee organizations or the bargaining
relationships between the employer and an employee organization.
 (b) The use of such artificial intelligence systems shall not result
in the: (i) discharge, displacement or loss of position, including
partial displacement such as a reduction in the hours of non-overtime
work, wages, or employment benefits, or result in the impairment of
existing collective bargaining agreements; or (ii) transfer of existing
duties and functions currently performed by employees of the school
district to an artificial intelligence system.
 (c) The use of such artificial intelligence system shall not alter the
rights or benefits, and privileges, including but not limited to terms
and conditions of employment and civil service status. The collective
bargaining unit membership status of all existing employees of the board
of education shall be preserved and protected.
 * NB Repealed July 1, 2028
 § 2586. Anniversary day as a holiday for pupils in the public schools
of the borough of Brooklyn and in the borough of Queens, city of New
York. The first Thursday in June in each year, except in those years
when the first Thursday in June occurs in the same week with Memorial
day, and in such years the second Thursday in June, known as anniversary
day, and celebrated in commemoration of the organization of Sunday
schools, is hereby made and declared to be a holiday for pupils in all
the public schools in the borough of Brooklyn and in the borough of
Queens, city of New York, and pupils shall not be required to attend the
public schools in such boroughs on such day.
 § 2586-a. Diwali as a holiday in the public schools of the city of New
York. The fifteenth day of the eighth month of the Indian calendar in
each year, known as Diwali, is hereby made and declared to be a holiday
in all the public schools in the city school district in the city of New
York and such public schools shall not be in session on such day.
 § 2587. Tenure in fashion institute of technology. 1. The following
words and phrases, as hereinafter used, and for the purposes of this
section, shall have the following meanings:
 a. "Community college" shall mean fashion institute of technology, a
community college sponsored by the board of education of the city of New
York.
 b. "Board" shall mean the board of trustees of fashion institute of
technology.
 c. "Instructional staff" shall mean the persons employed in the
community college in the positions of president, dean, director,
assistant dean, assistant director, chairman of department or division,
senior instructor, instructor, lecturer, college registrar, college
bursar, laboratory technician, college administrative assistant,
instructor technologist, college librarian, assistant librarian; or in
any position which the board in its discretion may add thereto.
 d. "Tenure" shall mean the right of a person to hold his position
during good behavior and efficient and competent service, and not to be
removed therefrom except for cause in the manner hereinafter provided.
 2. All members of the permanent instructional staff under the
jurisdiction of the board shall have tenure.
 3. The permanent instructional staff shall consist of:
 a. All persons employed on an annual salary basis in the community
college in the positions of senior instructor, librarian, assistant
librarian, college registrar, college bursar or college administrative
assistant, who, on the date on which this section is enacted, are
serving in any of the positions enumerated in this paragraph and have
completed at least four full years of continuous service on an annual
salary from the date of their appointment to any of the positions
enumerated in this paragraph, or who have so served at least three full
years and have been appointed for a fourth full year.
 b. All other persons employed on an annual salary basis in the
community college in the positions of senior instructor, librarian,
assistant librarian, college registrar, college bursar, college
administrative assistant, or in any position hereafter created which the
board in its discretion may designate as a tenure position, who, after
serving on an annual salary in any of the positions enumerated or
provided for in this paragraph for three full years continuously, have
been appointed or shall be appointed for a fourth full year, except as
provided in subdivision four of this section, provided that in
determining the tenure rights of such persons time served as an
instructor shall be counted.
 c. Any regularly appointed member of the teaching or supervising staff
of the board of education of the city of New York who, on the date on
which this section is enacted, is serving in the community college in
the position of senior instructor, librarian, assistant librarian,
college registrar, college bursar or college administrative assistant,
pursuant to an assignment by the superintendent of schools of the board
of education of the city of New York, and has or thereafter shall have
completed three full years of continuous service in any of the positions
enumerated in this paragraph, or in any position hereafter created which
the board may designate as a tenure position, shall be entitled to
become a member of the permanent instructional staff of the community
college with tenure in the position in which he is then serving in the
community college providing such person, within three months after such
completion of three full years of continuous service, shall notify the
president of the community college in writing of his election to become
a member of the permanent instructional staff of the community college
with tenure in the position in which he is then serving in the community
college, and provided further that such person shall within the same
period resign from his position in the board of education of the city of
New York. Such person shall have the absolute right, notwithstanding his
election to become a member of the permanent instructional staff of the
community college with tenure, to continue as a member of the retirement
system of which he was a member immediately prior to such election,
without any loss or diminution in his rights, status or privileges in
such retirement system. Any regular license issued by the superintendent
of schools of the board of education of the city of New York, held by
such person at the time he becomes entitled to tenure in the community
college shall continue to be valid during his continuance of service in
the community college.
 4. Nothing herein contained shall be construed as conferring or
permitting tenure, or service credit toward the achievement of tenure,
in the positions of president, dean, director, assistant dean, chairman
of department or division, or assistant director. Appointments to such
position or removal therefrom, however, shall not deprive the person so
appointed or removed of tenure in highest position on the instructional
staff held with tenure prior to his appointment to such office or
conjointly with such office, nor shall such appointment or the holding
of such position or removal from such position deprive any person of
service credit toward the achievement of tenure under the provisions of
this section.
 5. A certificate of permanent tenure shall be issued by the board upon
the enactment of this section to each person then employed in the
community college who, on or prior to the date of such enactment, shall
have satisfied the requirements for entitlement to tenure prescribed by
this section. In the case of any person now or hereafter employed in the
community college, who, after such date of enactment, satisfies such
requirements for entitlement to tenure, a certificate of permanent
tenure shall be issued by the board to such person, upon the completion
by such person of such requirements.
 6. For the purpose of appointments and promotions in the instructional
staff which may be made after the date on which this section is enacted,
the board shall determine to what extent examinations are practicable to
ascertain merit and fitness for each of the positions under its
jurisdiction, and, insofar as examinations are deemed practicable, shall
determine to what extent it is practicable, that such examinations be
competitive. Any examination held in accordance with the provisions of
this subdivision shall be set and administered through any agency which
the board may from time to time create or designate. The superintendent
of schools of the board of education of the city of New York may, upon
the request of the president of the community college, direct the
medical board of the board of education of the city of New York to
render such service as the president of the community college may
request to assist the board and the president of the community college
in the ascertainment of merit and fitness for appointment to or relative
to service in instructional positions in the community college.
 7. Neither tenure as conferred through the operation of this section
nor the period requisite for the achievement of tenure shall be affected
by transfer within the community college, or by promotion, or by change
of title, except that a person upon whom tenure is conferred through the
operation of this section and who may be transferred to any position in
the community college, or who may be promoted, or whose title may be
changed, shall have tenure in his new position, provided such position
is not one of those enumerated in subdivision four of this section.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent the board from
assigning any person having tenure to any appropriate position on the
staff, but no such assignment shall carry with it a reduction in rank or
a reduction in salary other than the elimination of any additional
emolument provided for administrative positions.
 8. A position held by a person upon whom tenure is conferred through
the operation of this section may be abolished or discontinued by the
board for reasons which are not discriminatory against a particular
person or persons. In the event that a position in a specified subject
is to be abolished or discontinued, such position shall be that of the
person last appointed to such position; provided, however, that all
persons in such position upon whom tenure is not conferred by the
operation of this section shall be dismissed before the position of any
other person in such subject is abolished or discontinued. If the board
abolishes or discontinues the position of a person upon whom tenure is
conferred through the operation of this section and can find no position
in the community college which can be efficiently and capably filled by
such person, then his name shall be placed and shall remain for three
years on a preferred eligible list of candidates for reappointment to
fill a vacancy that may thereafter occur in a position which can be
efficiently and capably filled by such person or to fill a newly created
position which can be efficiently and capably filled by such person.
Reappointment from such preferred eligible list to a position in a
specified subject shall be made in the order of the original appointment
of the persons on such preferred eligible list. Any person reappointed
from such preferred eligible list shall be reappointed at a salary not
less than that which he was receiving when his position was abolished or
discontinued. Any person whose name is placed on such preferred eligible
list as hereinbefore provided shall, for the purpose of maintaining his
status in any retirement system of which he is a member, be deemed to be
on leave of absence without pay.
 9. Persons granted tenure under the provisions of this section shall
not be removed except for cause, after a hearing and by a majority vote
of the board. Charges against a person entitled to tenure under the
provisions of this section may be preferred by the president, any member
or members of the board, or the board itself. Such charges and all
specifications of such charges shall be filed with the board, which
shall cause a copy thereof to be served upon the person accused, and
such person shall have ten days from the date of the service of such
charges and specifications, or such additional time as may be granted
him by the chairman of the board, in which to file an answer in writing
with the board. Any person against whom charges as herein provided are
filed with the board, may be suspended with or without pay by the
president pending a final determination of such charges by the board.
The board shall proceed to try and determine such charges either by the
board, or by a trial committee consisting of one or more members of the
board, or by a trial committee consisting of one or more persons
specially appointed for such purpose by the board, and the board shall
fix the penalty or punishment, if any, to be imposed for the offense,
and such penalty or punishment may consist of a reprimand, a fine,
suspension for a fixed time without pay, or dismissal; provided,
however, that a vote of a majority of all the members of the board shall
be necessary to impose a penalty or punishment. The report of any trial
committee holding such trial shall be subject to final action by the
board, each member of which shall before voting read the testimony and
the evidence in the case. The board may reject, confirm or modify the
conclusions of the trial committee, and the decisions of the board shall
be final, except that any person aggrieved may review the determination
of said board only by an appeal to the commissioner of education, as
provided for by article seven of this chapter. In case the charges
preferred against any person are dismissed, he shall be restored to his
position with full pay for the period of his suspension. In all trials
and investigations authorized by this section all testimony taken shall
be under oath, which the chairman of the board or the chairman of the
trial committee is hereby authorized to administer. For the purpose of
any investigation, trial or hearing, the chairman of the board or the
chairman of the trial committee shall have power to subpoena witnesses,
papers and records. The Supreme Court shall have power, upon the
application of the chairman of the board or the chairman of the trial
committee, to compel any witness who may be summoned, to appear and
testify before said board or trial committee.
 § 2588. Seniority, retention and displacement rights in connection
with abolition of positions in city school districts of cities having
more than one million inhabitants. 1. For the purposes of this section,
the tenure areas applicable to all professional education positions
shall be defined as the license areas established by the city board
pursuant to subdivision ten of section twenty-five hundred seventy-three
of this chapter, provided that, effective July first, nineteen hundred
seventy-six, there shall be a single elementary teaching tenure area
encompassing kindergarten through grade six. Such groupings of related
license areas shall not affect the rights of persons whose services had
been discontinued prior to the effective date of such groupings nor
shall such groupings be applicable for purposes other than those of this
section; and provided that, on the effective date of this subdivision,
there shall be a single tenure area for personnel properly assigned or
appointed prior to the effective date of this subdivision as assistant
principals of day elementary school and supervisors of early childhood;
and a single tenure area for personnel properly assigned or appointed
prior to the effective date of this subdivision as assistant
principals--junior high school--supervision, assistant
principals--junior high school--administration, and supervisors of art,
music, home economics, school library service, health and physical
education, audio-visual instruction, industrial arts, and bilingual
education. The tenure areas applicable to all intermediate supervisors
properly assigned or appointed on or after the effective date of this
subdivision shall be defined as the license areas established by the
city board.
 2. If a position within a tenure area is abolished and another
position is created in such area for the performance of duties similar
to those performed in the abolished position, the person filling such
office or position at the time of its abolition shall be appointed to
the position thus created without reduction in salary or increment,
provided the record of such person has been one of faithful, competent
service in the office or position he has filled.
 3. (a) Whenever a teaching position is abolished under this chapter,
the services of the person holding a position within the tenure area of
the position which is to be abolished who has the least seniority in the
city school district, including all full-time equivalent substitute
service and all full-time equivalent service as a paraprofessional,
shall be discontinued, provided that the services of a person who has
acquired tenure within such tenure area shall not be discontinued if
another person holding a position within such tenure area has not
acquired tenure.
 (b) Whenever a supervisory position is abolished under this chapter,
the services of the member of the supervisory staff, except associate,
assistant and other superintendents, principals and intermediate
supervisors serving in schools or programs under the jurisdiction of a
community school board or serving under the jurisdiction of the
chancellor, having the least seniority within the tenure area of the
position abolished in the city school district, shall be discontinued.
Whenever a principalship or intermediate supervisory position in a
school or program under the jurisdiction of a community school board is
abolished under this chapter, the principal or intermediate supervisor
serving in such position shall be entitled to be placed in any vacancy
within the tenure area of such position within such community district
which may exist, and if no such vacancies exist, he shall be entitled to
displace the principal or intermediate supervisor with the least
seniority within the tenure area of such position in the community
district, if he has greater seniority within the tenure area of such
position in the community district, than such person. Whenever a
principalship or an intermediate supervisory position under the
jurisdiction of the chancellor is abolished under this chapter, the
principal or intermediate supervisor serving in such position shall be
entitled to be placed in any vacancy within the tenure area of such
position which may exist under the chancellor's jurisdiction, and if no
such vacancies exist he shall be entitled to displace the principal or
intermediate supervisor with the least seniority within the tenure area
of such position under the jurisdiction of the chancellor if he has
greater seniority within the tenure area of such position under the
jurisdiction of the chancellor, than such person. Notwithstanding any
other provision of law, an intermediate supervisor appointed or properly
assigned prior to the effective date of this paragraph whose position is
abolished shall be entitled to be placed in any vacancy within the
tenure area of such position in the city school district, and if no such
vacancy exists, shall be entitled to displace the intermediate
supervisor with the least seniority within that tenure area in the city
school district. For purposes of this section, an intermediate
supervisor shall be any person serving by appointment or properly
assigned in the supervisory license area of: assistant principal--junior
high school--administration, assistant principal--junior high
school--supervision, assistant principal--day elementary school,
education administrator--instruction specialist, assistant
administrative director, supervisor of a subject area.
 (c) No later than September first, nineteen hundred seventy-six, the
chancellor shall promulgate a list of the seniority rankings of all
members of the teaching or supervisory staff computed in accordance with
the provisions of this subdivision. Such list shall be revised at least
annually thereafter.
 4. (a) A member of the teaching staff who has been regularly appointed
or a member of the supervisory staff who has been properly assigned or
appointed and whose services are terminated pursuant to this section,
shall be entitled to be placed, upon his application, in a vacancy
within the tenure area of a position where such individual shall have
previously served under regular appointment as a teacher or proper
assignment or appointment as a supervisor, and if no such vacancies
exist he shall be entitled to displace the person with least seniority
serving in the tenure area of such other position, if he has greater
seniority, based on length of service as a member of the teaching or
supervising staff in the city school district, including all full-time
equivalent substitute service and all full-time equivalent service as a
paraprofessional, than such person. A supervisor who reverts to a prior
supervisory license in which he had the right to placement within the
city school district shall retain such right and a supervisor who
reverts to a prior supervisory license in which he previously had the
right to placement only in a community school district shall be entitled
to reversion solely in the community school district from which he is
currently laid off. His salary thenceforth shall be fixed as though all
service rendered by him was in the position to which he is returned.
Provided, however, that a member of the supervisory staff applying to
displace a classroom teacher pursuant to this subdivision may include no
more than three years of service in a supervisory position in
calculating his seniority hereunder, and provided further that the
seniority of any principal seeking to displace another supervisor in
accordance with the provisions of this subdivision, shall be computed in
accordance with the provisions of paragraph (b) of subdivision three of
this section.
 (b) A person who returns to a position in a tenure area in which he
had previously served pursuant to the provisions of this subdivision
shall retain any tenure rights he had previously acquired pursuant to
the provisions of section twenty-five hundred seventy-three of this
chapter in such tenure area.
 5. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no classroom teaching
position may be abolished after the fifth school day of the fall school
term or after the fifth school day of the spring school term and all
transfers or personnel changes resulting from such abolitions which
would cause the displacement of a classroom teacher shall be completed
prior to the fifteenth school day of such terms, provided that the
chancellor, after counsulting with any affected community school board,
may waive the aforesaid limitations in a specific instance because of
emergency conditions or for reasons of special hardship.
 6. Notwithstanding any other provisions of law, except subdivisions
four and seven of this section, any member of the teaching staff whose
services have been terminated in accordance with the provision of this
section shall be eligible to be appointed to a vacant position for which
such individual does not hold appropriate licensure, provided that the
chancellor, upon the recommendation of the board of examiners, certifies
that such member is competent to serve in such vacant position and
provided further that such individual at the time of appointment meets
the minimum education and experience requirements for recertification
established, for such position, shows satisfactory evidence of
progression toward licensure as defined by the city board, and meets the
full requirements for licensure in such position not later than three
years from the date of the appointment therein. Such member shall serve
in such position at the salary of such position. Any person appointed to
a position for which he does not hold appropriate licensure prior to the
effective date of this section, may continue to serve in such position
only if he meets the minimum education and experience requirements
established for the position by February first, nineteen hundred
seventy-eight, shows satisfactory evidence of progression toward
licensure as defined by the city board and meets the full requirements
for licensure in such position not later than three years from the date
of appointment therein.
 7. If an office or position is abolished or if it is consolidated with
another position without creating a new position, the person filling
such position at the time of its abolition or consolidation, or a person
displaced by a person with higher seniority as provided in this section,
shall be placed upon a preferred eligible list of candidates for
appointment to a vacancy that then exists or that may thereafter occur
in the tenure area of such position, without reduction in salary or
increment, provided the record of such person has been one of faithful,
competent service in the office or position he has filled. The persons
on such preferred list shall be reinstated or appointed to such
vacancies in the order of their length of service in the city school
district, including all full-time equivalent substitute service and all
full-time equivalent service as a paraprofessional, provided that in the
case of vacancies in principalship positions under the jurisdiction of a
community school board, such persons shall be reinstated or reappointed
in order of their length of service in the tenure area of the position
in the community district and provided that intermediate supervisors
properly assigned or appointed on or after the effective date of this
subdivision to positions in a community district and who have been
placed on a preferred eligible list shall be entitled to reinstatement
or reappointment to vacancies in their tenure area within that community
district in order of their length of service in the tenure area of the
position in the community district.
 8. Notwithstanding any other provision of law or of this section, any
person whose services were discontinued because of the abolition of a
position during the period July first, nineteen hundred seventy-five and
June thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty-eight shall be deemed to have
been on leave of absence without pay and shall be entitled to include
such period of discontinuance of services in computing his seniority in
the city school district for purposes of this section, provided the
record of such person has been one of faithful, competent service in the
office or position he has filled and provided further that such person
shall not receive pension credit or incremental salary step credit for
such period of discontinuance of service.
 * 9. (a) The use of artificial intelligence systems as defined by
section one hundred three-e of the state technology law shall not affect
(i) the existing rights of employees pursuant to an existing collective
bargaining agreement, or (ii) the existing representational
relationships among employee organizations or the bargaining
relationships between the employer and an employee organization.
 (b) The use of such artificial intelligence systems shall not result
in the: (i) discharge, displacement or loss of position, including
partial displacement such as a reduction in the hours of non-overtime
work, wages, or employment benefits, or result in the impairment of
existing collective bargaining agreements; or (ii) transfer of existing
duties and functions currently performed by the teaching and supervisory
staff of the city school district to an artificial intelligence system.
 (c) The use of such artificial intelligence system shall not alter the
rights or benefits, and privileges, including but not limited to terms
and conditions of employment and civil service status. The collective
bargaining unit membership status of all existing employees of the board
of education shall be preserved and protected.
 * NB Repealed July 1, 2028
 ARTICLE 52-A
 NEW YORK CITY COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT SYSTEM
Section 2590. Application of article.
 2590-a. Definitions.
 2590-b. Continuation of city board and establishment of
 community districts; establishment of the city-wide
 councils on special education, English language
 learners, high schools, and district seventy-five.
 2590-c. Composition of community district education councils.
 2590-d. By-laws; regulations and decisions.
 2590-e. Powers and duties of community district education
 council.
 2590-f. Community superintendents.
 2590-g. Powers and duties of the city board.
 2590-h. Powers and duties of chancellor.
 2590-i. Powers and duties of schools; principals; provisions
 for the transfer of jurisdiction of high schools.
 2590-j. Appointment and removal of persons in the teaching and
 supervisory service.
 2590-k. Contracts with city university of New York for
 administration of high schools.
 2590-l. Enforcement of applicable law, regulations and
 directives; establishment of appeal board.
 2590-m. Custody and disbursement of funds.
 2590-n. Conflicts of interest.
 2590-o. Educational facilities master plan.
 2590-o*2. Neutrality of school employees in community board
 elections.
 2590-p. Educational facilities capital plan.
 2590-q. Budgetary and fiscal processes.
 2590-r. School based budgeting and expenditure reporting.
 2590-s. Prompt payment of salaries.
 2590-t. New York city comptroller audits.
 2590-u. New York city independent budget office reports.
 2590-v. Notice to students regarding certain test scores.
 § 2590. Application of article. This article shall apply to the city
school district of the city of New York.
 § 2590-a. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms
shall mean:
 1. City district. The term "city district" shall mean the city school
district of the city of New York.
 2. Community district. The term "community district" shall mean a
community school district created or to be created within the city
district under the provisions of this article.
 3. City board. The term "city board" shall mean the board of education
of the city district.
 * 4. Community district education council. The term "community
council" shall mean the community district education council of a
community district established pursuant to section twenty-five hundred
ninety-c of this article.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2026
 * 4. Community board. The term "community board" shall mean the board
of education of a community district.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2026
 5. Chancellor. The term "chancellor" shall mean the chancellor of the
city district.
 6. Community superintendent. The term "community superintendent" shall
mean the superintendent of schools of a community district.
 7. Parent. The term "parent" shall mean a person in parental relation
to a child, as that phrase is defined in subdivision ten of section two
of this chapter.
 * 8. Registered voter. The term "registered voter" shall mean an
elector of the city of New York under the election law.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2026
 * 9. Educational facilities. The term "educational facilities" shall
mean land and the improvements thereon for use in connection with any
educational activity to be undertaken or provided by the city board or
any community council or any facility attendant thereto or any facility
necessary, useful or desirable in connection with such activity.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2026
 * 9. Educational facilities. The term "educational facilities" shall
mean land and the improvements thereon for use in connection with any
educational activity to be undertaken or provided by the city board or
any community school board or any facility attendant thereto or any
facility necessary, useful or desirable in connection with such
activity.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2026
 10. Project. The term "project" shall mean, with respect to an
educational facilities capital plan, (a) the performance, at a specified
educational facility, of one or more program elements, as defined in
paragraph a, b, c or d of subdivision two of section twenty-five hundred
ninety-p of this article; or (b) the performance of the program elements
defined in paragraphs f and g of such subdivision or any system
replacement identified in paragraph e of such subdivision.
 * § 2590-b. Continuation of city board and establishment of community
districts; establishment of the city-wide councils on special education,
English language learners, high schools, and district seventy-five. 1.
(a) The board of education of the city school district of the city of
New York is hereby continued.
 (1) (A) Such board of education shall consist of thirteen appointed
members: one member to be appointed by each borough president of the
city of New York; and eight members to be appointed by the mayor of the
city of New York.
 (B) Commencing on July first, two thousand twenty, the board of
education shall consist of fifteen members: one member to be appointed
by each borough president of the city of New York, one member to be
elected by community district education council presidents, and nine
members to be appointed by the mayor of the city of New York. On or
before December thirty-first, two thousand nineteen, the chancellor
shall promulgate regulations establishing a process for community
district education council presidents to elect a member of the board,
and processes for removal of such member and for the filling of such
position in the event of a vacancy. The first member elected by
community district education council presidents pursuant to such
regulations shall take office on July first, two thousand twenty and
shall serve a term that ends on June thirtieth, two thousand twenty-two.
Thereafter, the member elected by community district education council
presidents shall serve for a two year term commencing on July first.
 (C) Commencing on January fifteenth, two thousand twenty-three, the
board of education shall consist of twenty-three voting members: one
member to be appointed by each borough president of the city of New
York; five members, one from each borough of the city of New York, to be
elected by community district education council presidents; and thirteen
members to be appointed by the mayor of the city of New York. The term
of the first member elected by community district education council
presidents pursuant to clause (B) of this subparagraph shall be extended
and end on January fourteenth, two thousand twenty-three. On or before
December first, two thousand twenty-two, the chancellor shall promulgate
regulations establishing a process for community district education
council presidents to elect members of the board, and processes for
removal of such members and for the filling of such positions in the
event of a vacancy. All appointed members and members elected by the
community education council presidents pursuant to such regulations
shall take office on January fifteenth, two thousand twenty-three and
shall serve a term that ends on June thirtieth, two thousand
twenty-three. Thereafter, appointed members and the members elected by
community district education council presidents shall serve for a one
year term commencing on July first.
 (D) Commencing on July first, two thousand twenty-four, the board of
education shall consist of twenty-four voting members: one member to be
appointed by each borough president of the city of New York; five
members, one from each borough of the city of New York, to be elected by
community district education council presidents; one independent member
who shall serve as chair of the board and who shall be selected as
established in subparagraph three of this paragraph; and thirteen
members to be appointed by the mayor of the city of New York. The
initial term of the chair selected pursuant to subparagraph three of
this paragraph shall commence on September fifteenth, two thousand
twenty-four and shall end on September fourteenth, two thousand
twenty-five; thereafter the chair shall serve for a one-year term
commencing on September fifteenth. The chancellor shall continue
regulations promulgated under clause (C) of this subparagraph
establishing a process for community district education council
presidents to elect members of the board, and processes for removal of
such members and for the filling of such positions in the event of a
vacancy. Appointed members and members elected by community district
education council presidents pursuant to clause (C) of this subparagraph
and commencing a term on July first, two thousand twenty-four shall
serve a term that ends on June thirtieth, two thousand twenty-five.
Thereafter, appointed members and the members elected by community
district education council presidents shall serve for a one-year term
commencing on July first.
 (2) The chancellor and comptroller of the city of New York shall serve
as ex-officio non-voting members of the city board.
 (3) The independent member who shall serve as chair of the board shall
be selected by the mayor of the city of New York from among three
qualified candidates, one nominated by the speaker of the assembly, one
nominated by the majority leader of the senate, and one nominated by the
chancellor of the board of regents. If the mayor of the city of New York
shall not accept any of the three candidates, up to two additional
groups of three will be submitted to the mayor of the city of New York
for consideration. The mayor of the city of New York must select a
candidate from among the nominees no later than September fifteenth of
each year. An individual selected to serve as chair may be reappointed
by the mayor of the city of New York to serve an additional one-year
term, provided such reappointment will be made on or before June
thirtieth of each year, and provided further that no individual may
serve as chair for more than two terms consecutively. If the individual
serving as chair is not reappointed by the mayor of the city of New
York, is term limited pursuant to this subparagraph, or the role of
chair becomes vacant for any reason, the selection of a new member to
serve as chair will be completed through the process as established in
this subparagraph.
 (4) All appointed members shall serve for a one year term, provided
that any member may be removed for good cause, provided that voting
against the appointing authority's direction shall not be cause for
removal, by the appointing authority, who shall provide written notice
to the member and public explaining the reasons therefor at least ten
days in advance of the removal and provide the member a full and fair
opportunity to refute such reasons before removal.
 (5) Except for the chancellor, no board members shall be employed in
any capacity by the city of New York, or a subdivision thereof, or the
city board.
 (6) No appointed or elected member of the city board shall also be a
member, officer, or employee of any public corporation, authority, or
commission where the mayor of the city of New York has a majority of the
appointments.
 (7) Each borough president's appointee shall be a resident of the
borough for which the borough president appointing him or her was
elected and shall be the parent of a child attending a public school
within the city school district of the city of New York.
 (8) Each mayoral appointee shall be a resident of the city and four
shall be parents of a child attending a public school within the city
district, provided that at least one appointee shall be the parent of a
child with an individualized education program, at least one appointee
shall be the parent of a child who is in a bilingual or English as a
second language program conducted pursuant to section thirty-two hundred
four of this chapter, and at least one appointee shall be the parent of
a child who is attending a district seventy-five school or program.
 (9) All parent members shall be eligible to continue to serve on the
city board for two years following the conclusion of their child's
attendance at a public school within the city district.
 (10) Any vacancy other than by an expiration of term shall be filled
by appointment by the appropriate appointing authority within ninety
days of such vacancy and shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired
term.
 (11) Notwithstanding any provision of local law, the members of the
board shall not have staff, offices, or vehicles assigned to them or
receive compensation for their services, but shall be reimbursed for the
actual and necessary expenses incurred by them in the performance of
their duties.
 (12) Every appointed and elected member of the city board shall,
within the first three months of his or her term, complete a minimum of
six hours of training on the financial oversight, accountability and
fiduciary responsibilities of a city board member, as well as a training
course on the powers, functions and duties of the city board.
 (b) The city board shall hold at least one regular public meeting per
month. At least one regular public meeting shall be held in each borough
of the city of New York per year; any additional meetings may be called
at the request of the chairperson. The city board shall consider
appropriate public accommodations when selecting a venue so as to
maximize participation by parents and the community.
 (c) (i) Notice of the time, place and agenda for all city board
regular public meetings shall be publicly provided, including via the
city board's official internet web site, and specifically circulated to
all community superintendents, community district education councils,
community boards, and school based management teams, at least ten
business days in advance of such meeting.
 (ii) A city board regular public meeting agenda shall be comprised of
a list and brief description of the subject matter being considered,
identification of all items subject to a city board vote, and the name,
office, address, email address and telephone number of a city district
representative, knowledgeable on the agenda, from whom any information
may be obtained and to whom written comments may be submitted concerning
items on such agenda.
 (iii) A city board meeting that includes an item subject to a city
board vote related to approval of a school closure or significant change
in school utilization including the phase-out, grade reconfiguration,
re-siting, or co-location of a school pursuant to paragraph h of
subdivision one of section twenty-five hundred ninety-g of this article
shall be held in the borough of the city of New York where the school
that is subject to such proposed school closing or significant change in
school utilization is located.
 (d) The chairperson of the city board shall ensure that at every
regular public meeting there is a sufficient period of time to allow for
public comment on any topic on the agenda prior to any city board vote.
 (e) Minutes of all city board regular public meetings shall be made
publicly available, including via the city board's official internet
website, in a timely manner but no later than the subsequent regular
city board meeting.
 2. (a) There shall be a community council for each community district
created pursuant to this article.
 (b) The city board shall define, adjust, alter, maintain and adopt the
boundaries of the community districts pursuant to this chapter no later
than February first, nineteen hundred ninety-five. There shall be no
less than thirty nor more than thirty-seven community districts.
 (c) The city board may readjust or alter the districts in such plan
only once in every ten years, commencing with the year two thousand
four. The city board in conjunction with the chancellor and the
community council representatives, shall prepare and make public a plan
to ensure the smooth transition of pupils and school personnel, creation
of new boards, and allocation of school facilities and resources among
the districts established pursuant to paragraph (b) of this subdivision.
Prior to the adoption of the transition plan, the city board shall hold
one or more public hearings in each borough. The city board shall make
the transition plan available not less than three weeks before the first
such public hearing. Upon receipt of comments, the city board, in
conjunction with the chancellor and the community council
representatives, shall prepare a revised transition plan, if necessary
and make such plan available to the public for comment.
 3. (a) The redistricting advisory study group established prior to the
effective date of this paragraph for the purpose of study and making
recommendations on community school district boundaries, is hereby
continued and shall perform the duties required herein.
 (b) The study group shall prepare a report containing recommendations
for dividing the city into no more than thirty-seven community
districts.
 (c) In preparation of its recommendations for dividing the city into
community districts, the study group shall ensure that the
recommendations provide for the most effective delivery of educational
services and shall be guided by the following criteria:
 (1) each community district shall: (i) be a suitable size for
efficient policy-making and economic management; (ii) contain a
reasonable number of pupils; (iii) be compact and contiguous, contained
within county lines, and to the maximum extent possible, keep intact
communities and neighborhoods; and (iv) bear a rational relationship to
geographic areas for which the city of New York plans and provides
services;
 (2) to the extent possible, keep existing lines intact;
 (3) the common and special education needs of the communities and
school children involved;
 (4) effective utilization of existing and planned school facilities;
 (5) minimum disruption of existing and planned elementary
school-junior high/middle school-high school feeder patterns;
 (6) transportation facilities;
 (7) additional administrative costs involved in the creation of such
new districts; and
 (8) ensure fair and effective representation of racial and language
groups pursuant to the Voting Rights Act of 1965, as amended;
 (9) notwithstanding the provisions of this subparagraph and
subparagraphs one through eight of this paragraph: (i) the residents of
the county of New York in school district ten as it existed prior to the
implementation of this paragraph shall continue to remain in school
district ten as such district is comprised; (ii) the boundaries of
community district thirty-one shall continue to remain as they are
currently comprised; and (iii) no county shall have fewer community
school districts than in existence on the effective date of this
paragraph.
 (d) The study group shall hold one or more public hearings in each
borough before final adoption of its recommendations. The study group
shall make its recommendations available to the public for inspection
and comment not less than one month before the first such public
hearing. Following its consideration of the comments received on the
recommendations, the study group shall prepare a report containing its
final recommendations. The study group shall submit its report to the
city board and make such report available to the public for inspection
no later than November first, nineteen hundred ninety-four.
 (e) The city board of education shall hold public hearings in each
borough on the recommendations submitted by the study group and may
adopt, revise or reject in whole or in part such recommendations, or,
may request the study group to submit adjusted recommendations. The
final recommendations shall be adopted by the city board of education no
later than February first, nineteen hundred ninety-five to take effect
July first, nineteen hundred ninety-six, provided that such revised
boundaries adopted by the city board pursuant to this chapter shall be
used for purposes of community school board elections to be held on the
first Tuesday in May, nineteen hundred ninety-six.
 (f) Provided, however, that the city board may make minor adjustments,
(i) to correct errors that may occur in the district lines adopted by
the city board, or (ii) upon showing a change in circumstances. Any such
limited revisions to community school district lines may occur between
the effective date of this paragraph and the city board readjustment
scheduled in the year two thousand four.
 (g) No public hearings required pursuant to this subdivision shall be
held during the months of July and August. All public hearings shall be
held at a time and place designated to maximize community and parent
participation. Notice of all such public hearings shall be provided in a
timely manner to all print and electronic media and shall be widely
distributed to all interested parties, so as to maximize participation
by parents and the community. In addition such notice shall be posted in
each school building and district office.
 4. a. There shall be a city-wide council on special education created
pursuant to this section. The city-wide council on special education
shall consist of eleven voting members and one non-voting member, as
follows:
 (1) nine voting members who shall be parents of students with
individualized education programs, to be selected by parents of students
with individualized education programs pursuant to a representative
process developed by the chancellor. Such members shall serve a two year
term;
 (2) two voting members appointed by the public advocate of the city of
New York, who shall be individuals with extensive experience and
knowledge in the areas of educating, training or employing individuals
with handicapping conditions and will make a significant contribution to
improving special education in the city district. Such members shall
serve a two year term; and
 (3) one non-voting member who is a high school senior with an
individualized education program, appointed by the administrator
designated by the chancellor to supervise special education programs.
Such member shall serve a one year term.
 b. The city-wide council on special education shall have the power to:
 (1) advise and comment on any educational or instructional policy
involving the provision of services for students with disabilities;
 (2) advise and comment on the process of establishing committees
and/or subcommittees on special education in community school districts
pursuant to section forty-four hundred two of this chapter;
 (3) issue an annual report on the effectiveness of the city district
in providing services to students with disabilities and making
recommendations, as appropriate, on how to improve the efficiency and
delivery of such services; and
 (4) hold at least one meeting per month open to the public and during
which the public may discuss issues facing students with disabilities.
 c. Vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired term by the city-wide
council on special education, pursuant to a process developed by the
chancellor that shall include consultation with parents of students with
individualized educational programs; provided however, that where a
vacancy occurs in a position appointed by the public advocate, the
public advocate shall appoint a member to serve the remainder of the
unexpired term.
 5. (a) There shall be a city-wide council on English language learners
created pursuant to this section. The city-wide council on English
language learners shall consist of eleven voting members and one
non-voting member, as follows:
 (i) nine voting members who shall be parents of students who are in a
bilingual or English as a second language program conducted pursuant to
section thirty-two hundred four of this chapter, some of whom may be
parents of students who have been in such a program within the preceding
two years, to be selected by parents of students who receive such
services pursuant to a representative process developed by the
chancellor. Such members shall serve a two year term;
 (ii) two voting members appointed by the public advocate of the city
of New York, who shall be individuals with extensive experience and
knowledge in the education of English language learners and will make a
significant contribution to improving bilingual and English as a second
language programs in the city district. Such members shall serve a two
year term; and
 (iii) one non-voting member who is a high school senior who is or has
been in a bilingual or English as a second language program, appointed
by the administrator designated by the chancellor to supervise such
programs. Such member shall serve a one year term.
 (b) The city-wide council on English language learners shall have the
power to:
 (i) advise and comment on any educational or instructional policy
involving bilingual or English as a second language programs;
 (ii) issue an annual report on the effectiveness of the city district
in providing services to English language learners and making
recommendations, as appropriate, on how to improve the efficiency and
delivery of such services; and
 (iii) hold at least one meeting per month open to the public and
during which the public may discuss issues facing English language
learners.
 (c) Vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired term by the city-wide
council on English language learners, pursuant to a process developed by
the chancellor that shall include consultation with parents of students
who receive services for English language learners; provided however,
that where a vacancy occurs in a position appointed by the public
advocate, the public advocate shall appoint a member to serve the
remainder of the unexpired term.
 6. (a) There shall be a city-wide council on high schools created
pursuant to this section. The city-wide council on high schools shall
consist of thirteen voting members and one non-voting member, as
follows:
 (i) ten voting members who shall be parents of students attending
public high schools. For councils whose terms begin prior to two
thousand twenty, two members representing each borough shall be selected
by presidents and officers of the parents' associations or
parent-teachers' associations in the relevant borough, pursuant to a
process established by the chancellor. For councils whose terms begin in
two thousand twenty-one and thereafter, two members representing each
borough shall be parents of public high school students in the relevant
borough, pursuant to a process established by the chancellor. Such
members shall serve a two year term, and shall be eligible to continue
serving their term following the conclusion of their child's attendance
at a public high school;
 (ii) one voting member who shall be a parent of a high school student
with an individualized education program. Such member shall be appointed
by the city-wide council on special education, and shall serve a two
year term;
 (iii) one voting member who shall be a parent of a student in a
bilingual or English as a second language program conducted in a public
high school. Such member shall be appointed by the city-wide council on
English language learners, and shall serve a two year term;
 (iv) one voting member appointed by the public advocate of the city of
New York, who shall be a resident of the city and shall have extensive
business, trade, or education experience and knowledge who will make a
significant contribution to improving education in the city district.
Such member shall serve for a term of two years; and
 (v) one non-voting member who is a public high school senior,
appointed by the chancellor pursuant to a process developed by the
chancellor. Such member shall serve a one year term.
 Officers of parents' associations or parent-teachers' associations who
are candidates in the selection process established by the chancellor
pursuant to this subdivision shall not be eligible to cast votes in such
selection process. The association shall elect a member to vote in the
place of each such officer for purposes of the selection process.
 (b) The city-wide council on high schools shall have the power to:
 (i) advise and comment on any educational or instructional policy
involving high schools;
 (ii) issue an annual report on the effectiveness of the city district
in providing services to high school students and making
recommendations, as appropriate, on how to improve the efficiency and
delivery of such services; and
 (iii) hold at least one meeting per month open to the public and
during which the public may discuss issues facing high schools.
 (c) Vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired term by the city-wide
council on high schools, pursuant to a process developed by the
chancellor that shall include consultation with parents of students
attending public high school; provided, however, that where a vacancy
occurs in a position appointed by the public advocate, the public
advocate shall appoint a member to serve the remainder of the unexpired
term.
 7. (a) There shall be a city-wide council on district seventy-five
created pursuant to this section. The city-wide council for district
seventy-five shall consist of eleven voting members and one non-voting
member, as follows:
 (i) nine voting members who shall be parents of students receiving
city-wide special education services in a district seventy-five school
or program to be selected by parents of students who receive such
services pursuant to a representative process developed by the
chancellor. Such members shall serve a two year term;
 (ii) two voting members appointed by the public advocate of the city
of New York, who shall be individuals with extensive experience and
knowledge in the areas of educating, training or employing individuals
with disabilities and who will make a significant contribution to
improving special education in the city district. Such members shall
serve a two year term; and
 (iii) one non-voting member who is a high school senior appointed by
the administrator designated by the chancellor to supervise district
seventy-five schools and programs. Such member shall serve a one year
term.
 (b) The city-wide council on district seventy-five shall have the
power to:
 (i) advise and comment on any educational or instructional policy
involving the provision of district seventy-five services;
 (ii) issue an annual report on the effectiveness of the city district
in providing services to district seventy-five students and make
recommendations, as appropriate, on how to improve the efficiency and
delivery of such services; and
 (iii) hold at least one meeting per month open to the public and
during which the public may discuss issues facing district seventy-five
students.
 (c) Vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired term by the city-wide
council for district seventy-five, pursuant to a process developed by
the chancellor that shall include consultation with parents of students
attending district seventy-five schools or programs; provided, however,
that where a vacancy occurs in a position appointed by the public
advocate, the public advocate shall appoint a member to serve the
remainder of the unexpired term.
 8. (a) Members of the city-wide councils established pursuant to this
section shall not be paid a salary or stipend, but shall be reimbursed
for all actual and necessary expenses directly related to the duties and
responsibilities of the city-wide council on which they serve.
 (b) Each such city-wide council may appoint a secretary, pursuant to
the policies of the city board, who shall perform the following
functions:
 (i) prepare meeting notices, agendas and minutes;
 (ii) record and maintain accounts of proceedings and meetings; and
 (iii) prepare briefing materials and other related informational
materials for such meetings.
 Each city-wide council shall be responsible for the appointment,
supervision, evaluation and discharge of the secretary.
 (c) No person may serve at the same time on more than one city-wide
council established pursuant to this section, nor may any person serve
at the same time on such a city-wide council and any community district
education council.
 (d) A member of a city-wide council established pursuant to this
section shall be ineligible to be employed by any such council, any
community district education council, or the city board.
 (e) No person shall be eligible for membership on a city-wide council
established pursuant to this section if he or she holds any elective
public office or any elective or appointed party position except that of
delegate or alternate delegate to a national, state, judicial or other
party convention, or member of a county committee.
 (f) A person may be permanently ineligible for appointment to a
city-wide council for any of the following:
 (i) an act of malfeasance directly related to his or her service on
such city-wide council or community district education council; or
 (ii) conviction of a crime, provided that any such conviction shall be
considered in accordance with article twenty-three-A of the correction
law.
 (g) In addition to the conditions enumerated in the public officers
law creating a vacancy, a member of a city-wide council established
pursuant to this section who refuses or neglects to attend three
meetings of such city-wide council of which he or she is duly notified,
without rendering in writing a good and valid excuse therefor vacates
his or her office by refusal to serve. Each absence and any written
excuse rendered shall be included within the official written minutes of
such meeting. After the third unexcused absence such city-wide council
shall declare a vacancy to the chancellor.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2026
 * § 2590-b. Continuation of city board and establishment of community
districts. 1. (a) The board of education of the city school district of
the city of New York is hereby continued. Such board of education shall
consist of seven members, a member to be appointed by each borough
president of the city of New York and two by the mayor. Each borough
president appointee shall be a resident of the borough for which the
borough president appointing him was elected. Two members at large shall
be appointed by the mayor of the city of New York. Each mayoral
appointee shall be a resident of such city. The term of office of each
member shall be four years, commencing the first day of July, nineteen
hundred seventy-four and every four years thereafter. A vacancy
occurring other than by expiration of term of a member appointed by a
borough president shall be filled for the unexpired term by appointment
by the appropriate borough president of a person who is a resident of
such borough. The mayor shall fill vacancies for an unexpired term of
any of his appointees. The president of the board shall be chosen by the
members. Notwithstanding any provision of local law, the members of the
board shall receive compensation for their services as follows: $20,000
for the board president and $15,000 for each board member and shall be
reimbursed for the actual and necessary expenses incurred by them in the
performance of their duties.
 (b) The members to be appointed by the borough presidents shall be
appointed not earlier than April first, nineteen hundred seventy-four
and not later than June first, nineteen hundred seventy-four and their
successors thereafter.
 The mayor of the city of New York shall appoint two members not
earlier than April first, nineteen hundred seventy-four and not later
than June first, nineteen hundred seventy-four and their successors
thereafter.
 2. (a) There shall be a community board for each community district
created pursuant to this article.
 (b) The city board shall define adjust, alter, maintain and adopt the
boundaries of the community districts pursuant to this chapter no later
than February first, nineteen hundred ninety-five. There shall be no
less than thirty nor more than thirty-seven community districts.
 (c) The city board may readjust or alter the districts in such plan
only once in every ten years, commencing with the year two thousand
four. The city board in conjunction with the chancellor and the
community school boards council, shall prepare and make public a plan to
ensure the smooth transition of pupils and school personnel, creation of
new boards, and allocation of school facilities and resources among the
districts established pursuant to paragraph (b) of this subdivision.
Prior to the adoption of the transition plan, the city board shall hold
one or more public hearings in each borough. The city board shall make
the transition plan available not less than three weeks before the first
such public hearing. Upon receipt of comments, the city board, in
conjunction with the chancellor and the community school boards council,
shall prepare a revised transition plan, if necessary and make such plan
available to the public for comment. A final transition plan shall be
adopted by the city board by November fifteenth, nineteen hundred
ninety-five.
 3. (a) The redistricting advisory study group established prior to the
effective date of this paragraph for the purpose of study and making
recommendations on community school district boundaries, is hereby
continued and shall perform the duties required herein.
 (b) The study group shall prepare a report containing recommendations
for dividing the city into no more than thirty-seven community
districts.
 (c) In preparation of its recommendations for dividing the city into
community districts, the study group shall ensure that the
recommendations provide for the most effective delivery of educational
services and shall be guided by the following criteria:
 (1) each community district shall: (i) be a suitable size for
efficient policy-making and economic management; (ii) contain a
reasonable number of pupils; (iii) be compact and contiguous, contained
within county lines, and to the maximum extent possible, keep intact
communities and neighborhoods; and (iv) bear a rational relationship to
geographic areas for which the city of New York plans and provides
services;
 (2) to the extent possible, keep existing lines intact;
 (3) the common and special education needs of the communities and
school children involved;
 (4) effective utilization of existing and planned school facilities;
 (5) minimum disruption of existing and planned elementary
school-junior high/middle school-high school feeder patterns;
 (6) transportation facilities;
 (7) additional administrative costs involved in the creation of such
new districts; and
 (8) ensure fair and effective representation of racial and language
groups pursuant to the Voting Rights Act of 1965, as amended;
 (9) notwithstanding the provisions of this subparagraph and
subparagraphs one through eight of this paragraph: (i) the residents of
the county of New York in school district ten as it existed prior to the
implementation of this paragraph shall continue to remain in school
district ten as such district is comprised; (ii) the boundaries of
community district thirty-one shall continue to remain as they are
currently comprised; and (iii) no county shall have fewer community
school districts than in existence on the effective date of this
paragraph.
 (d) The study group shall hold one or more public hearings in each
borough before final adoption of its recommendations. The study group
shall make its recommendations available to the public for inspection
and comment not less than one month before the first such public
hearing. Following its consideration of the comments received on the
recommendations, the study group shall prepare a report containing its
final recommendations. The study group shall submit its report to the
city board and make such report available to the public for inspection
no later than November first, nineteen hundred ninety-four.
 (e) The city board of education shall hold public hearings in each
borough on the recommendations submitted by the study group and may
adopt, revise or reject in whole or in part such recommendations, or,
may request the study group to submit adjusted recommendations. The
final recommendations shall be adopted by the city board of education no
later than February first, nineteen hundred ninety-five to take effect
July first, nineteen hundred ninety-six, provided that such revised
boundaries adopted by the city board pursuant to this chapter shall be
used for purposes of community school board elections to be held on the
first Tuesday in May, nineteen hundred ninety-six.
 (f) Provided, however, that the city board may make minor adjustments,
(i) to correct errors that may occur in the district lines adopted by
the city board, or (ii) upon showing a change in circumstances. Any such
limited revisions to community school district lines may occur between
the effective date of this paragraph and the city board readjustment
scheduled in the year two thousand four.
 (g) No public hearings required pursuant to this subdivision shall be
held during the months of July and August. All public hearings shall be
held at a time and place designated to maximize community and parent
participation. Notice of all such public hearings shall be provided in a
timely manner to all print and electronic media and shall be widely
distributed to all interested parties, so as to maximize participation
by parents and the community. In addition such notice shall be posted in
each school building and district office.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2026
 * § 2590-c. Composition of community district education councils. 1.
Each community district shall be governed by a community district
education council. The community councils shall consist of twelve voting
members and two non-voting members, as follows:
 (a) (1) For councils whose terms begin prior to two thousand twenty,
nine voting members shall be parents whose children are attending a
school or a pre-kindergarten program offered by a school under the
jurisdiction of the community district, or have attended a school or a
pre-kindergarten program offered by a school under the jurisdiction of
the community district within the preceding two years, and shall be
selected by the presidents and officers of the parents' association or
parent-teachers' association. Such members shall serve for a term of two
years. Presidents and officers of parents' associations or
parent-teachers' associations who are candidates in the selection
process pursuant to this section shall not be eligible to cast votes in
such selection process. The association shall elect a member to vote in
the place of each such president or officer for the purposes of the
selection process. Provided, however, that a parent of a
pre-kindergarten pupil shall vacate his or her membership on such
community district education council where the parent no longer has a
child that attends a school or pre-kindergarten program offered by a
school under the jurisdiction of the community district.
 (2) For councils whose terms begin in two thousand twenty-one and
thereafter, nine voting members shall be parents whose children are
attending a school or a pre-kindergarten program offered by a school
under the jurisdiction of the community district, or have attended a
school under the jurisdiction of the community district within the
preceding two years, and shall be elected by parents of children
attending such schools and pre-kindergarten programs in accordance with
a process developed by the chancellor pursuant to subdivision eight of
this section. Provided, however, that a parent of a pre-kindergarten
pupil shall vacate his or her membership on such community district
education council when the parent no longer has a child that attends a
school or pre-kindergarten program offered by a school under the
jurisdiction of the community district.
 (b) Two voting members shall be appointed by the borough presidents
corresponding to such district. Such appointees shall be residents of,
or own or operate a business in, the district and shall be individuals
with extensive business, trade, or education experience and knowledge,
who will make a significant contribution to improving education in the
district. Such members shall serve for a term of two years.
 (c) One voting member shall be a parent whose child is attending a
district seventy-five school or program, or has attended a district
seventy-five school or program within the preceding two years, and shall
be elected by parents of children attending such schools or programs in
accordance with a process developed by the chancellor. Such member shall
serve for a term of two years.
 (d) Two non-voting members who are high school seniors residing in the
district, shall be appointed by the superintendent from among the
elected student leadership. Such members shall serve for a one year
term.
 Members shall not be paid a salary or stipend, but shall be reimbursed
for all actual and necessary expenses directly related to the duties and
responsibilities of the community council.
 2. For the initial community council, such members must be selected on
or before October thirty-first, two thousand three, with terms
commencing on December first, two thousand three. Thereafter, commencing
in May of two thousand five, the selection or election of community
council members shall occur on the second Tuesday in May, with terms
commencing on the following July first.
 3. Each such council shall select one of its voting members to serve
as chair.
 4. Notwithstanding any provisions of law to the contrary, the
community district education council may appoint an administrative
assistant, pursuant to the policies of the city board, who shall perform
the following functions: (a) prepare meeting notices, agendas and
minutes; (b) record and maintain accounts of proceedings and other
council meetings; and (c) prepare briefing materials and other related
informational materials for such meetings. Each council shall be
responsible for the appointment, supervision, evaluation and discharge
of the administrative assistant.
 5. No person may serve on more than one community council or on the
city-wide council on special education, the city-wide council on English
language learners, the city-wide council on high schools, or the
city-wide council on district seventy-five and a community council. A
member of a community council shall be ineligible to be employed by the
community council of which he or she is a member, any other community
council, the city-wide council on special education, the city-wide
council on English language learners, the city-wide council on high
schools, the city-wide council on district seventy-five, or the city
board. No person shall be eligible for membership on a community council
if he or she holds any elective public office or any elective or
appointed party position except that of delegate or alternate delegate
to a national, state, judicial or other party convention, or member of a
county committee.
 A person may be permanently ineligible for appointment to any
community district education council for any of the following: (a) an
act of malfeasance directly related to his or her service on the
city-wide council on special education, the city-wide council on English
language learners, the city-wide council on high schools, the city-wide
council on district seventy-five, community school board or community
district education council; or (b) conviction of a crime, provided that
any such conviction shall be considered in accordance with article
twenty-three-A of the correction law.
 Any decision rendered by the chancellor or the city board with respect
to the eligibility or qualifications of the nominees for community
district education councils must be written and made available for
public inspection within seven days of its issuance at the office of the
chancellor and the city board. Such written decision shall include the
factual and legal basis for its issuance and a record of the vote of
each board member who participated in the decision, if applicable.
 6. (a) In addition to the conditions enumerated in the public officers
law creating a vacancy, a member of a community district education
council who refuses or neglects to attend three meetings of such council
of which he or she is duly notified, without rendering in writing a good
and valid excuse therefore vacates his or her office by refusal to
serve. Each absence and any written excuse rendered shall be included
within the official written minutes of such meeting. After the third
unexcused absence the community council shall declare a vacancy to the
chancellor.
 (b) (1) Vacancies in positions that were not appointed by a borough
president or elected by parents of children attending district
seventy-five schools or programs shall be filled for an unexpired term
by the community district education council after consultation with the
presidents' council or other consultative body representing parents'
associations and other educational groups within the district.
Recommendations made by such parents and other educational groups shall
be submitted in writing and included within the record of the meeting at
which the vacancy is filled.
 (2) If such vacancy results in the council not having at least one
member who is a parent of a student who is an English language learner
or who has been an English language learner within the preceding two
years, or results in the council not having at least one member who is a
parent of a student with an individualized education program, the
community council shall select a parent having such qualifications to
fill the vacancy.
 (c) If the vacancy is not filled by the community council within sixty
days after it is declared due to a tie vote for such appointment, the
chancellor shall vote with the community council, to break such tie
vote. If the community council has failed to fill the vacancy within
sixty days after it is declared because of any other reason, the
chancellor shall order the community council to do so pursuant to
section twenty-five hundred ninety-1 of this article.
 (d) Where a vacancy occurs in a position appointed by a borough
president, the borough president shall appoint a member to serve the
remainder of the unexpired term.
 (e) Where a vacancy occurs in a position elected by parents of
children attending district seventy-five schools or programs, the
chancellor shall develop a process for parents of children attending
district seventy-five schools or programs to select a member to serve
the remainder of the unexpired term.
 7. (a) Each community council shall prepare and submit to the city
board a performance report every month. The information provided shall
include community council members' attendance records; participation in
community council committees and other community council activities;
visits to schools; and voting records on major issues before the
community council.
 (b) The city board shall review and consolidate the performance
reports into one comprehensive city district-wide report, which shall be
disseminated to the community and the media semiannually.
 8. The chancellor shall: (a) develop a process to ensure a uniform
election process for parent associations and parent-teacher
associations. Such process shall ensure uniformity with respect to
timing of elections and the structure and size of the body.
 (b) develop a process for nomination of candidates for community
council membership. Such process will outline in detail the procedure
which must be followed to present a name for consideration, may include
qualifications and prohibitions in addition to those outlined in this
section and may allow for an interview process for nominees.
 (c) (1) develop selection procedures for community council members
which shall attempt to ensure membership that reflects a representative
cross-section of the communities within the school district and
diversity of the student population including those with particular
educational needs, shall include consideration of the enrollment figures
within each community district and the potential disparity of such
enrollment from school to school within the district, and shall ensure
that, to the extent possible, a school may have no more than one parent
representative on the community council. Such procedures shall ensure
that at least one position on the community council is filled by a
parent of a student who is an English language learner or who has been
an English language learner within the preceding two years, and at least
one position is filled by a parent of a student with an individualized
education program, and shall allow for the seven remaining positions to
be filled by parents who are otherwise eligible;
 (2) after reviewing the recommendations of the task force described in
subdivision nine of this section, develop election procedures for
community council members which shall attempt to ensure membership that
reflects a representative cross-section of the communities within the
school district and diversity of the student population including those
with particular educational needs, shall include consideration of the
enrollment figures within each community district and the potential
disparity of such enrollment from school to school within the district,
and shall ensure that, to the extent possible, a school may have no more
than one parent representative on the community council. Such measures
shall ensure that at least one position on the community council is
filled by a parent of a current student who is or has been at any time
an English language learner, and at least one position is filled by a
parent of a student who has or has at any time had an individualized
education program, and shall allow for the seven remaining positions to
be filled by parents who are otherwise eligible. Such election
procedures shall ensure that no candidate is elected by a margin of less
than one vote.
 (d) promulgate rules and regulations requiring financial disclosure by
the nominees and policies prohibiting political endorsements of and
campaign contributions to nominees.
 (e) beginning in January of each school year and continuing until the
date of selection, ensure the distribution of guides to parents in
addition to information regarding community council roles, functions,
and activities, including upcoming parents' association and
parent-teacher association elections, candidate information, and the
nature of the selection or election process.
 Prior to the adoption of the processes, procedures, rules or
regulations set forth in this subdivision, the chancellor shall ensure
that there is an inclusive public process which allows for sufficient
public input from parents and the community including public hearings.
All such processes, procedures, rules or regulations must be final in
sufficient time to assure for an orderly implementation and notification
of such processes, procedures, rules or regulations to allow for full
community participation in the nomination and selection processes and
procedures.
 9. The mayor shall appoint a task force on community district
education councils consisting of parents whose child or children are
attending a public school within the community districts and other
members with relevant expertise. The task force shall review the
eligibility criteria to serve on a community district education council,
the process for selecting community council members, and their terms of
office. The task force shall submit a report concerning its findings and
recommendations to the mayor and the chancellor by November first, two
thousand nineteen.
 * NB Repealed June 30, 2026
 * § 2590-c. Composition of community boards. 1. Each community
district shall be governed by a community board to consist of nine
members to be elected for a term of three years and to serve without
compensation. Each such board shall select one of its members to serve
as chairman.
 Notwithstanding any provisions of law to the contrary, the community
board may appoint a board secretary, pursuant to the policies of the
city board, who shall perform the following functions: (a) prepare
meeting notices, agendas and minutes; and (b) record and maintain
accounts of proceedings and other board meetings. Each board shall be
responsible for the appointment, supervision, evaluation and discharge
of the board secretary.
 2. Such members shall be elected at an election conducted by the board
of elections in the city of New York to be held on the first Tuesday in
May commencing with the year two thousand three and every third year
thereafter for a term commencing on the first day of July next
following.
 3. Every registered voter residing in a community district and every
registered parent of a child attending any school under the jurisdiction
of the community board of such district who is a citizen of the state, a
resident of the city of New York for at least thirty days and at least
eighteen years of age shall be eligible to vote at such election for the
members of such community board, except that no person may vote more
than once or in more than one community district, and no person shall
have the right to register or vote at any community board election who
would not be qualified to register or vote at any election in accordance
with the provisions of section 5-106 of the election law.
 (a) The board of elections of the city of New York shall provide for
the personal and mail registration, and cancellation of registration, of
persons qualified by this subdivision to vote as "parents," in a manner
determined jointly by the board of elections and the city board. Each
parent shall be offered the opportunity to register as a parent voter at
the time such parent registers his child with the school and at such
other times as the board of elections deems necessary to achieve the
registration of the maximum number of parents possible. The registration
process shall provide a procedure for determining when such parents
shall cease to be eligible to vote as parent voters because their child
no longer attends a school under the jurisdiction of the community
board.
 (b) In January next preceding each community board election, the city
board shall provide written notice to every parent of a child attending
school under the jurisdiction of every community board of such parent's
right to vote in the community board election, the method and time by
which a parent may register to vote, and a form by which such parent may
register by mail.
 (c) The board of elections shall certify qualified registrations
pursuant to the certification procedures agreed to by the board of
elections and the city board. The board of elections shall certify all
qualified registrations and transmit notice of such certification to the
city board promptly.
 4. (a) Every registered voter residing in a community district and
every parent of a child attending any school under the jurisdiction of
the community board of such district who is a citizen of the state, a
resident of the city of New York for at least ninety days prior to the
date of the election, and at least eighteen years of age shall be
eligible for membership on such community board, provided that such
person not be disqualified from registering for or voting at an election
under the provisions of section 5-106 of the election law or ineligible
to serve, under the provisions of paragraph (b) of this subdivision. No
person may serve on more than one community board. A member of a
community board shall be ineligible to be employed by the community
board of which he is a board member, any other community board or the
city board. No person shall be eligible for membership on a community
board if he or she holds any elective public office or any elective or
appointed party position except that of delegate or alternate delegate
to a national, state, judicial or other party convention, or member of a
county committee.
 (b) A person who has been convicted of a felony, or has been removed
from a community school board for any of the following shall be
permanently ineligible for appointment or election to any community
school board:
 (1) an act of malfeasance directly related to his or her service on
such community school board; or
 (2) conviction of a crime, if such crime is directly related to his or
her service upon such community school board.
 5. Each registered voter shall vote at such polling place within his
or her community district as shall be designated by the board of
elections in the city of New York or may vote as a registered parent
voter, but not both. Each person voting as a registered parent shall
vote at such polling place within the community district in which his or
her child is attending school as shall be designated by the board of
elections in the city of New York. In the event a parent has children
attending school in different community districts, the parent may vote
at either polling place designated for each of the community districts
by the board of elections, but not both. The polls of such elections
shall be open between the hours of six o'clock in the forenoon and nine
o'clock in the evening on the days of elections.
 6. Applicability of the election law. (a) The provisions of the
election law with respect to registration of voters, nomination of
candidates, declination of nominations, filling of vacancies in
nominations, notices to candidates, objections to petitions, rulings
thereon, judicial proceedings, campaign receipts and expenditures,
conduct of the election, including the use of voting machines, counting
and canvassing of votes, and all other matters so far as applicable
shall govern the election of community board members; provided, however,
that:
 (1) candidates for community board member shall be nominated by
petitions in accordance with regulations, not inconsistent with the
provisions of this article, promulgated by the board of elections in the
city of New York. Such petitions shall be filed with the board of
elections at least four weeks before the election;
 (2) nominating petitions shall be signed by not fewer than two hundred
registered voters residing in such community district, or persons
eligible to vote as registered parents in such community district;
 (3) each candidate shall be nominated by a separate petition and no
elector shall sign more than one such petition. Should an elector sign
more than one such petition, his or her signature shall be void except
upon the petition first signed;
 (4) no candidate shall be identified by political party or other
organizational affiliation on the nominating petitions or the ballot;
 (5) certification of acceptance or declination are not required to be
acknowledged; and
 (6) the order of the names of candidates on the ballot shall be
determined in the same manner as the order of names of candidates in a
primary election.
 (b) Notwithstanding the provisions of section 14-102 of the election
law to the contrary, all receipts and contributions received by a
candidate for community board or a political committee on behalf of a
candidate for community board from any one contributor must be
specifically accounted for by separate items in such candidate's or
committee's financial disclosure statement.
 (c) At each election, any candidate for community board member shall
be entitled to exercise all the rights granted by section 8-500 of the
election law to a political party or independent body in regard to the
appointment of watchers and challengers for the polls.
 (d) Any public hearing held by the board of elections or the city
board with respect to the community school board elections or to
candidates for community boards must be stenographically transcribed or
recorded in another manner and such transcripts or written records of
such recordings must be made available for public inspection at the
offices of the city board and the board of elections.
 (e) Any decision rendered by the board of elections or the city board
with respect to candidates for community boards must be written and made
available for public inspection within seven days of its issuance at the
offices of the city board and the board of elections. Such written
decision shall include the factual and legal basis for its issuance and
a record of the vote of each board member or commissioner of elections
who participated in the decision.
 7. The members of each community board shall be elected by
proportional representation in accordance with the following rules:
 (1) Paper ballots. Community board members shall be voted for, in
accordance with the instructions provided in paragraph three, on paper
ballots on which the candidates are listed by name only. The ballots
shall conform to the provisions of the election law for paper ballots,
so far as applicable, except as to size and as hereinafter provided. The
ballots shall contain a square for voting before each candidate's name.
 (2) Order of names on ballot. The names of the candidates shall be
printed in the alphabetical order of their surnames, except that they
shall be rotated by polling places by transposing the first named
candidate to the bottom of the order at each succeeding polling place;
so that each name shall appear first and in each other position in an
equal number, as nearly as possible, of the polling places.
 (3) Instructions to voters. There shall be no indication on the ballot
of a definite number of candidates to be voted for. The instructions to
voters shall read as follows:
 INSTRUCTIONS
 Mark Your Choices with NUMBERS Only.
 (Do NOT use X Marks.)
 Put the number 1 in the square opposite the name of your first choice.
 Put the number 2 opposite your second choice, the number 3 opposite
your third choice, and so on. You may mark as many choices as you
please.
 Do not put the same number opposite more than one name.
 To vote for a person whose name is not printed on this ballot, write
his name on a blank line under the names of the candidates and put a
number in the square opposite to show which choice you wish to give him.
 If you tear or deface or wrongly mark this ballot, draw lines across
its face to prevent its being used, return it and obtain another.
 (4) Central count. Prior to every election at which community board
members are to be elected, the board of elections shall designate a
central counting place for each community district where the ballots
shall be brought together and counted publicly; shall appoint for each
central counting place a board of two competent persons, to act as
directors of the count for such counting place; shall employ a
sufficient staff of assistants for each counting place, and shall make
suitable arrangements for the counting and recording of the ballots,
subject to the provisions of this article. If the board of elections and
the city board determine it to be feasible and desirable, the board of
elections may provide for the counting of the ballots by any combination
of electronic, mechanical or other devices to carry out the provisions
of this section. The board of elections shall prepare and provide all
necessary forms and equipment.
 (5) Assembling ballots. As soon as the polls have closed, the election
officials assigned by the board of elections at each polling place shall
seal the ballot boxes without opening them and shall send them at once,
as the board of elections may direct, to the central counting place for
the district with a record of the number of ballots for community board
member which have been voted in their polling place.
 (6) Checking number of ballots. At the central counting place the
number of ballots for community board member found in each ballot box
shall be recorded and compared with the record sent from the
corresponding polling place. The records thus compared shall be made
available to the public with notations explaining any corrections or
changes made therein. Discrepancies which cannot be reconciled shall be
shown on the record. All ballots found in the ballot boxes which bear no
evidence of having been improperly cast shall be accepted.
 (7) Sorting of ballots. Ballots shall be sorted by polling places in
an order determined by lot.
 (8) Rules for validity. If a ballot does not clearly show which
candidate the voter prefers to all others or if it contains the
signature of the voter, it shall be held as invalid. Every ballot not
thus invalid shall be counted according to the intent of the voter so
far as that can be clearly ascertained, whether marked according to the
instructions printed on it or not. No ballot shall be held invalid
because it is marked in ink or pencil different from the one supplied at
the polling place, or because the names of candidates thereon have been
stricken out by the voter. Any cross mark or check mark shall be
disregarded, except that a single cross mark or check mark on a ballot
on which no number one appears shall be considered equivalent to the
number one. If the consecutive numerical order of the numbers on a
ballot is broken by the omission of one or more numbers, the smallest
number marked shall be taken to indicate the voter's first choice, the
next smallest his second, and so on, without regard to the number or
numbers omitted.
 (9) Count of first choices. At the beginning of the count for each
district the ballots shall be sorted and counted according to the first
choices marked on them. The ballots shall be so credited to the
candidates of their choice in the order of polling places chosen by lot
as specified in paragraph seven of this subdivision. The number of valid
ballots cast for each candidate as first choice in each polling place
and the total number of valid ballots for each candidate and for all
candidates shall be determined and recorded.
 (10) Single transferable vote. Each candidate shall be credited with
one vote for every ballot that is sorted to him as first choice or
transferred to him as hereinafter provided, and no ballot shall ever be
credited to more than one candidate at the same time.
 (11) Quota sufficient to elect. The quota of votes sufficient to elect
a community board member shall be determined by dividing the total
number of valid ballots cast in the community district by one more than
the number of members to be elected for the district and adding one to
the result, disregarding fractions. This is the smallest number of
ballots which could be received separately by each of as many candidates
as are to be elected but not by one more.
 (12) Election of candidates with quotas. All candidates whose
first-choice ballots equal or exceed the quota shall be declared
elected.
 (13) Transfer of surplus ballots. All of the surplus ballots in excess
of the quota of each candidate so elected shall be transferred from him,
each to the unelected candidate indicated on it as next choice among
such candidates. The ballots to be so transferred as surplus ballots
shall be those last received by the candidate in the count of first
choices which show a clear next choice for an unelected candidate. All
ballots which show no such clear next choice shall be left to the credit
of the candidate of their first choice. If more than one candidate has
first-choice ballots in excess of the quota, the surplus ballots of the
candidate with most ballots shall be transferred first, then those of
the candidate with next most ballots, and so on.
 (14) Election of candidates during transfers. Whenever during any
transfer of ballots, at any stage of the counting, the number of ballots
credited to a candidate becomes equal to the quota, he shall be declared
elected and no ballots in excess of the quota shall be transferred to
him. Any transferred ballots in excess of the quota which show a next
choice for such candidate shall be transferred further at once, each to
the next subsequent choice on it for a continuing candidate. A
"continuing candidate" is a candidate not yet elected or defeated. If
such a ballot shows no such further choice, it shall be set aside as
"exhausted".
 (15) Defeat of lowest candidates. After the count of first choices and
the transfer of all surplus ballots, if any, the candidates having
fewest votes to their credit shall be successively defeated and their
ballots transferred as hereinafter provided. The one candidate with the
fewest votes shall be declared defeated first. If at this point, two or
more of the candidates with the next fewest votes, including any such
candidates whose names have been written in, have together fewer votes
than the candidate next higher in number of votes, they may all be
declared defeated together unless this would reduce the number of
undefeated candidates below the number to be elected.
 (16) Transfer of ballots from defeated candidates. All the ballots of
the candidates thus defeated shall be transferred, each to the candidate
indicated on it as next choice among the continuing candidates. If a
ballot shows no such further choice, it shall be set aside as exhausted.
If the same choice is marked for more than one candidate, it shall be
disregarded except as to continuing candidates, but if the next choice
for a continuing candidate is marked for more than one continuing
candidate, the ballots shall be set aside as exhausted.
 (17) Defeat of candidate then lowest. When all the ballots of the
candidate or candidates first defeated have been transferred, the one
candidate who is then lowest on the poll shall be declared defeated and
all his ballots transferred in the same way.
 (18) Successive defeats and transfers of ballots. Thereupon the
candidate who is then lowest on the poll shall be declared defeated and
all his ballots similarly transferred. The lowest candidates shall be
declared defeated one at a time and all their ballots transferred until
the election is at an end as hereinafter provided.
 (19) Order of transfer. When ballots are being transferred from
defeated candidates, they shall be transferred in the reverse order to
that in which they were credited to the candidate whose ballots are
being transferred, except that if no quota can possibly be completed for
another candidate during the transfer they may be transferred in any
order.
 (20) Ties. In deciding any tie a candidate shall be treated as having
more votes than another if he was credited with more votes at the end of
the last preceding transfer or sorting of ballots at which the numbers
of their votes were different. Any tie not thus decided shall be decided
by lot.
 (21) Election ended when all quotas are completed. If at any time as
many candidates as are to be elected have received the quota, the other
candidates shall all be declared defeated and the election shall be at
an end. Any transfer that is in progress when the last candidate is
elected may be completed for the record.
 (22) Last candidates elected even if quotas are not completed. If at
any time all ballots of any defeated candidates have been transferred
and it is impossible to defeat another candidate without reducing the
continuing candidates below the number still to be elected, all the
continuing candidates shall be declared elected and the election shall
be at an end.
 (23) Correction of errors. If at any time after the first sorting of
the ballots a ballot is found to have been misplaced, it shall be
credited to the candidate who should have been credited with it at that
stage of the counting or set aside as exhausted if that would have been
the proper disposition of it at that stage, and any changes in the
disposition of the ballots composing completed quotas made necessary by
the correction shall also be made forthwith. If the number of misplaced
ballots found indicates that the list of continuing candidates may be
incorrect, so much of the sorting and counting as may be required to
correct the error shall be done over again before the count proceeds.
 (24) Record of count. A record of the count shall be kept in such form
as to show, after each sorting or transfer of ballots, the number
thereby credited to each candidate, the number thereby found exhausted,
the total for each candidate, the total found exhausted, and the total
number of valid ballots found by adding the totals of all candidates and
the total found exhausted.
 (25) Record and disposition of ballots. Every ballot that is
transferred from one candidate to another shall be stamped or marked so
as to show all the candidates to whom it is successively credited during
the entire course of the count. If in correcting an error, or in
recounting ballots, any ballots are re-sorted or re-transferred, every
such ballot shall be made to take the same course that it took in the
original count unless the correction of an error requires its taking a
different course.
 (26) Ineligible candidates. If a candidate dies or is officially
determined to be ineligible before the counting of the ballots is
completed, all choices for such candidate shall be disregarded and every
ballot which would otherwise have been counted for him shall be counted
for the next choice thereon, if any, instead.
 (27) Public attendance at count. The candidates, representatives of
the press and other media and, so far as may be consistent with good
order and convenience, the public shall be afforded every facility for
being present and witnessing the count.
 (28) Supplementary regulations. Administrative regulations for the
conduct of elections by proportional representation, not inconsistent
with the provisions of this article may be made by the city board and,
subject to any such regulation, by the board of elections in the city of
New York.
 ** 7. Method of election. The members of each community board shall be
elected in accordance with the following rules of limited voting:
 (a) Community board members shall be voted for on voting machines, in
accordance with the provisions of title two of article seven of the
election law.
 (b) Order of names on ballot. The names of the candidates shall be
printed in the alphabetical order of their surnames, except that they
shall be rotated by polling places by transposing the first named
candidate to the bottom of the order at each succeeding polling place so
that each name shall appear first and in each other position in an equal
number, as nearly as possible, of the polling places.
 (c) Vote casting. Each voter is entitled to cast one vote for each
candidate to a maximum of four votes. No voter may cast more than one
vote for any one candidate.
 (d) Election of candidates. The nine candidates receiving the greatest
number or votes when ballots are counted in accordance with the
provisions of article nine of the election law shall be elected.
 (e) Ties. In the event that more eligible persons than the number
remaining to be elected receive an equal number of votes, on notice to
the persons receiving the same number of votes, the board of elections
in the city of New York shall determine by lot which of those persons is
elected.
 (f) Supplementary regulations. Administrative regulations for the
conduct of elections by limited voting, not inconsistent with the
provisions of this article, may be made by the board of elections in the
city of New York, in consultation with the city board.
 ** NB The amendments to subdivision 7 made by chapter 149 of the laws
of 1998, although signed into law by the Governor on July 2, 1998, are
not operative until precleared by the Department of Justice, which has
not yet occurred.
 8. (a) In addition to the conditions enumerated in the public officers
law creating a vacancy, a member of a community board who refuses or
neglects to attend three meetings of his board of which he is duly
notified, without rendering in writing a good and valid excuse therefor
vacates his office by refusal to serve. Each absence and any written
excuse rendered shall be included within the official written minutes of
such meeting. After the third unexcused absence the board shall declare
a vacancy and certify the existence of the vacancy to the chancellor.
 (b) Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term by the community
board after consultation with the presidents' council or other
consultative body representing parents' associations and other
educational groups within the district. Recommendations made by such
parents and other educational groups shall be submitted in writing and
included within the record of the meeting at which the vacancy is
filled.
 (c) If the vacancy is not filled by the board within sixty days after
it is declared due to a tie vote for such appointment, the chancellor
shall vote with the community board, to break such tie vote. If the
board has failed to fill the vacancy within sixty days after it is
declared because of any other reason, the chancellor shall order the
board to do so pursuant to section twenty-five hundred ninety-l of this
chapter.
 9. Public information and education. (a) Each community board shall
prepare and submit to the city board monthly a performance report. The
information provided shall include community board members' attendance
records; participation in community board committees and other community
board activities; visits to schools; and voting records on major issues
before the community board.
 (b) The city board shall review and consolidate the performance
reports into one comprehensive city district-wide report, which shall be
disseminated to the community and the media semiannually.
 10. Polling place procedures. The board of elections shall provide at
the locations designated as polling places on the days of the community
board elections, sufficient employees who have received formal training
regarding the conduct of community board elections, including the
procedures applicable to parent voters. The board of elections of the
city of New York shall provide polling place employees who speak other
languages as required by law.
 11. Distribution of information/media. Beginning in October of the
school year in which the community school election will take place, and
continuing until the date of election, the city board shall ensure the
distribution of voter guides to parents in addition to information
regarding community board roles, functions, and activities, including
upcoming elections, voter registration, candidate information, and the
nature of the election process to parents and to the general public
through city-wide and local media. The city board and the board of
elections of the city of New York should use foreign language and ethnic
newspapers and television stations to maximize minority participation in
the electoral process.
 12. Definition. For the purposes of this section, the term "parent of
a child" shall include a parent of a child with a disability, as defined
in article eighty-nine of this chapter.
 * NB Revived June 30, 2026
 * § 2590-d. By-laws; regulations and decisions. 1. The city board and
the chancellor shall prescribe such by-laws and regulations as may be
necessary to make effectual the provisions of this chapter and for the
conduct of the proceedings of said board consistent with the
requirements of this article. The city board by-laws shall include a
process by which any member of the city board may request that items be
placed on the city board's agenda. Such request may be made at a city
board regular public meeting or prior to such meeting. If a member of
the city board requests that an item be placed on the agenda at a
regular public meeting of the city board, then the chairperson shall
respond to the request at such meeting. If a member of the city board
requests that an item be placed on the agenda at any time prior to a
regular public meeting of the city board, then the chairperson shall
respond to the request at any time prior to the subsequent regular
public meeting. Said by-laws and regulations shall be published and
indexed and revised at least annually. Copies of such by-laws and
regulations shall be made available for public inspection via the city
board's official internet web site, at the offices of the city board,
each community council, the office of the commissioner of education, and
the legislative library in Albany, and at such other places as the city
board may deem proper.
 2. Each community council shall prescribe such by-laws and regulations
as may be necessary to make effectual the provisions of this chapter and
for the conduct of the proceedings of said board. Such by-laws and
regulations shall be filed with the city board and the commissioner of
education and shall be made available for inspection by the public at
the offices of the community council. Such by-laws shall include, but
not be limited to the following requirements:
 a. that there shall be a parents' association or a parent-teachers'
association in each school under its jurisdiction;
 b. that the council, the community superintendent and the principal of
each school shall have regular communication with all parents'
associations and parent-teachers' associations within the community
district, and meet with their elected officers at least quarterly during
the school year, to the end that such associations are provided with
full factual information pertaining to matters of pupil achievement,
including but not limited to: annual reading scores, comparison of the
achievement of pupils in comparable grades and schools, as well as the
record of achievement of the same children as they progress through the
school; provided, however, that such record and scores shall not be
disclosed in a manner which will identify individual pupils.
 c. that community councils develop and implement a process consistent
with procedures which shall be developed by the chancellor for community
input in connection with the annual evaluation of the district
superintendent and other instructional supervisors assigned or appointed
to the district by the chancellor.
 d. that all meetings of the community council be subject to article
seven of the public officers law.
 3. Copies of all written decisions rendered by the city board acting
as an appeal board pursuant to subdivision ten of section twenty-five
hundred ninety-g and copies of all written decisions rendered by the
chancellor pursuant to section twenty-five hundred ninety-l shall be
published, indexed and revised at least semi-annually. Copies of said
decisions shall be made available for public inspection at the offices
of the city board, each community council, the office of the
commissioner of education, and at such other places as the city board
shall deem proper.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2026
 * § 2590-d. By-laws; regulations and decisions. 1. The city board and
the chancellor shall prescribe such by-laws and regulations as may be
necessary to make effectual the provisions of this chapter and for the
conduct of the proceedings of said board. Said by-laws and regulations
shall be published and indexed and revised at least annually. Copies of
such by-laws and regulations shall be made available for public
inspection at the offices of the city board, each community board, the
office of the commissioner of education, and the legislative library in
Albany, and at such other places as the city board may deem proper.
 2. Each community board shall prescribe such by-laws and regulations
as may be necessary to make effectual the provisions of this chapter and
for the conduct of the proceedings of said board. Such by-laws and
regulations shall be filed with the city board and the commissioner of
education and shall be made available for inspection by the public at
the offices of the community board. Such by-laws shall include, but not
be limited to the following requirements:
 a. that there shall be a parents' association or a parent-teachers'
association in each school under its jurisdiction;
 b. that the board, the community superintendent and the principal of
each school shall have regular communication with all parents'
associations and parent-teachers' associations within the community
district, and meet with their elected officers at least quarterly during
the school year, to the end that such associations are provided with
full factual information pertaining to matters of pupil achievement,
including but not limited to: annual reading scores, comparison of the
achievement of pupils in comparable grades and schools, as well as the
record of achievement of the same children as they progress through the
school; provided, however, that such record and scores shall not be
disclosed in a manner which will identify individual pupils.
 c. that districts implement a process for community involvement in
connection with the periodic recommendation of superintendent candidates
to the chancellor pursuant to regulations of the chancellor, subject to
the review and approval of the chancellor, and such involvement in
connection with the periodic review of the superintendent's performance.
 d. that all meetings of the community board be subject to article
seven of the public officers law.
 3. Copies of all written decisions rendered by the city board acting
as an appeal board pursuant to subdivision ten of section twenty-five
hundred ninety-g and copies of all written decisions rendered by the
chancellor pursuant to section twenty-five hundred ninety-l shall be
published, indexed and revised at least semi-annually. Copies of said
decisions shall be made available for public inspection at the offices
of the city board, each community board, the office of the commissioner
of education, and at such other places as the city board shall deem
proper.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2026
 * § 2590-e. Powers and duties of community district education council.
Each community council shall have the following powers and duties to
establish educational policies and objectives, not inconsistent with the
provisions of this article and the policies established by the city
board, with respect to all pre-kindergarten, nursery, kindergarten,
elementary, intermediate and junior high schools and programs in
connection therewith in the community district. The community councils
shall have no executive or administrative powers or functions, but shall
have the following powers and duties:
 3. promote achievement of educational standards and objectives
relating to the instruction of students.
 4. cooperate as required by the chancellor in the removal from office
pursuant to section twenty-five hundred ninety-l of this article of any
community council member for willful, intentional or knowing involvement
in the hiring, appointment or assignment of employees other than as
specifically authorized in this article.
 5. a. require community council members, the community superintendent,
and any other officer or employee in schools and programs under the
jurisdiction of the community councils, to make annual written
disclosure, in accordance with regulations and bylaws of the city board
developed in consultation with the community councils, to the community
council and the city board, of the following information:
 (1) the employment by the city school board or any community council
of any person related within the third degree of consanguinity or
affinity to the person making disclosure, including the employment of
any such person for which a two-thirds vote was required under paragraph
e of subdivision four of section twenty-five hundred ninety-j of this
chapter with a notation of the date such vote was taken.
 (2) the source of any income, reimbursement, gift or other form of
compensation for services rendered together with a description of such
services.
 (3) the source of any financial contribution made within the year
preceding the election or the term of office of a community district
education council member to assist in the election or reelection of such
member of the community council, and the amount of such contribution,
consistent with any applicable regulations of the city board and the
board of elections.
 b. willful or repeated failure to make full and timely disclosure
shall constitute cause for removal from office of any member of a
community council or for any other officer or employee disciplinary
action and such other penalty as provided by law.
 c. all written disclosures required hereunder shall be filed with the
community council and the city board and shall be available for public
inspection during regular business hours on regular business days.
 6. require community council members, candidates for community
district education councils, the community superintendent and, for good
cause shown, any other officer or employee in schools and programs under
the jurisdiction of the community councils to submit to the city board
and the community councils, in accordance with regulations and bylaws of
the city board developed in consultation with the community councils,
financial reports for themselves and their spouses.
 a. the frequency and period of coverage, the designation of persons to
submit such reports by name, title or income level or by a combination
thereof, and the content of such reports, including minimum dollar
amounts, shall be determined by the city board.
 b. willful or repeated failure to file required financial reports or
make other required disclosures shall constitute cause for removal from
office of any member of a community council or for any other officer or
employee disciplinary action and such other penalty as provided by law.
No person may assume office as a community council member without
previously complying with this subdivision, subdivision five of this
section, and with all applicable financial disclosure requirements
promulgated by the board of elections.
 7. participate in training and continuing education programs pursuant
to the provisions of this subdivision.
 (1) Community district education council members shall participate in
training to acquaint them with the powers, functions and duties of
community council members, as well as the powers of other governing and
administering authorities that affect education including the powers of
the commissioner, city board, chancellor and community superintendents.
Such participation shall be completed no later than three months from
the date in which a community council member takes office for the first
time.
 (2) Each community district education council member shall be required
to participate in continuing education programs on an annual basis as
defined by the chancellor. Participation in training pursuant to
paragraph one of this subdivision by a community district education
council member who takes office for the first time shall be deemed to
satisfy the requirements of this subdivision for the first year of such
member's term.
 (3) such training and continuing education programs shall be approved
by the chancellor, following consultation with the commissioner, and may
be provided by the state education department, the city board, the
chancellor or a nonprofit provider authorized by the chancellor to
provide such training and continuing education programs.
 (4) the chancellor is authorized to promulgate regulations regarding
providers and their certification, the content and implementation of the
training and continuing education programs. Any such regulations shall
be developed after consultation with the commissioner.
 (5) such training and continuing education programs shall be offered
by the chancellor on an annual basis or more frequently, as needed, to
enable community council members to comply with this subdivision.
 (6) failure of community council members to comply with the training
and continuing education requirements mandated by this subdivision shall
constitute cause for removal from office pursuant to section twenty-five
hundred ninety-1 of this article.
 8. Each year prepare a school district report card pursuant to
regulations of the commissioner, and shall make it publicly available by
transmitting it to local newspapers of general circulation, appending it
to copies of the proposed budget made publicly available as required by
law, making it available for distribution at the annual meeting, and
otherwise disseminating it as required by the commissioner. Such report
card shall include measures of the academic performance of the school
district, on a school by school basis, and measures of the fiscal
performance of the district, as prescribed by the commissioner. Pursuant
to regulations of the commissioner, the report card shall also compare
these measures to statewide averages for all public schools, and
statewide averages for public schools of comparable wealth and need,
developed by the commissioner. Such report card shall include, at a
minimum, any information on the school district regarding pupil
performance and expenditure per pupil required to be included in the
annual report by the requests to the governor and the legislature
pursuant to section two hundred fifteen-a of this chapter; and any other
information required by the commissioner. School districts (i)
identified as having fifteen percent or more of their students in
special education, or (ii) which have fifty percent or more of their
students with disabilities in special education programs or services
sixty percent or more of the school day in a general education building,
or (iii) which have eight percent or more of their students with
disabilities in special education programs in public or private separate
educational settings shall indicate on their school district report card
their respective percentages as defined in this paragraph and paragraphs
(i) and (ii) of this subdivision as compared to the statewide average.
 9. Subject to paragraph (o) of subdivision one of section twenty-five
hundred ninety-f of this article, to employ or retain counsel subject to
the powers and duties of the corporation counsel of the city of New York
to be the district's attorney and counsel pursuant to subdivision a of
section three hundred ninety-four of the New York city charter in
actions or proceedings in which the council or any member thereof is a
defendant or a respondent.
 10. Where the district has provided transportation to students
enrolled in such district to a school sponsored field trip,
extracurricular activity or any other similar event, it shall provide
transportation back to either the point of departure or to the
appropriate school in the district, unless the parent or legal guardian
of a student participating in such event has provided the school
district with written notice, consistent with district policy,
authorizing an alternative form of return transportation for such
student or unless intervening circumstances make such transportation
impractical. In cases where intervening circumstances make
transportation of a student back to the point of departure or to the
appropriate school in the district impractical, a representative of the
school district shall remain with the student until such student's
parent or legal guardian has been (a) contacted and informed of the
intervening circumstances which make such transportation impractical and
(b) such student had been delivered to his or her parent or legal
guardian.
 11. Approve zoning lines, as submitted by the superintendent,
consistent with the regulations of the chancellor, applicable to schools
under the jurisdiction of the community district.
 12. Hold meetings at least every month with the superintendent to
discuss the current state of the schools in the district and progress
made toward the implementation of the district's comprehensive education
plan required by the chancellor.
 13. Review of the district's educational programs and assess their
effect on student achievement.
 14. Hold public meetings at least every month with the superintendent
during which the public may speak so that parents and the community have
a voice and a public forum to air their concerns.
 15. Submit an annual evaluation of the superintendent to the
chancellor.
 16. Submit an annual evaluation consistent with procedures which shall
be developed by the chancellor of all other instructional supervisory
personnel who have responsibility for more than one school within the
district.
 17. Hold a public hearing on the district's annual capacity plans,
recommended by the superintendent and based on data from the chancellor
on enrollment/utilization for each school within the district and submit
such plan, upon approval by the community council, to the chancellor for
his or her approval and implementation.
 18. Provide input, as it deems necessary, to the chancellor and the
city board on matters of concern to the district.
 19. Liaison with school leadership teams as may be necessary, provide
assistance to the school leadership teams where possible, and serve on
the district leadership team by designating a representative.
 20. Consult on the selection of a community superintendent pursuant to
subdivision thirty of section twenty-five hundred ninety-h of this
article. Such consultation shall include an opportunity for the
community council to interview a minimum of three final candidates the
chancellor is considering appointing and to provide feedback to the
chancellor, which may include a ranked list of such candidates, prior to
the appointment being made.
 21. Hold a joint public hearing with the chancellor or deputy
chancellor, or in the case of a proposed significant change in school
utilization the chancellor or his or her designee, and the impacted
school based management team regarding any proposed school closing or
significant change in school utilization, including the phase-out, grade
reconfiguration, re-siting, or co-location of schools, of any public
school located within the community district pursuant to subdivision
two-a of section twenty-five hundred ninety-h of this article. Following
such hearing, the community council may pass a resolution on whether to
recommend or not recommend to the city board the proposed school closing
or significant change in school utilization, and shall transmit it to
the city board for its consideration at least seven days in advance of
any city board vote on such item pursuant to section twenty-five hundred
ninety-g of this article, provided that the receipt of such resolution
from the community council shall not be a precondition for the city
board to act on the matter.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2026
 * § 2590-e. Powers and duties of community boards. Each community
board shall have the following powers and duties to establish
educational policies and objectives, not inconsistent with the
provisions of this article and the policies established by the city
board, with respect to all pre-kindergarten, nursery, kindergarten,
elementary, intermediate and junior high schools and programs in
connection therewith in the community district. The community boards
shall have no executive or administrative powers or functions, but shall
have the following powers and duties:
 1. employ a community superintendent, selected by the chancellor, by
contract for a term not to exceed by more than one year the term of
office of the community school board authorizing such contract, subject
to removal for cause, at a salary to be fixed within the budgetary
allocation therefor, subject to the provisions of subdivision two of
section twenty-five hundred ninety-j of this article. Consistent with
procedures of the chancellor establishing a publicly inclusive process
for the recruitment, screening and selection of superintendent
candidates, and regulations establishing educational, managerial, and
administrative qualifications and performance record criteria for such
position, the community board shall select no more than four final
candidates for superintendent from candidates for appointment, who shall
have been interviewed and screened by and with the assistance of
parents, teachers, representatives of school support personnel, and
administrators, and forward such names, to the chancellor for selection
together with the reasons for the recommendation of such candidates. If
the chancellor should reject all the candidates for written reasons
within thirty days after the receipt of the proposed names, the
community board shall make another selection of no more than four new
names consistent with such procedures and regulations, until the
chancellor selects a candidate. The contract of employment shall be
consistent with a model contract promulgated by the chancellor which
shall include provisions for reappointment.
 3. promote achievement of educational standards and objectives
relating to the instruction of students.
 4. cooperate as required by the chancellor in the removal from office
pursuant to section twenty-five hundred ninety-l of this article of any
community board member for willful, intentional or knowing involvement
in the hiring, appointment or assignment of employees other than as
specifically authorized in this article.
 5. a. require community board members, the community superintendent,
and any other officer or employee in schools and programs under the
jurisdiction of the community boards, to make annual written disclosure,
in accordance with regulations and bylaws of the city board developed in
consultation with the community boards, to the community board and the
city board, of the following information:
 (1) the employment by the city school board or any community board of
any person related within the third degree of consanguinity or affinity
to the person making disclosure, including the employment of any such
person for which a two-thirds vote was required under paragraph e of
subdivision four of section twenty-five hundred ninety-j of this chapter
with a notation of the date such vote was taken.
 (2) the source of any income, reimbursement, gift or other form of
compensation for services rendered together with a description of such
services.
 (3) the source of any financial contribution made within the year
preceding the election or the term of office of a community board member
to assist in the election or reelection of such member of the community
board, and the amount of such contribution, consistent with any
applicable regulations of the city board and the board of elections.
 b. willful or repeated failure to make full and timely disclosure
shall constitute cause for removal from office of any member of a
community board or for any other officer or employee disciplinary action
and such other penalty as provided by law.
 c. all written disclosures required hereunder shall be filed with the
community board and the city board and shall be available for public
inspection during regular business hours on regular business days.
 6. require community board members, candidates for community boards,
the community superintendent and, for good cause shown, any other
officer or employee in schools and programs under the jurisdiction of
the community boards to submit to the city board and the community
boards, in accordance with regulations and bylaws of the city board
developed in consultation with the community boards, financial reports
for themselves and their spouses, provided that in the case of community
board members and candidates for community boards the statement of
financial disclosure and the frequency with which it must be filed must
satisfy at least the requirements and standards for disclosure of
section seventy-three-a of the public officers law.
 a. the frequency and period of coverage, the designation of persons to
submit such reports by name, title or income level or by a combination
thereof, and the content of such reports, including minimum dollar
amounts, shall be determined by the city board.
 b. willful or repeated failure to file required financial reports or
make other required disclosures shall constitute cause for removal from
office of any member of a community board or for any other officer or
employee disciplinary action and such other penalty as provided by law.
No person may assume office as a community board member without
previously complying with this subdivision, subdivision five of this
section, and with all applicable financial disclosure requirements
promulgated by the board of elections.
 7. participate in training and continuing education programs pursuant
to the provisions of this subdivision.
 (1) Community board members shall participate in training to acquaint
them with the powers, functions and duties of community board members,
as well as the powers of other governing and administering authorities
that affect education including the powers of the commissioner, city
board, chancellor and community superintendents. Such participation
shall be completed no later than six months from the date in which a
community board member takes office for the first time.
 (2) Each community board member shall be required to participate in
continuing education programs on an annual basis as defined by the
chancellor. Participation in training pursuant to paragraph one of this
subdivision by a community board member who takes office for the first
time shall be deemed to satisfy the requirements of this subdivision for
the first year of such member's term.
 (3) such training and continuing education programs shall be approved
by the chancellor, following consultation with the commissioner, and may
be provided by the state education department, the city board, the
chancellor or a nonprofit provider authorized by the chancellor to
provide such training and continuing education programs.
 (4) the chancellor is authorized to promulgate regulations regarding
providers and their certification, the content and implementation of the
training and continuing education programs. Any such regulations shall
be developed after consultation with the commissioner.
 (5) such training and continuing education programs shall be offered
on an annual basis or more frequently, as needed, to enable community
board members to comply with this subdivision.
 (6) failure of community board members to comply with the training and
continuing education requirements mandated by this subdivision shall
constitute cause for removal from office pursuant to section twenty-five
hundred ninety-1 of this article.
 8. Each year prepare a school district report card pursuant to
regulations of the commissioner, and shall make it publicly available by
transmitting it to local newspapers of general circulation, appending it
to copies of the proposed budget made publicly available as required by
law, making it available for distribution at the annual meeting, and
otherwise disseminating it as required by the commissioner. Such report
card shall include measures of the academic performance of the school
district, on a school by school basis, and measures of the fiscal
performance of the district, as prescribed by the commissioner. Pursuant
to regulations of the commissioner, the report card shall also compare
these measures to statewide averages for all public schools, and
statewide averages for public schools of comparable wealth and need,
developed by the commissioner. Such report card shall include, at a
minimum, any information on the school district regarding pupil
performance and expenditure per pupil required to be included in the
annual report by the requests to the governor and the legislature
pursuant to section two hundred fifteen-a of this chapter; and any other
information required by the commissioner. School districts (i)
identified as having fifteen percent or more of their students in
special education, or (ii) which have fifty percent or more of their
students with disabilities in special education programs or services
sixty percent or more of the school day in a general education building,
or (iii) which have eight percent or more of their students with
disabilities in special education programs in public or private separate
educational settings shall indicate on their school district report card
their respective percentages as defined in this paragraph and paragraphs
(i) and (ii) of this subdivision as compared to the statewide average.
 9. Subject to paragraph (o) of subdivision one of section twenty-five
hundred ninety-f of this article, to employ or retain counsel subject to
the powers and duties of the corporation counsel of the city of New York
to be the district's attorney and counsel pursuant to subdivision a of
section three hundred ninety-four of the New York city charter in
actions or proceedings in which the board or any member thereof is a
defendant or a respondent.
 10. Where the district has provided transportation to students
enrolled in such district to a school sponsored field trip,
extracurricular activity or any other similar event, it shall provide
transportation back to either the point of departure or to the
appropriate school in the district, unless the parent or legal guardian
of a student participating in such event has provided the school
district with written notice, consistent with district policy,
authorizing an alternative form of return transportation for such
student or unless intervening circumstances make such transportation
impractical. In cases where intervening circumstances make
transportation of a student back to the point of departure or to the
appropriate school in the district impractical, a representative of the
school district shall remain with the student until such student's
parent or legal guardian has been (a) contacted and informed of the
intervening circumstances which make such transportation impractical and
(b) such student had been delivered to his or her parent or legal
guardian.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2026
 * § 2590-f. Community superintendents. 1. Subject in every case to
powers devolved to principals and schools consistent with this article,
the community superintendent shall have the following powers and duties
as superintendent of schools for the community district, which shall be
exercised in a manner to ensure the implementation of all provisions of
law, rules and regulations relating to the management of the schools and
the delivery of instructional services:
 (a) to assist district schools in obtaining waivers from state,
federal and city board regulations where appropriate to promote student
achievement and school performance.
 (b) to delegate any of her or his powers and duties to such
subordinate officers or employees of her or his community district as
she or he deems appropriate, at his or her sole discretion, and to
modify or rescind any power and duty so delegated.
 (c) except for the appointment of supervisors pursuant to paragraph
(d) of this subdivision, to appoint, define the duties of, assign,
promote and discharge all employees, including teacher-aides, of the
community district, and fix their compensation and terms of employment
within amounts appropriated therefor and not inconsistent with the
provisions of this article and any collective bargaining agreement.
 (d) to appoint supervisory personnel from candidates screened by a
screening committee consistent with regulations of the chancellor
establishing a process that promotes parental and staff involvement in
the recruitment, screening, interviewing and recommendation of
candidates and consistent with qualifications established through
chancellor's regulations.
 (e) to appoint or reject the principal and assistant principal
candidates screened by screening committees, consistent with regulations
of the chancellor establishing a process that promotes parental and
staff involvement in the recruitment, screening, interviewing and
recommendation of candidates, and after consulting with members of the
school based management team. Candidates must meet the requirements of
regulations of the chancellor establishing educational, managerial, and
administrative qualifications, including evaluation of each candidate's
record of performance in comparable positions and shall be subject to
the chancellor's power to reject such appointments pursuant to section
twenty-five hundred ninety-h of this article.
 (f) to supervise and evaluate, at least annually, the performance of
principals for every school in the district with respect to educational
effectiveness and school performance, including effectiveness of
promoting student achievement and parental involvement, developing an
effective shared decision-making relationship with the school based
management team, and maintaining school discipline; the community
superintendent shall have access to all school records that he or she
deems necessary and shall consider comments contained within an
assessment made by the school based management team, pursuant to
subparagraph (vii) of paragraph (b-1) of subdivision fifteen of section
twenty-five hundred ninety-h of this article, when carrying out such
evaluations.
 (g) the authority to transfer or remove principals for persistent
educational failure, conflicts of interest, and ethics violations, and
to require principals to participate in training and other remedial
programs to address identified factors affecting student achievement and
school performance, consistent with sections twenty-five hundred
ninety-h, twenty-five hundred ninety-i and twenty-five hundred ninety-l
of this article.
 (h) to review, modify and approve school-based budgets proposed by the
school, pursuant to section twenty-five hundred ninety-r of this
article, provided however, that the community superintendent shall only
approve a school-based budget proposal after certifying that it is
sufficiently aligned with its corresponding school's comprehensive
educational plan. The community superintendent shall prescribe the form
and manner in which principals must submit written justification to
demonstrate that the proposed school-based budget is aligned with the
school's comprehensive educational plan, and shall also include a
provision allowing for the school based management team to respond to
such justification. The community superintendent shall consider the
principal's written justification, along with any response provided by
the school based management team, prior to making such certification.
 (h-1) to establish a process that allows for school based management
team members, other than the principal, to dispute any decision made by
the principal where such team members reach a consensus that the
decision is inconsistent with the goals and policies set forth in their
school's existing comprehensive educational plan. The community
superintendent shall provide a written response to the school based
management team and the principal that includes the information reviewed
and the basis for the community superintendent's decision regarding such
dispute.
 (i) to retain one or more district fiscal officers to monitor and
report on schools' expenditures pursuant to the school-based budgets.
 (j) within the amounts appropriated therefor to administer district
minor repair and purchasing funds, and make them available to schools
consistent with sections twenty-five hundred ninety-i, twenty-five
hundred ninety-r, and subdivisions thirty-six and thirty-seven of
section twenty-five hundred ninety-h of this article, for services and
supplies provided by the chancellor, the community superintendent, or
purchased by the schools, and to provide for minor repairs to all school
buildings and other buildings and sites under the district's
jurisdiction.
 (k) subject to subdivision three of section twenty-five hundred
ninety-e of this article and this section, to approve or disapprove
matters relating to the instruction of students, including the power to
disapprove school choices with respect to selection of textbooks and
other instructional materials.
 (l) (1) to provide assistance and direct support to parents in
accessing information, addressing concerns and responding to complaints
relating to their child's education that cannot be resolved at the
school level.
 (2) to operate administrative offices and similar facilities,
including social centers, and recreational and extracurricular programs,
under the district's jurisdiction, and the duty to support the operation
of school facilities. The community superintendent shall establish a
central office within the district and hire and supervise sufficient
staff to directly interact with parents, respond to information
requests, receive input and comments, assist the community
superintendent in resolving complaints in a timely manner, and work to
develop a cooperative relationship with parents and the school
community.
 (m) subject to regulations or resolutions of the city board, to
operate cafeteria or restaurant services for pupils and teachers and for
the use by the community for school related functions and activities and
to furnish meals to the elderly, sixty years of age or older, of the
district. Charges shall be sufficient to meet the direct cost of
preparing and serving such meals, reducible by available reimbursements.
 (n) to maintain discipline in the educational and other facilities
under the jurisdiction of the district, including the duty to assist the
schools in maintaining discipline.
 (o) to employ or retain counsel subject to the powers and duties of
the corporation counsel of the city of New York to be the district's
attorney and counsel pursuant to subdivision a of section three hundred
ninety-four of the New York city charter; provided, however, that in
actions or proceedings between community districts or between a
community district and the city board, each community district may be
represented by its own counsel.
 (p) in compliance with rules and regulations of the commissioner,
promulgated pursuant to section one hundred one-a of this chapter, to
give written notice to the family court pursuant to subdivision three of
section seven hundred fifty-eight-a and subdivision three of section
353.6 of the family court act of the desire of any school under the
jurisdiction of the community district to act in the supervision of
certain juveniles while performing services for the public good.
 (q) to take all necessary steps to ensure the integrity of community
district operations, consistent with standards, policies, objectives,
and regulations of the city district.
 (r) where so authorized by the chancellor, to exercise the
chancellor's powers under subdivision thirty-one of section twenty-five
hundred ninety-h of this article.
 (s) to provide written notice and other related information described
in subdivision forty-eight of section twenty-five hundred ninety-h of
this article to every parent of a child, including a child with a
disability, attending a school under the jurisdiction of his or her
community district education council as directed by the chancellor.
 (t) notwithstanding any provisions of law to the contrary, to exercise
all of the duties and responsibilities of the employing board as set
forth in section three thousand twenty-a of this chapter pursuant to a
delegation of the chancellor under section twenty-five hundred ninety-h
of this article.
 (u) to provide relevant data to the community district education
council to encourage informed and adequate public discussion on student
achievement and the state of each school within the district.
 (v) to hold at least two public forums within the district, during
each school year, for the purpose of reporting on the district's
performance, including progress made toward achieving the district
comprehensive educational plan goals, discussing plans for improvement,
and receiving parental and community comments and concerns; the
community superintendent shall ensure that notice for the public forums
is posted in a manner to maximize the participation of parents, students
and school personnel and is specifically circulated to members of the
school based management teams, community district education council and
the relevant community boards.
 (w) to provide notice of any proposed school closing or significant
change in school utilization, including the phase-out, grade
reconfiguration, re-siting, or co-location of schools, for any public
school within the community district to all impacted parents, including
information as to where a copy of the educational impact statement, or
revised educational impact statement if applicable, may be obtained and
the date of any hearing on such school closure or significant change in
school utilization pursuant to subdivision two-a of section twenty-five
hundred ninety-h of this article.
 2. In exercising such powers and duties each community superintendent
shall comply with all applicable provisions of law, by-laws, rules or
regulations, directives or agreements of the chancellor and his or her
community district education council and with the city-wide educational
policies established by the city board and his or her community district
education council, including performance standards addressed to
administration and educational effectiveness, and any requirements for
continuing training and education, embodied in standards, circulars or
regulations promulgated by the chancellor provided however, that the
chancellor shall ensure that community superintendents are assigned to
tasks predominantly within their own community districts and that in no
event shall community superintendents be assigned any task which would
impair their ability to exercise the powers and duties enumerated within
this section, such as responding to parental comments and concerns,
appointing and evaluating principals, approving school-based budgets,
overseeing educational instruction, providing access to information and
assisting with resolving complaints.
 3. No person who has served as a member of a community district
education council may be employed by that board or the community
superintendent of that district within a period of three years after the
termination of such service unless such person qualifies for the
position pursuant to a competitive examination and applicable provisions
of the civil service law.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2026
 * § 2590-f. Community superintendents. 1. Subject in every case to
powers devolved to principals and schools consistent with this article,
the superintendent shall have the following powers and duties:
 (a) to assist district schools in obtaining waivers from state,
federal and city board regulations where appropriate to promote student
achievement and school performance.
 (b) to delegate any of her or his powers and duties to such
subordinate officers or employees of her or his community district as
she or he deems appropriate and to modify or rescind any power and duty
so delegated.
 (c) except for the appointment of supervisors pursuant to paragraph
(d) of this subdivision, to appoint, define the duties of, assign,
promote and discharge all employees, including teacher-aides, of the
community district, and fix their compensation and terms of employment
within amounts appropriated therefor and not inconsistent with the
provisions of this article and any collective bargaining agreement.
 (d) to appoint supervisory personnel from candidates screened by a
committee including parents, teachers, and school support personnel, who
shall be selected and shall operate in a manner prescribed by
chancellor's regulations.
 (e) to appoint or reject the principal candidates screened by
screening committees, in accordance with procedures and criteria
prescribed by chancellor's regulations, and subject to the chancellor's
power to reject such appointments pursuant to section twenty-five
hundred ninety-h of this article.
 (f) to evaluate, at least annually, the performance of principals for
every school in the district with respect to educational effectiveness
and school performance, including effectiveness of promoting student
achievement and parental involvement, and maintaining school discipline.
 (g) the authority to transfer or remove principals for persistent
educational failure, conflicts of interest, and ethics violations, and
to require principals to participate in training and other remedial
programs to address identified factors affecting student achievement and
school performance, consistent with sections twenty-five hundred
ninety-h, twenty-five hundred ninety-i and twenty-five hundred ninety-l
of this article.
 (h) to review, modify and approve school-based budgets proposed by the
school, pursuant to section twenty-five hundred ninety-r of this
article.
 (i) to retain one or more district fiscal officers to monitor and
report on schools' expenditures pursuant to the school-based budgets.
 (j) within the amounts appropriated therefor to administer district
minor repair and purchasing funds, and make them available to schools
consistent with sections twenty-five hundred ninety-i, twenty-five
hundred ninety-r, and subdivisions thirty-six and thirty-seven of
section twenty-five hundred ninety-h of this article, for services and
supplies provided by the chancellor, the superintendent, or purchased by
the schools, and to provide for minor repairs to all school buildings
and other buildings and sites under the district's jurisdiction.
 (k) subject to subdivision three of section twenty-five hundred
ninety-e of this article and this section, to approve or disapprove
matters relating to the instruction of students, including the power to
disapprove school choices with respect to selection of textbooks and
other instructional materials.
 (l) to operate administrative offices and similar facilities,
including social centers, and recreational and extracurricular programs,
under the district's jurisdiction, and the duty to support the operation
of school facilities.
 (m) subject to regulations or resolutions of the city board, to
operate cafeteria or restaurant services for pupils and teachers and for
the use by the community for school related functions and activities and
to furnish meals to the elderly, sixty years of age or older, of the
district. Charges shall be sufficient to meet the direct cost of
preparing and serving such meals, reducible by available reimbursements.
 (n) to maintain discipline in the educational and other facilities
under the jurisdiction of the district, including the duty to assist the
schools in maintaining discipline.
 (o) to employ or retain counsel subject to the powers and duties of
the corporation counsel of the city of New York to be the district's
attorney and counsel pursuant to subdivision a of section three hundred
ninety-four of the New York city charter; provided, however, that in
actions or proceedings between community districts or between a
community district and the city board, each community district may be
represented by its own counsel.
 (p) in compliance with rules and regulations of the commissioner,
promulgated pursuant to section one hundred one-a of this chapter, to
give written notice to the family court pursuant to subdivision three of
section seven hundred fifty-eight-a and subdivision three of section
353.6 of the family court act of the desire of any school under the
jurisdiction of the community district to act in the supervision of
certain juveniles while performing services for the public good.
 (q) to take all necessary steps to ensure the integrity of community
district operations, consistent with regulations promulgated by the
chancellor and the city board.
 (r) where so authorized by the chancellor, to exercise the
chancellor's powers under subdivision thirty-one of section twenty-five
hundred ninety-h of this article.
 ** (s) to provide written notice and other related information
described in paragraph (b) of subdivision three of section twenty-five
hundred ninety-c of this article to every parent of a child, including a
child with a disability, attending a school under the jurisdiction of
his or her community board as directed by the chancellor.
 ** NB There are 2 par (s)'s
 ** (s) notwithstanding any provisions of law to the contrary, to
exercise all of the duties and responsibilities of the employing board
as set forth in section three thousand twenty-a of this chapter pursuant
to a delegation of the chancellor under section twenty-five hundred
ninety-h of this article.
 ** NB There are 2 par (s)'s
 2. In exercising such powers and duties each community superintendent
shall comply with all applicable provisions of law, by-laws, rules or
regulations, directives or agreements of the city board, the chancellor
and his or her community board and with the educational policies
established by the city board and his or her community board, including
performance standards addressed to administration and educational
effectiveness, and any requirements for continuing training and
education, embodied in standards, circulars or regulations promulgated
by the chancellor.
 3. No person who has served as a member of a community board may be
employed by that board or the superintendent of that district within a
period of three years after the termination of such service unless such
person qualifies for the position pursuant to a competitive examination
and applicable provisions of the civil service law.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2026
 * § 2590-g. Powers and duties of the city board. The city board shall
advise the chancellor on matters of policy affecting the welfare of the
city school district and its pupils. The board shall exercise no
executive power and perform no executive or administrative functions.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to require or authorize the
day-to-day supervision or the administration of the operations of any
school within the city school district of the city of New York. The
board shall have the power and duty to:
 1. (a) approve standards, policies, and objectives proposed by the
chancellor directly related to educational achievement and student
performance;
 (b) consider and approve any other standards, policies, and objectives
as specifically authorized or required by state or federal law or
regulation;
 (c) approve all regulations proposed by the chancellor or the city
board and any amendments made thereto;
 (d) approve the educational facilities capital plan, and any
amendments requiring city board approval pursuant to section twenty-five
hundred ninety-p of this article, following any applicable hearings
conducted by the community district education councils;
 (e) approve annual estimates of the total sum of money which it deems
necessary for the operation of the city district and the capital budget
pursuant to section twenty-five hundred ninety-q of this article;
 (f) approve the allocation of projected revenues among community
districts and their schools pursuant to subdivision a of section
twenty-five hundred ninety-r of this article and to approve the
aggregation of the community district budgets, with a proposed budget
for administrative and operational expenditures of the city board and
the chancellor, following a public hearing pursuant to subdivision f of
section twenty-five hundred ninety-r of this article;
 (g) approve a procurement policy for the city district, and any
amendments made thereto, developed pursuant to subdivision thirty-six of
section twenty-five hundred ninety-h of this article; and
 (h) approve proposals for all school closures or significant changes
in school utilization including the phase-out, grade reconfiguration,
re-siting, or co-location of schools, following any hearing pursuant to
subdivision two-a of section twenty-five hundred ninety-h of this
article. If the city board approves such a proposal that the relevant
community council affirmatively voted against pursuant to subdivision
twenty-one of section twenty-five hundred ninety-e of this article, the
board shall provide such council an explanation for its determination
within thirty days of such determination.
 2. for all purposes, be the government or public employer of all
persons appointed or assigned by the city board or the community
districts; provided, however, that the chancellor shall have the
authority to appoint staff pursuant to subdivision forty-one of section
twenty-five hundred ninety-h of this article;
 2-a. adopt a policy proposed by the chancellor that promotes the
recruitment and retention of a workforce at the city district, community
district and school level that considers the diversity of the students
attending the public schools within the city district. The city board
shall review at a regular public meeting an annual report issued by the
chancellor outlining the initiatives taken to enhance diversity and
equity in recruitment and retention and the impacts of such initiatives
to the workforce at the city district, community district and school
level;
 3. serve as the appeal board as provided in section twenty-five
hundred ninety-l of this article, and subject to such powers, duties,
and restrictions as were in effect before the effective date of this
section;
 4. subject to the provisions of section twenty-five hundred ninety-i
of this article, maintain such jurisdiction over city-wide educational
policies governing the special, academic, vocational, and other high
schools authorized by this article before the effective date of this
section as the respective community district education councils maintain
over the schools within their jurisdiction, which shall not be construed
to require or authorize the day-to-day supervision or the administration
of the operations of such schools.
 5. (a) Approve any contract awarded by the city district or the
community districts where:
 (i) such contract was let by a procurement method other than
competitive sealed bidding pursuant to subdivision thirty-six of section
twenty-five hundred ninety-h of this article, including but not limited
to competitive sealed proposals, or sole source contracts;
 (ii) such contract provides for technical, consultant or personal
services;
 (iii) the value of such contract exceeds, or projects an annual
expenditure exceeding one million dollars; or
 (iv) the value of any contracts awarded to a single entity exceeds one
million dollars annually;
 (b) Approve all franchises, revocable consents, and concessions
awarded by the city district or the community districts.
 (c) Notwithstanding paragraphs (a) and (b) of this subdivision, city
board approval shall not be required for any contract with the United
States General Services Administration or any other federal agency, if
the price is lower than the prevailing market price, or the New York
state office of general services or any other state agency, if the price
is lower than the prevailing market price, or for any contract made
directly by an individual school.
 6. Approve litigation settlements only when such settlement would
significantly impact the provision of educational services or
programming within the district.
 6-a. Approve by-laws for the city board pursuant to section
twenty-five hundred ninety-d of this article.
 7. All items requiring city board approval shall be by a public vote
at a regular public meeting, consistent with the requirements contained
within subdivision one of section twenty-five hundred ninety-b of this
article, and such items shall not become effective until after such vote
occurs except as expressly authorized in subdivision nine of this
section.
 8. (a) Prior to the approval of any proposed item listed in
subdivision one of this section, undertake a public review process to
afford the public an opportunity to submit comments on the proposed
item. Such public review process shall include notice of the item under
city board consideration which shall be made available to the public,
including via the city board's official internet website, and
specifically circulated to all community superintendents, community
district education councils, community boards, and school based
management teams, at least forty-five days in advance of any city board
vote on such item. Notice of the proposed item under city board
consideration shall include:
 (i) a description of the subject, purpose and substance of the
proposed item under consideration;
 (ii) information regarding where the full text of the proposed item
may be obtained;
 (iii) the name, office, address, email and telephone number of a city
district representative, knowledgeable on the item under consideration,
from whom any information may be obtained concerning such item;
 (iv) date, time and place of any hearing regarding the proposed item,
if applicable;
 (v) date, time and place of the city board meeting at which the city
board will vote on the proposed item; and
 (vi) information on how to submit written or oral comments regarding
the item under consideration.
 (b) In the event that a proposed item listed in subdivision one of
this section is substantially revised at any time following the public
notice provided pursuant to paragraph (a) of this subdivision, the city
board shall issue a revised public notice. Such revised notice shall be
available at least fifteen days in advance of any city board vote on the
proposed item, but in no event shall the city board vote on any such
item within forty-five days from the initial public notice provided
pursuant to paragraph (a) of this subdivision. Revised public notice of
the item under city board consideration shall include:
 (i) a description of the subject, purpose and substance of the revised
item under consideration;
 (ii) identification of all substantial revisions to the item;
 (iii) a summary of all public comments received on such item following
the initial public notice pursuant to paragraph (a) of this subdivision;
 (iv) information regarding where the full text of the revised item may
be obtained;
 (v) the name, office, address, email and telephone number of a city
district representative, knowledgeable on the item under consideration,
from whom any information may be obtained concerning such item;
 (vi) date, time and place of any hearing regarding the item, if
applicable;
 (vii) date, time and place of the city board meeting at which the city
board will vote on the item; and
 (viii) information on how to submit written or oral comments regarding
the item under consideration.
 (c) Following the public review process pursuant to paragraph (a) or
(b) of this subdivision but prior to voting on any proposed item listed
in subdivision one of this section, the city board shall make available
to the public, including via the city board's official internet web
site, an assessment of all public comments concerning the item under
consideration received prior to twenty-four hours before the city board
meeting at which such item is subject to a vote. Such assessment shall
include:
 (i) a summary and an analysis of the issues raised and significant
alternatives suggested;
 (ii) a statement of the reasons why any significant alternatives were
not incorporated into the proposed item;
 (iii) a description of any changes made to the proposed item as a
result of public comments received; and
 (iv) information as to where the full text of any approved item may be
obtained.
 9. In the event the city board or the chancellor determines that
immediate adoption of any item requiring city board approval is
necessary for the preservation of student health, safety or general
welfare and that compliance with the requirements of subdivision seven
or eight of this section would be contrary to the public interest, then
such proposed item may be adopted on an emergency basis. The city board
or chancellor shall provide written justification for such determination
and make such justification publicly available including via the city
board's official internet web site. Except as expressly authorized for
school closures or significant changes in school utilizations pursuant
to paragraph (f) of subdivision two-a of section twenty-five hundred
ninety-h of this article, all emergency adoptions shall only remain in
effect for sixty days, during such time the city board shall comply with
the requirements of this subdivision in order for the adoption of the
item to become permanent.
 10. Respond, at a regular public meeting, to the recommendations
raised in the annual reports issued by the city-wide council on special
education, the city-wide council on English language learners, the
city-wide council on high schools and the city-wide council on district
seventy-five.
 11. Conduct an annual survey to allow parents, teachers and school
personnel to evaluate the performance of the city board and the
chancellor with regards to city district resources, oversight and
curriculum. The results of such survey shall be made publicly available
including via the city board's official internet website.
 12. Provide information, data, estimates and statistics regarding all
matters relating to the city district as requested by the director of
the independent budget office of the city of New York or the comptroller
of the city of New York, in a timely fashion.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2026
 * § 2590-g. Powers and duties of the city board. The city board shall
advise the chancellor on matters of policy affecting the welfare of the
city school district and its pupils. Except as otherwise provided by
law, the board shall exercise no executive power and perform no
executive or administrative functions. The board shall have the power
and duty to:
 1. (a) approve standards, policies, objectives and regulations
proposed by the chancellor directly related to educational achievement
and student performance; (b) approve standards, policies, objectives and
regulations directly related to maintaining the internal fiscal
integrity of administrative operations by the chancellor, the community
districts and the schools; and (c) consider and approve any other
standards, policies, objectives and regulations at the request of the
chancellor, or otherwise only as specifically authorized or required by
state or federal law or regulation;
 2. for all purposes, be the government or public employer of all
persons appointed or assigned by the city board or the community
districts;
 3. serve as the appeal board as provided in section twenty-five
hundred ninety-l of this article, and subject to such powers, duties and
restrictions as were in effect before the effective date of this
section;
 4. subject to the provisions of section twenty-five hundred ninety-i
of this article, maintain such jurisdiction over policies governing the
special, academic, vocational and other high schools authorized by this
article before the effective date of this section as the respective
community boards maintain over the schools within their jurisdiction,
which shall not be construed to require or authorize the day-to-day
supervision or the administration of the operations of such schools.
 5. (a) Prescribe regulations and bylaws requiring members of the city
board, the chancellor, and any other officer or employee in schools and
programs under the jurisdiction of the city board and the chancellor, to
make annual written disclosure to the city board, of the following
information:
 (i) the employment by the city school board or any community board of
any person related within the third degree of consanguinity or affinity
to the person making disclosure, including the employment of any such
person for which a two-thirds vote was required under paragraph e of
subdivision four of section twenty-five hundred ninety-j of this article
with a notation of the date such vote was taken.
 (ii) the source of any income, reimbursement, gift or other form of
compensation for services rendered together with a description of such
services.
 (b) Regulations and bylaws authorized herein shall apply with equal
force and effect to community board members, community superintendents
and all other officers and employees in schools and programs under the
jurisdiction of the community boards.
 (c) The city board shall review, at least once annually, compliance
with the requirements of subdivisions five and six of section
twenty-five hundred ninety-e of this article and regulations or bylaws
prescribed hereunder. Any community board member, community
superintendent or other officer or employee required to make disclosure
who fails to make such disclosure shall be notified in writing of their
failure to do so and given thirty days within which to comply.
 (d) Willful failure to make full and timely disclosure shall
constitute cause for removal from office of any member of the city board
or for any other officer or employee disciplinary action and such other
penalty as provided by law.
 (e) Disclosures made pursuant to the requirements herein and any
notification of failure to make disclosures shall be made available for
public inspection during regular business hours on regular business
days; and
 6. (a) Prescribe regulations and bylaws requiring members of the city
board, the chancellor and, for good cause shown, any other officer or
employee in schools and programs under the jurisdiction of the city
board and the chancellor, to submit to the city board, in the discretion
of the city board, financial reports for themselves and their spouses.
 (b) The frequency and period of coverage, the designation of persons
to submit such reports by name, title or income level or by a
combination thereof, and the content of such reports, including minimum
dollar amounts, shall be determined by the city board and such reports
may include but not necessarily be limited to the following:
 (i) amount and source of income for services rendered, together with a
description of such services;
 (ii) amount and source of gifts, capital gains, reimbursements for
expenditures, and honoraria;
 (iii) investments in securities and real property;
 (iv) amount of debts and names of creditors;
 (v) outstanding loans and other forms of indebtedness due to person
reporting or spouse, by name and amounts;
 (vi) trusts and other fiduciary relationships and their assets in
which a beneficial interest is held.
 (c) Regulations and bylaws authorized herein shall apply with equal
force and effect to community board members, community superintendents
and all other officers and employees in schools and programs under the
jurisdiction of the community boards.
 (d) Willful failure to file required financial reports shall
constitute cause for removal from office of any member of the city board
or for any other officer or employee disciplinary action and such other
penalty as provided by law.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2026
 * § 2590-h. Powers and duties of chancellor. The office of chancellor
of the city district is hereby continued. Such chancellor shall serve at
the pleasure of and be employed by the mayor of the city of New York by
contract. The chancellor shall meet the requirements of subdivision one
of section three thousand three of this chapter, provided that a person
who has been issued a certificate as superintendent of schools pursuant
to subdivision three of such section may serve as chancellor on the
basis of such certificate for no longer than six months. The length of
such contract shall not exceed by more than two years the term of office
of the mayor authorizing such contract. The chancellor shall receive a
salary to be fixed by the mayor within the budgetary allocation
therefor. He or she shall exercise all his or her powers and duties in a
manner not inconsistent with the city-wide educational policies of the
city board. The chancellor shall have the following powers and duties as
the superintendent of schools and chief executive officer for the city
district, which the chancellor shall exercise to promote an equal
educational opportunity for all students in the schools of the city
district, promote fiscal and educational equity, increase student
achievement and school performance and encourage local school-based
innovation, including the power and duty to:
 1. Control and operate:
 (a) academic and vocational senior high schools until such time as the
same may be transferred to the jurisdiction of appropriate community
district education councils pursuant to this article;
 (b) all specialized senior high schools. The special high schools
shall include the present schools known as:
 The Bronx High School of Science, Stuyvesant High School, Brooklyn
Technical High School, Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and
the Arts in the borough of Manhattan, and such further schools which the
city board may designate from time to time. The special schools shall be
permitted to maintain a discovery program in accordance with the law in
effect on the date preceding the effective date of this section;
admissions to the special schools shall be conducted in accordance with
the law in effect on the date preceding the effective date of this
section;
 (c) all special education programs and services conducted pursuant to
this chapter;
 (d) subject to the provisions of section twenty-five hundred ninety-i
of this article, devolving powers to the schools, city-wide programs for
city-wide services to a substantial number of persons from more than one
community district, including transportation; food services; payroll and
personnel functions, including pension and retirement services; and
enforcement of laws and regulations promoting equal opportunity in
employment, access to public accommodations and facilities, equal
opportunity in education, and preventing and addressing unlawful
discrimination; provided, however, that a community district may also
operate within its district programs which provide similar services
otherwise authorized by this article.
 2. Establish, control and operate new schools or programs of the types
specified in subdivision one of this section, or to discontinue any such
schools and programs as he or she may determine; provided, however, that
the chancellor shall consult with the affected community district
education council before:
 (a) substantially expanding or reducing such an existing school or
program within a community district;
 (b) initially utilizing a community district school or facility for
such a school or program;
 (c) instituting any new program within a community district.
 2-a. (a) Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, prepare
an educational impact statement regarding any proposed school closing or
significant change in school utilization, including the phase-out, grade
reconfiguration, re-siting, or co-location of schools, for any public
school located within the city district.
 (b) Such educational impact statement shall include the following
information regarding the proposed school closing or significant change
in school utilization:
 (i) the current and projected pupil enrollment of the affected school,
the prospective need for such school building, the ramifications of such
school closing or significant change in school utilization upon the
community, initial costs and savings resulting from such school closing
or significant change in school utilization, the potential disposability
of any closed school;
 (ii) the impacts of the proposed school closing or significant change
in school utilization to any affected students;
 (iii) an outline of any proposed or potential use of the school
building for other educational programs or administrative services;
 (iv) the effect of such school closing or significant change in school
utilization on personnel needs, the costs of instruction,
administration, transportation, and other support services;
 (v) the type, age, and physical condition of such school building,
maintenance, and energy costs, recent or planned improvements to such
school building, and such building's special features;
 (vi) the ability of other schools in the affected community district
to accommodate pupils following the school closure or significant change
in school utilization; and
 (vii) information regarding such school's academic performance
including whether such school has been identified as a school under
registration review or has been identified as a school requiring
academic progress, a school in need of improvement, or a school in
corrective action or restructuring status.
 (c) Such educational impact statement shall be made publicly
available, including via the city board's official internet website, and
a copy shall also be filed with the city board, the impacted community
council, community boards, community superintendent, and school based
management team at least six months in advance of the first day of
school in the succeeding school year.
 (d) No sooner than thirty days, but no later than forty-five days
following the filing of the educational impact statement, the chancellor
or deputy chancellor, or in the case of a proposed significant change in
school utilization the chancellor or his or her designee, shall hold a
joint public hearing with the impacted community council and school
based management team, at the school that is subject to the proposed
school closing or significant change in school utilization, and shall
allow all interested parties an opportunity to present comments or
concerns regarding the proposed school closing or significant change in
school utilization. The chancellor shall ensure that notice of such
hearing is widely and conspicuously posted in such a manner to maximize
the number of affected individuals that receive notice, including
providing notice to affected parents and students, and shall also notify
members of the community boards and the elected state and local
officials who represent the affected community district.
 (d-1) So long as the revised proposal does not impact any school other
than a school that was identified in the initial educational impact
statement, the chancellor, after receiving public input, may
substantially revise the proposed school closing or significant change
in school utilization provided that the chancellor shall prepare a
revised educational impact statement, in the form prescribed in
paragraph (b) of this subdivision, and publish and file such educational
impact statement in the same manner as prescribed in paragraph (c) of
this subdivision. No sooner than fifteen days following the filing of
such revised educational impact statement, the chancellor or deputy
chancellor, or in the case of a significant change in school utilization
the chancellor or his or her designee, shall hold a joint public hearing
with the impacted community council and school based management team, at
the school that is subject to the proposed school closing or significant
change in school utilization and shall allow all interested parties an
opportunity to present comments and concerns regarding such proposal.
The chancellor shall ensure that notice of such hearing is widely and
conspicuously posted in such a manner to maximize the number of affected
individuals that receive notice, including providing notice to affected
parents and students, and shall also notify members of the community
boards and the elected state and local officials who represent the
affected community district.
 (e) Except as otherwise provided in paragraph (f) of this subdivision,
all proposed school closings or significant changes in school
utilization shall be approved by the city board pursuant to section
twenty-five hundred ninety-g of this article and shall not take effect
until all the provisions of this subdivision have been satisfied and the
school year in which such city board approval was granted, has ended.
 (f) In the event that the chancellor determines that a school closing
or significant change in school utilization is immediately necessary for
the preservation of student health, safety or general welfare, the
chancellor may temporarily close a public school or adopt a significant
change in the school's utilization on an emergency basis. Such emergency
school closing or significant change in school utilization shall only
remain in effect for six months, during such time the chancellor shall
comply with the requirements of this subdivision in order for such
school closure or significant change in school utilization to extend
beyond the six month period.
 3. Subject to the approval of the city board, develop a plan to
provide for the establishment of comprehensive high schools within the
city district so that every community district shall have available to
its graduates further education and a comprehensive high school. Such
plan may provide for the conversion of academic and vocational high
schools and may be amended or modified from time to time.
 4. Appoint teacher-aides for the schools and programs under his or her
jurisdiction within the budgetary allocation therefor.
 5. Retain jurisdiction over all employees who are required in
connection with the performance of duties with respect to the design,
construction, operation and maintenance of all school buildings in the
city school district. Such employees shall have all rights accorded them
under the provisions of the civil service law, including manner of
appointment, classification, promotion, transfer and removal including
an opportunity to be heard provided, however, that each custodian shall
be responsible for the performance of his or her duties to the principal
of the school who shall be responsible to the district superintendent.
 6. Employ or retain counsel subject to the powers and duties of the
corporation counsel of the city of New York to be his or her attorney
and counsel pursuant to subdivision a of section three hundred
ninety-four of the New York city charter; provided, however, that in
actions or proceedings between the city board or the chancellor and one
or more community boards, the city board or the chancellor shall be
represented by the corporation counsel of the city of New York.
 7. To continue existing voluntary programs or to establish new
programs under which students may choose to attend a public school in
another community district.
 8. Promulgate minimum clear educational standards, curriculum
requirements and frameworks, and mandatory educational objectives
applicable to all schools and programs throughout the city district, and
examine and evaluate periodically all such schools and programs with
respect to
 (i) compliance with such educational standards and other requirements,
and
 (ii) the educational effectiveness of such schools and programs, in a
manner not inconsistent with the policies of the city board.
 9. Furnish community district education councils and the city board
periodically with the results of such examinations and evaluations and
to make the same public.
 10. Require each community superintendent to make an annual report
covering all matters relating to schools under the district's
jurisdiction including, but not limited to, the evaluation of the
educational effectiveness of such schools and programs connected
therewith.
 11. Require such community district education council or
superintendent to make such number of periodic reports as may be
necessary to accomplish the purposes of this chapter.
 13. Perform the following functions throughout the city district;
provided, however, that the chancellor and any community district
education council may agree that any such function may be appropriately
performed by the community district education council with respect to
the schools and programs under its jurisdiction:
 (a) Technical assistance to community districts and schools;
 (b) Such warehouse space on a regional basis as he or she determines
to be necessary or appropriate after consultation with the community
superintendents;
 (c) Purchasing services on a city-wide, regional or community district
basis subject to subdivision thirty-six of this section;
 (d) Reinforce and foster connections to institutions of higher
education to promote student achievement.
 14. Develop and furnish pre-service and in-service training programs
for principals and other employees throughout the city district. In
addition, the chancellor shall prepare and annually update a training
plan for participating parents, and school personnel, which shall
include, at minimum, such training as may be required for exercise of
their responsibilities, full participation and compliance with the
provisions of this section. The chancellor shall, in addition, within
amounts appropriated, allocate sufficient funds directly and to the
superintendents for teacher and principal training to meet identified
needs for school improvement.
 15. Promote the involvement and appropriate input of all members of
the school community pursuant to the provisions of this article,
including parents, teachers, and other school personnel, including:
 (a) establishing a parents' association or a parent-teachers'
association in each public school under the chancellor's jurisdiction;
and ensuring that the districts and charter schools located within the
city district do the same; the chancellor shall ensure that meetings of
such parents' associations or parent-teachers' associations shall comply
with section four hundred fourteen of this chapter;
 (b) pursuant to a plan prepared in consultation with associations of
parents, and representatives of teachers, supervisors, paraprofessionals
and other school personnel within the city district, and promulgated no
later than January thirty-first, nineteen hundred ninety-eight, (i)
taking all necessary steps to ensure that no later than October first,
nineteen hundred ninety-nine, the city district and the community
districts are in full compliance, and remain in compliance thereafter,
with state and federal law and regulations concerning school-based
management and shared decision-making, including section 100.11 of the
commissioner's regulations, in a manner which balances participation by
parents with participation by school personnel in advising in the
decisions devolved to schools pursuant to sections twenty-five hundred
ninety-i and twenty-five hundred ninety-r of this article, and (ii)
pursuant to such plan providing for appropriate training to any parent
and school personnel who participate in the school based management and
shared decision-making process;
 (b-1) school based management teams developed pursuant to paragraph
(b) of this subdivision shall possess the following powers and duties:
 (i) develop an annual school comprehensive educational plan and
consult on the school-based budget pursuant to section twenty-five
hundred ninety-r of this article. Such school comprehensive educational
plan shall be developed concurrently with the development of the
school-based budget so that it may inform the decision-making process
and result in the alignment of the comprehensive educational plan and
the school-based budget for the ensuing school year. Such plan shall be
submitted to the community superintendent along with the principal's
written justification demonstrating that the school-based budget
proposal is aligned with the school's comprehensive educational plan and
the school based management team's response to such justification
pursuant to paragraph (h) of subdivision one of section twenty-five
hundred ninety-f of this article. In the case of specialized, academic,
vocational, and other high schools that are not under the jurisdiction
of a community superintendent, such plan shall be submitted to the
chancellor pursuant to subdivision e of section twenty-five hundred
ninety-r of this article. The chancellor shall ensure that the
comprehensive educational plan of every school within the city district
is easily accessible and be made available for public inspection
including via the city board's official internet website;
 (ii) hold at least one meeting per month during the school year. Each
monthly meeting shall be held at a time that is convenient for the
parent representatives;
 (iii) provide notice of monthly meetings that is consistent with the
open meetings law;
 (iv) have parent members of such teams make recommendations,
consistent with the chancellor's regulations, on the selection of the
school principal and have all members be consulted prior to the
appointment of any principal candidate to its school;
 (v) undergo initial and ongoing training that will allow its members
to carry out their duties effectively;
 (vi) dispute any decision made by the principal to the community
superintendent pursuant to section twenty-five hundred ninety-f of this
article where members of the school based management team, other than
the principal, reach a consensus that the decision is inconsistent with
the goals and policies set forth in the school's existing comprehensive
educational plan; and
 (vii) provide to the community superintendent an annual assessment of
the school principal's record of developing an effective shared
decision-making relationship with school based management team members;
and
 (c) developing, in consultation with associations of parents in the
city district, and implementing no later than October first, nineteen
hundred ninety-eight, a parental bill of rights which provides for, at
minimum:
 (i) reasonable access by parents, persons in parental relation and
guardians to schools, classrooms, and academic and attendance records of
their own children, consistent with federal and state laws, provided
that such access does not disrupt or interfere with the regular school
process;
 (ii) the rights of parents, persons in parental relation and guardians
to take legal action and appeal the decisions of the school
administration, as authorized by law;
 (iii) the right of parents, persons in parental relation and guardians
to have information on their own child's educational materials;
 (iv) access to and information about all public meetings, hearings of
the chancellor, the city board, the community superintendents, the
community district education councils, and the schools; and
 (v) access to information regarding programs that allow students to
apply for admission where appropriate to schools outside a student's own
attendance zone; and
 (d) require each public school under the chancellor's jurisdiction to
have a parent coordinator who shall be responsible for engaging with and
involving parents in the school community by working with the school
principal, school personnel, school based management team, parent
associations, and community groups to identify parent and related school
and community issues. The community district education council of each
school shall be consulted prior to the selection of the parent
coordinator. Such consultation shall include an opportunity for the
community district education council to meet with the final candidate or
candidates the school principal is considering selecting and to provide
feedback to the principal prior to the selection being made.
 The chancellor shall by rule or regulation provide for the involvement
including membership, in any parents' association or parent-teacher
association established pursuant to this subdivision, of a grandparent
who is in parental relation to a child who attends a school within the
jurisdiction of the community school district. For purposes of this
subdivision, a grandparent shall be considered to be in parental
relation to a child when such grandparent has assumed care of such child
because such child's parents are not available due to death,
imprisonment, mental illness, living outside the state, abandonment of
the child, or other circumstances. A determination of whether a
grandparent is in parental relation to a child shall be based upon the
individual circumstances surrounding guardianship and custodial care of
such child.
 16. Promulgate such rules and regulations as he or she may determine
to be necessary or convenient to accomplish the purposes of this act,
not inconsistent with the provisions of this article and the city-wide
educational policies of the city board.
 16-a. Create standards, policies, and objectives and promulgate
regulations directly related to maintaining the internal fiscal
integrity of administrative operations by the chancellor, the community
districts, and the schools.
 17. Possess those powers and duties described in section twenty-five
hundred fifty-four of this title, the exercise of which shall be in a
manner not inconsistent with the provisions of this article and the
city-wide educational policies of the city board.
 18. Possess those powers and duties contained in section nine hundred
twelve of this chapter and those provisions of article fifteen of this
chapter which relate to non-public schools, those powers and duties
contained in section five hundred twenty-two of the New York city
charter, and those powers and duties contained in article seventy-three
of this chapter, the exercise of which shall be in a manner not
inconsistent with the provisions of this article and the city-wide
educational policies of the city board.
 19. Delegate any of his or her powers and duties to such subordinate
officers or employees as he or she deems appropriate and to modify or
rescind any power and duty so delegated.
 20. Ensure compliance with qualifications established for all
personnel employed in the city district, including the taking of
fingerprints as a prerequisite for licensure and/or employment of such
personnel. Every set of fingerprints taken pursuant to this subdivision
shall be promptly submitted to the division of criminal justice services
where it shall be appropriately processed. Furthermore, the division of
criminal justice services is authorized to submit the fingerprints to
the federal bureau of investigation for a national criminal history
record check.
 21. Perform the functions of the bureau of audit throughout the city
district, including ensuring compliance with subdivisions thirty-six and
thirty-seven of this section.
 22. Establish uniform procedures for record keeping, accounting and
reporting throughout the city district, including pupil record keeping,
accounting and reporting.
 23. Develop an educational facilities master plan, and revisions
thereto, as defined in section twenty-five hundred ninety-o of this
article.
 24. Develop and implement a five-year educational facilities capital
plan, and amendments thereto, as defined in section twenty-five hundred
ninety-p of this article. The chancellor shall also appoint a person,
who reports directly to the chancellor or his or her designee, to assist
in the development and implementation of such plan and amendments
thereto and to oversee the school buildings program.
 25. On the chancellor's own initiative, or at the request of a
community superintendent, transfer a principal employed by a community
school district pursuant to an agreement with the employee organization
representing such principals. The chancellor shall establish a procedure
for consulting with affected parents to explain any such transfer.
Consistent with section twenty-five hundred ninety-i of this article,
including without limitation subdivision three thereof, and subdivision
one thereof with respect to the rights and obligations of a school to
which a principal is transferred, in addition to any other law providing
for the transfer of principals, the chancellor also may cause the
transfer or removal of principals for persistent educational failure,
conflicts of interest, and ethics violations, and may require principals
to participate in training and other remedial programs to address
identified factors affecting student achievement and school performance.
 26. Establish educational and experience qualifications and
requirements for all custodial positions including, but not limited to,
custodians and custodial engineers and develop standards for evaluating
the performance of all such individuals, subject to approval of the city
board. Such performance standards shall include, but not be limited to:
the cleanliness of facilities; adequacy and timeliness of minor repairs;
maintenance of good working order of facilities and grounds; general
facilities improvement; and emergency services. The chancellor shall
promulgate regulations setting forth the respective responsibilities of
the district plant manager, which shall include regular consultation and
ongoing reports to the community superintendent, and the principal of
each school for evaluating the performance of the custodial employees
assigned to his or her school, in accordance with such performance
standards, and such performance evaluations shall be given dominant
weight in any decision for the purposes of: advancement; continued
employment; building transfers; and other performance incentives. The
responsibility of the principal of each school in the evaluation of
custodial employees may be a matter for collective bargaining with
collective bargaining representatives for principals.
 27. Promulgate regulations, in conjunction with each community
superintendent, establishing a plan for providing access to school
facilities in each community school district, when not in use for school
purposes, in accordance with the provisions of section four hundred
fourteen of this chapter. Such plan shall set forth a reasonable system
of fees not to exceed the actual costs and specify that no part of any
fee shall directly or indirectly benefit or be deposited into an account
which inures to the benefit of the custodians or custodial engineers.
 29. Promulgate regulations establishing educational, managerial, and
administrative qualifications, performance record criteria, and
performance standards for the positions of superintendent and principal.
 30. Select and appoint a community superintendent, in compliance with
the qualifications required by subdivision twenty-nine of this section
and subject to the provisions of subdivision two of section twenty-five
hundred ninety-j of this article, and in consultation with the
corresponding community district education council, at a salary to be
fixed within the budgetary allocation therefor.
 31. Intervene in any district or school which is persistently failing
to achieve educational results and standards approved by the city board
or established by the state board of regents, or has failed to improve
its educational results and student achievement in accordance with such
standards or state or city board requirements, or in any school or
district in which there exists, in the chancellor's judgment, a state of
uncontrolled or unaddressed violence. The chancellor may, in addition to
exercising any other powers authorized by this article, require such
school principal, or district as the case may be, to prepare a
corrective action plan, with a timetable for implementation of steps
acceptable to the chancellor to reach improvement goals consistent with
city board standards and educational results. The chancellor may require
the school or district to alter or improve the corrective action plan,
or may directly modify the plan. The chancellor shall monitor
implementation of the plan, and, if the school or district fails to
implement it, may supersede any inconsistent decision of the school
principal, community district education council or community
superintendent; assume joint or direct control of the operation of the
school or district to implement the corrective action plan; or take any
other action authorized by this article. Any action of the chancellor to
supercede an inconsistent decision of the school principal, community
district education council or community superintendent, or to assume
joint or direct control of the operation of the school or district
pursuant to this subdivision may be appealed to the city board in
accordance with section twenty-five hundred ninety-g of this article.
 32. Appoint a deputy, for each borough of the city of New York,
responsible for coordinating and periodically meeting and consulting
with the borough president, the chancellor and the community
superintendents in the borough on borough-specific issues and issues of
borough-wide significance, including the provision of services in
support of schools and community districts such as transportation,
purchasing, capital planning, and coordination with municipal services,
and chancellor and city board policy with respect to the high schools.
 33. Require community school board members to participate in training
and retraining in order to promote district and school performance and
student achievement, as a continuing condition for membership.
 35. Take all necessary steps to promote the effectiveness and
integrity of school-based budgeting pursuant to section twenty-five
hundred ninety-r of this article, including the obligations imposed by
subdivision thirty-seven of this section.
 36. Develop a procurement policy for the city school district of the
city of New York and the community districts and public schools therein
to ensure the wise and prudent use of public money in the best interest
of the taxpayers of the state; guard against favoritism, improvidence,
extravagance, fraud, and corruption; and ensure that contracts are
awarded consistent with law and on the basis of best value, including,
but not limited to, the following criteria: quality, cost and
efficiency.
 (a) Such policy shall specifically include:
 (i) a competitive sealed bidding process for the awarding of contracts
in which sealed bids are publicly solicited and opened and that a
contract is awarded to the lowest responsive, responsible bidder;
 (ii) processes for awarding contracts using alternatives to
competitive sealed bidding where competitive sealed bidding is not
practicable or not advantageous, in which case the most competitive
alternative method of procurement, which is appropriate under the
circumstances, shall be used consistent with the requirements of
subparagraph (vii) of this paragraph;
 * (iii) measures to enhance the ability of minority and women owned
business enterprises pursuant to section thirteen hundred four of the
New York city charter and a certified business as defined in section
three hundred ten of the executive law, including firms certified
pursuant to article fifteen-A of the executive law and firms certified
as minority and women owned business enterprises pursuant to section
thirteen hundred four of the New York city charter, to compete for
contracts and to ensure their meaningful participation in the
procurement process. The school district shall have the authority to use
the same measures, to enhance minority and women owned business
enterprise participation as are available to the city of New York
pursuant to article five-A of the general municipal law, section
thirteen hundred four of the New York city charter, paragraphs one and
two of subdivision i of section three hundred eleven of the New York
city charter, and section 6-129 of the administrative code of the city
of New York;
 * NB Effective until February 22, 2024
 * (iii) measures to enhance the ability of minority and women owned
business enterprises pursuant to section thirteen hundred four of the
New York city charter and a certified business as defined in section
three hundred ten of the executive law, including firms certified
pursuant to article fifteen-A of the executive law and firms certified
as minority and women owned business enterprises pursuant to section
thirteen hundred four of the New York city charter, to compete for
contracts and to ensure their meaningful participation in the
procurement process. The city district shall have the authority to use
the same measures to enhance minority and women owned business
enterprise and small business participation as are available to the city
of New York pursuant to article five-A of the general municipal law,
sections thirteen hundred four and thirteen hundred nine of the New York
city charter, paragraphs one and two of subdivision i of section three
hundred eleven of the New York city charter, and section 6-129 of the
administrative code of the city of New York, provided that these
policies may establish that the city district is subject to the rules
and goal authorized under subdivision g of section thirteen hundred nine
of such charter with respect to a mentoring program established pursuant
to this subparagraph, and provided further that, if such policies
subjecting the city district to such rules and goal are adopted, the
chancellor and the city, acting by the mayor, may enter into a
memorandum of understanding relating to mentoring opportunities
authorized under this subparagraph;
 * NB Effective February 22, 2024
 * NB Repealed February 22, 2034 or upon the expiration of this section
or subdivision (see chapter 604 of 2023 § 7 sb b)
 (iv) the manner for administering contracts and overseeing the
performance of contracts and contractors;
 (v) standards and procedures to be used in determining whether bidders
are responsible;
 (vi) circumstances under which procurement may be used for the
provision of technical, consultant or personal services;
 (vii) requiring written justification for the basis, including the
efficiency, benefit, and necessity, for awarding a contract using
procurement methods other than competitive sealed bidding including
competitive sealed proposals and sole source contracts, and for awarding
technical, consultant, or personal services contracts, franchises,
revocable consents, or concessions. Such written justification shall be
filed with the comptroller of the city of New York along with the
corresponding contract, franchise, revocable consent, or concession;
 (viii) maintaining a file for every contract franchise, revocable
consent, and concession containing information pertaining to the
solicitation, award and management of every such contract or agreement.
Such file shall contain copies of each determination, writing or filing
required by this subdivision and shall be open to public inspection with
adequate protection for information which is confidential;
 (ix) a process for the filing of all contracts, franchises, revocable
consents, and concessions with the comptroller of the city of New York;
 * (x) a process for emergency procurement in the case of an unforeseen
danger to life, safety, property or a necessary service provided that
such procurement shall be made with such competition as is practicable
under the circumstances and that a written determination of the basis
for the emergency procurement shall be required and filed with the
comptroller of the city of New York when such emergency contract is
filed with such comptroller; and
 * NB Effective until May 15, 2024
 * (x) a process for emergency procurement in the case of an unforeseen
danger to life, safety, property or a necessary service provided that
such procurement shall be made with such competition as is practicable
under the circumstances and that a written determination of the basis
for the emergency procurement shall be required and filed with the
comptroller of the city of New York when such emergency contract is
filed with such comptroller;
 * NB Effective May 15, 2024 and until May 15, 2029 or until sb 36
expires, whichever is sooner
 * (x) a process for emergency procurement in the case of an unforeseen
danger to life, safety, property or a necessary service provided that
such procurement shall be made with such competition as is practicable
under the circumstances and that a written determination of the basis
for the emergency procurement shall be required and filed with the
comptroller of the city of New York when such emergency contract is
filed with such comptroller; and
 * NB Effective May 15, 2029 if sb 36 is still in effect
 * (xi) procedures for the fair and equitable resolution of contract
disputes.
 * NB Effective until May 15, 2024
 * (xi) procedures for the fair and equitable resolution of contract
disputes; and
 * NB Effective May 15, 2024 and until May 15, 2029 or until sb 36
expires, whichever is sooner
 * (xi) procedures for the fair and equitable resolution of contract
disputes.
 * NB Effective May 15, 2029 if sb 36 is still in effect
 * (xii) employment goals established in accordance with the program
established pursuant to section thirty-five hundred two of the New York
city charter, including but not limited to employment goals established
pursuant to paragraph seven of subdivision a and the corresponding best
efforts provisions set forth in subdivision d of such section; provided,
however, that where a provision of such section requires action by the
director of the office of community hiring and workforce development,
such action shall not be taken by the director of the office of
community hiring and workforce development but shall be taken by the
chancellor or his or her designee.
 * NB Effective May 15, 2024
 * NB Repealed May 15, 2029 or upon the repeal of sb 36, whichever is
earlier
 (b) Consistent with the provisions of paragraph (a) of this
subdivision such policy shall also include: (i) standards for quality,
function, and utility of all material goods, supplies, and services
purchased by the chancellor, superintendents, or schools; (ii)
regulations which enable superintendents and schools to purchase
material goods, supplies, and services directly from vendors or
suppliers when such products are available at prices or other terms more
economically beneficial for the purposes of the acquiring superintendent
or school; and (iii) regulations shall include repair services and
building supplies, as defined in such regulations, for expenditures from
each district's minor repair and purchasing funds pursuant to section
twenty-five hundred ninety-r of this article.
 (c) The chancellor shall be responsible for certifying that the
procedural requisites pursuant to this subdivision and section
twenty-five hundred ninety-g of this article have been met, prior to the
filing any contract awarded by a procurement method other than
competitive sealed bidding, or prior to filing any technical,
consultant, or personal services contract, franchise, revocable consent,
or concession with the comptroller of the city of New York. The
corporation counsel for the city of New York shall certify prior to the
filing of such contract or agreement with the comptroller of the city of
New York, that the city district has legal authority to award each such
contract or agreement.
 (d) (i) No contract, franchise, revocable consent or concession shall
be implemented until a copy has been filed with the comptroller of the
city of New York and either such comptroller has registered it or thirty
days have elapsed from the date of filing, whichever is sooner, unless
an objection has been filed pursuant to subparagraph (iii) of this
paragraph, or the comptroller of the city of New York has grounds for
not registering such contract or agreement under subparagraph (ii) of
this paragraph.
 (ii) Subject to the provisions of subparagraph (iii) of this
paragraph, the comptroller of the city of New York shall register such
contract or agreement within thirty days unless such comptroller has
information indicating that:
 (1) there remains no unexpended and unapplied balance of the
appropriation or fund applicable thereto, sufficient to pay the
estimated expense of executing such contract or agreement;
 (2) a certification required pursuant to this paragraph has not been
made; or
 (3) the proposed vendor has been debarred by the city of New York.
 (iii) The comptroller of the city of New York may, within thirty days
of the date of filing of the contract, franchise, revocable consent or
concession with his or her office, object in writing to the registration
of such contract or agreement, if in such comptroller's judgment there
is sufficient reason to believe that there is possible corruption in the
letting of such contract or agreement or that the proposed contractor is
involved in corrupt activity. Such objection shall be delivered within
such thirty day period to the mayor of the city of New York setting
forth in detail the grounds for the New York city comptroller's
determination. The mayor of the city of New York may require
registration of the contract or agreement despite the New York city
comptroller's objections if the mayor of the city of New York has
responded to such comptroller's objections in writing, indicating:
 (1) the corrective actions if any, that have been taken or will be
taken in response to such comptroller's objections, or
 (2) the reasons why the mayor of the city of New York disagrees with
such comptroller's objections.
 Such response by the mayor of the city of New York shall not serve as
the basis for further objection by the New York city comptroller, and
such comptroller shall register the contract, franchise, revocable
consent or concession within ten days of receipt of the mayor of the
city of New York's response.
 (e) The requirements of paragraphs (c) and (d) of this subdivision
shall not apply to an emergency contract awarded pursuant to
subparagraph (x) of paragraph (a) of this subdivision, provided that the
chancellor shall comply with the requirements of paragraphs (c) and (d)
of this subdivision as soon as practicable.
 37. Establish guidelines and a system of internal controls, including
internal administrative controls and internal accounting controls, with
provisions for internal audits, as such terms are defined in section
nine hundred fifty of the executive law. Such system shall also include
a system of internal control review designed to identify weaknesses and
identify actions to rectify them; a clear and concise statement of the
generally applicable management policies and standards made available to
each officer and employee relevant to fiscal and expenditure control, in
addition to education and training efforts to ensure adequate
understanding of internal control standards and evaluation techniques;
and the designation of an internal control officer for each community
district, each of whom shall report to the chancellor and the auditor
general, to execute a regular internal audit function, which shall
operate in accordance with generally accepted governmental auditing
standards. The internal auditors for the community districts shall
operate in cooperation with the auditor general, appointed by the
chancellor, who shall, in addition to the functions of the internal
auditors, monitor and conduct random audits of school districts at least
once every two years for fraud, waste, and mismanagement.
Notwithstanding any provision of state law or state or city regulation,
the internal auditors, and the auditor general, shall be entitled, upon
their request, to all and any documents and materials bearing in their
judgment on the finances and cost-effectiveness of the schools and the
school districts that is in the possession of the community districts,
the schools, or any officer thereof.
 38. To exercise all of the duties and responsibilities of the
employing board as set forth in section three thousand twenty-a of this
chapter with respect to any member of the teaching or supervisory staff
of schools under the jurisdiction of the community district education
councils. The chancellor shall exercise all such duties and
responsibilities for all community districts or may delegate the
exercise of all such duties and responsibilities to all of the community
superintendents of the city district.
 38-a. To exercise all of the duties and responsibilities of the
employing board as set forth in section three thousand twenty-a of this
chapter with respect to any member of the teaching or supervisory staff
of schools which are not covered under subdivision thirty-eight of this
section. Provided, however that the city board shall maintain
jurisdiction over any consequence resulting from an employee waiver of a
hearing, as provided for in paragraph (d) of subdivision two of section
three thousand twenty-a of this chapter.
 ** 39. (a) Prescribe regulations and by-laws requiring members of the
city board, the chancellor, and any other officer or employee in schools
and programs under the jurisdiction of the city board and the chancellor
to make annual written disclosure to the chancellor, of the following
information:
 (i) the employment by the city school board or any community district
education council of any person related within the third degree of
consanguinity or affinity to the person making disclosure, including the
employment of any such person for which a two-thirds vote was required
under paragraph (e) of subdivision four of section twenty-five hundred
ninety-j of this article, with a notation of the date such vote was
taken.
 (ii) the source of any income, reimbursement, gift, or other form of
compensation for services rendered, together with a description of such
services.
 (b) The chancellor shall review, at least once annually, compliance
with the requirements of subdivisions five and six of section
twenty-five hundred ninety-e of this article and regulations or by-laws
prescribed in this subdivision. Any community district education council
member, community superintendent, or other officer or employee required
to make disclosure, who fails to make such disclosure, shall be notified
in writing of his or her failure to do so and given thirty days within
which to comply.
 (d) Willful failure to make full and timely disclosure shall
constitute cause for removal from office of any member of the city board
or for any other officer or employee disciplinary action and such other
penalty as may be provided by law.
 (e) Disclosures made pursuant to the requirements of this subdivision
and any notification of failure to make disclosures shall be made
available for public inspection during regular business hours on regular
business days.
 ** NB There are 2 sb (39)'s
 ** 39. To enter an agreement, in his or her discretion, with the city
of New York for the installation and use of school bus photo violation
monitoring systems pursuant to section eleven hundred seventy-four-a of
the vehicle and traffic law, provided that the purchase, lease,
installation, operation and maintenance, or any other costs associated
with such cameras shall not be considered an aidable expense pursuant to
section thirty-six hundred twenty-three-a of this chapter.
 ** NB There are 2 sb (39)'s
 ** NB Repealed December 1, 2029
 40. (a) Prescribe regulations and by-laws requiring members of the
city board, the chancellor, and, for good cause shown, any other officer
or employee in schools and programs under the jurisdiction of the city
board and the chancellor, to submit to the chancellor, in the discretion
of the chancellor, financial reports for themselves and their spouses.
 (b) The frequency and period of coverage, the designation of persons
to submit such reports by name, title, or income level, or by a
combination thereof, and the content of such reports, including minimum
dollar amounts, shall be determined by the chancellor, and such reports
may include but not necessarily be limited to the following:
 (i) amount and source of income for services rendered, together with a
description of such services;
 (ii) amount and source of gifts, capital gains, reimbursements for
expenditures, and honoraria;
 (iii) investments in securities and real property;
 (iv) amount of debts and names of creditors;
 (v) outstanding loans and other forms of indebtedness due to person
reporting or spouse, by name and amounts; and
 (vi) trusts and other fiduciary relationships and their assets in
which a beneficial interest is held.
 (c) Willful failure to file required financial reports shall
constitute cause for removal from office of any member of the city board
or for any other officer or employee disciplinary action and such other
penalty as may be provided by law.
 41. Appoint and set salaries for staff in non-represented managerial
titles.
 42. (a) To dispose of such personal property used in the schools and
other buildings of the city of New York under the charge of the city
board as shall no longer be required for use therein. Such disposition
shall be made in the name of the city of New York and for such city.
 (b) The chancellor may sell, at prices as may be agreed upon, such
manufactured articles or other products of any school of the district,
day and evening, as may not be utilized by the city board, and all
moneys realized by the sale thereof shall be paid into the city treasury
and shall at once be appropriated by the city to a special fund to be
administered by the city board for such purposes as such board, in its
discretion, may determine. All other moneys realized by the sale of
personal property shall be paid into the city treasury and shall at once
be appropriated by the city to the special school fund of the city board
for use in the borough in which the property sold was situated.
 (c) Such method of disposal shall be deemed not to apply to the
disposition of school books pursuant to subdivision forty-three of this
section.
 43. To dispose of, to the best advantage of the city of New York,
either by sale or on the basis of money allowance for waste paper, all
books delivered to the several public schools of such city that have
been discarded either by reason of being obsolete, no longer required by
the course of study, worn by long usage, or mutilated by accident. If
disposal is made by sale, it shall be to the highest bidder, and the
money realized shall be paid into the city treasury and shall at once be
appropriated by the city to the special school fund of the city board
entitled "supplies". If disposal is made on the basis of money allowance
for waste paper, it shall be to the highest bidder. Such discarded books
may be disposed of without public advertisement or entry into a formal
contract. Should the discarded books be in such condition that no sale
or exchange can be made, or should there be reason to believe that such
discarded books have become infected through disease among the pupils,
or should the superintendent of schools certify that such discarded
books contain erroneous, inaccurate, obsolete, or antiquated subject
matter, illustrations, maps, charts, or other material, the committee on
supplies of the board of education, if such books cannot be sold, given
away, or otherwise salvaged as waste paper without danger to the public
health, may authorize their destruction by fire, in which event the
superintendent of school supplies shall obtain and file in his or her
office a certificate that such books have been so destroyed, signed by
the principal of the school in which the books are located.
 44. To provide the proper book or books in which he or she shall cause
the class teachers under the direction and supervision of the principal
to enter the names, ages, and residences of the pupils attending the
school, the name of the parent or guardian of each pupil, and the days
on which the pupils shall have attended respectively, and the aggregate
attendance of each pupil during the year, and also the day upon which
the school shall have been visited by the superintendent of schools or
by an associate superintendent of schools or by an assistant
superintendent, or by members of the city board, or by members of the
community district education council, or by any of them, which entry
shall be verified by such oath or affirmation of the principal as may be
prescribed by the chancellor. Such books shall be preserved as the
property of the chancellor and shall at all times be open to inspection
by members of the city board, by members of the community councils and
by the superintendent of schools, or by any associate superintendent of
schools, or by the assistant superintendents.
 45. Make rules and regulations for the conduct, operation, and
maintenance of extra classroom activities and for the safeguarding,
accounting, and audit of all moneys received and derived therefrom. In
the case of any extra classroom activity as it shall deem proper, and
notwithstanding the provisions of section twenty-five hundred thirty of
this title, it may direct that the moneys received or derived from the
conduct, operation, or maintenance of such an extra classroom activity
be deposited with the auditor, who in such event shall be the treasurer
of such an extra classroom activity, the moneys of which are required to
be so deposited. In the procurement of articles and services for the
conduct, operation, and maintenance of a cafeteria or restaurant
service, the chancellor shall be subject to applicable provisions of
law, except that said chancellor need not have duly advertised for
estimates in order to contract for such articles or services in an
amount exceeding one thousand dollars. The chancellor shall also have
power to assign any officers or employees to perform such duties as he
or she may prescribe in connection with an extra classroom activity and
to designate such officers and employees when so assigned from whom a
bond shall be required for faithful performance of their duties and to
fix the sum in which each such bond shall be given.
 46. To maintain, through such representatives as he or she may
designate, an effective visitation and inspection of all schools and
classes maintained in institutions controlled by the department of
correction of the city of New York.
 47. To assign, in his or her discretion, one or more employees of the
city board to serve as trial examiner with power to conduct
investigations and hearings on behalf of the chancellor. Each trial
examiner shall report the result of any such investigation or hearing to
the chancellor.
 48. To hold a public meeting in each community district, in
conjunction with the community district education council, during a two
year period, beginning with the two thousand nine--two thousand ten
school year, in order to report on public school finances, student
performance, and educational goals and priorities of the city district
and to receive and respond to public comments and concerns. The
chancellor shall direct the community superintendent to provide public
notice of such meeting in order to maximize the participation of
parents, students, and all other interested parties.
 49. To provide information, data, estimates and statistics regarding
all matters relating to the city district as requested by the director
of the independent budget office of the city of New York or the
comptroller of the city of New York, in a timely fashion.
 50. To issue an annual report on the participation of minority and
women owned business enterprises in the city district's procurement
process including the number of contracts awarded to minority and women
owned business enterprises, the percent of contracts awarded to minority
and women owned business enterprises of the total number of all city
district contracts, the aggregate value of all contracts awarded to
minority and women owned business enterprises, and the percent of the
aggregate value of contracts awarded to minority and women owned
business enterprises of the total aggregate value of all city district
contracts.
 51. Propose a policy for city board approval that promotes the
recruitment and retention of a workforce at the city district, community
district, and school level that considers the diversity of the students
attending the public schools within the city district. The chancellor
shall issue an annual report outlining the initiatives taken to enhance
diversity and equity in recruitment and retention and the impacts of
such initiatives to the workforce at the city district, community
district and school level.
 52. To compile an inventory of and issue a written report about the
outdoor schoolyards in the city school district, as required by
subdivision fourteen of section twenty-five hundred fifty-six of this
title.
 53. To compile an inventory of, issue a written report, and provide
recommendations as required by subdivision fifteen of section
twenty-five hundred fifty-six of this title regarding transportable
classroom units in the city school district.
 54. To establish a charitable fund to receive unrestricted charitable
monetary donations made to such fund for use by the city school district
for public educational purposes. The monies of such charitable fund
shall be deposited and secured in the manner provided by section ten of
the general municipal law. The monies of such charitable fund may be
invested in the manner provided by section eleven of the general
municipal law. Any interest earned or capital gain realized on the money
so invested shall accrue to and become part of such fund. At such time
and in such amounts as determined by the chancellor, the monies of such
charitable fund shall be transferred to the city school district's
general fund for expenditure consistent with the charitable purposes of
the fund, provided that the amount of taxes to be levied by the city for
any school year shall be determined without regard to any such transfer.
The city school district shall maintain an accounting of all such
deposits, interest or capital gain, transfers, and expenditures.
 55. Ensure that all public, nonpublic, and charter school students
enrolled in elementary and secondary schools located in the city of New
York be provided with additional opportunities to supplement classroom
instruction including, but not limited to, visiting educational and
cultural sites and institutions such as a Holocaust museum, African
American cultural centers and historical landmarks, a Native American
museum, Asian American museums and cultural centers, a LatinX American
museum, center for women, LGBTQ historical landmarks, and American
historical landmarks and monuments.
 56. Render written responses to resolutions passed by the city-wide
education councils and community district education councils within
thirty days of receipt.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2026
 * § 2590-h. Powers and duties of chancellor. The office of chancellor
of the city district is hereby continued. It shall be filled by a person
employed by the city board by contract for a term not to exceed by more
than one year the term of office of the city board authorizing such
contract, subject to removal for cause. The chancellor shall receive a
salary to be fixed by the city board within the budgetary allocation
therefor. He or she shall exercise all his or her powers and duties in a
manner not inconsistent with the policies of the city board. The
chancellor shall have the following powers and duties as the
superintendent of schools and chief executive officer for the city
district, which the chancellor shall exercise to promote an equal
educational opportunity for all students in the schools of the city
district, promote fiscal and educational equity, increase student
achievement and school performance and encourage local school-based
innovation, including the power and duty to:
 1. Control and operate:
 (a) academic and vocational senior high schools until such time as the
same may be transferred to the jurisdiction of appropriate community
boards pursuant to this article;
 (b) all specialized senior high schools. The special high schools
shall include the present schools known as:
 The Bronx High School of Science, Stuyvesant High School, Brooklyn
Technical High School, Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and
the Arts in the borough of Manhattan, and such further schools which the
city board may designate from time to time. The special schools shall be
permitted to maintain a discovery program in accordance with the law in
effect on the date preceding the effective date of this section;
admissions to the special schools shall be conducted in accordance with
the law in effect on the date preceding the effective date of this
section;
 (c) all special education programs and services conducted pursuant to
this chapter;
 (d) subject to the provisions of section twenty-five hundred ninety-i
of this article, devolving powers to the schools, city-wide programs for
city-wide services to a substantial number of persons from more than one
community district, including transportation; food services; payroll and
personnel functions, including pension and retirement services; and
enforcement of laws and regulations promoting equal opportunity in
employment, access to public accommodations and facilities, equal
opportunity in education, and preventing and addressing unlawful
discrimination; provided, however, that a community district may also
operate within its district programs which provide similar services
otherwise authorized by this article.
 2. Establish, control and operate new schools or programs of the types
specified in subdivision one of this section, or to discontinue any such
schools and programs as he or she may determine; provided, however, that
he shall consult with the affected community board before:
 (a) substantially expanding or reducing such an existing school or
program within a community district;
 (b) initially utilizing a community district school or facility for
such a school or program;
 (c) instituting any new program within a community district.
 3. Subject to the approval of the city board, develop a plan to
provide for the establishment of comprehensive high schools within the
city district so that every community district shall have available to
its graduates further education and a comprehensive high school. Such
plan may provide for the conversion of academic and vocational high
schools and may be amended or modified from time to time.
 4. Appoint teacher-aides for the schools and programs under his or her
jurisdiction within the budgetary allocation therefor.
 5. Retain jurisdiction over all employees who are required in
connection with the performance of duties with respect to the design,
construction, operation and maintenance of all school buildings in the
city school district. Such employees shall have all rights accorded them
under the provisions of the civil service law, including manner of
appointment, classification, promotion, transfer and removal including
an opportunity to be heard provided, however, that each custodian shall
be responsible for the performance of his duties to the principal of the
school who shall be responsible to the district superintendent.
 6. Employ or retain counsel subject to the powers and duties of the
corporation counsel of the city of New York to be his or her attorney
and counsel pursuant to subdivision a of section three hundred
ninety-four of the New York city charter; provided, however, that in
actions or proceedings between the city board or the chancellor and one
or more community boards, the city board or the chancellor shall be
represented by the corporation counsel of the city of New York.
 7. To continue existing voluntary programs or to establish new
programs under which students may choose to attend a public school in
another community district.
 8. Promulgate minimum clear educational standards, curriculum
requirements and frameworks, and mandatory educational objectives
applicable to all schools and programs throughout the city district, and
examine and evaluate periodically all such schools and programs with
respect to
 (i) compliance with such educational standards and other requirements,
and
 (ii) the educational effectiveness of such schools and programs, in a
manner not inconsistent with the policies of the city board.
 9. Furnish community boards and the city board periodically with the
results of such examinations and evaluations and to make the same
public.
 10. Require each community superintendent to make an annual report
covering all matters relating to schools under the district's
jurisdiction including, but not limited to, the evaluation of the
educational effectiveness of such schools and programs connected
therewith.
 11. Require such community board or superintendent to make such number
of periodic reports as may be necessary to accomplish the purposes of
this chapter.
 13. Perform the following functions throughout the city district;
provided, however, that the chancellor and any community board may agree
that any such function may be appropriately performed by the community
board with respect to the schools and programs under its jurisdiction:
 (a) Technical assistance to community districts and schools;
 (b) Such warehouse space on a regional basis as he or she determines
to be necessary or appropriate after consultation with the community
superintendents;
 (c) Purchasing services on a city-wide, regional or community district
basis subject to subdivision thirty-six of this section;
 (d) Reinforce and foster connections to institutions of higher
education to promote student achievement.
 14. Develop and furnish pre-service and in-service training programs
for principals and other employees throughout the city district. In
addition, the chancellor shall prepare and annually update a training
plan for participating parents, and school personnel, which shall
include, at minimum, such training as may be required for exercise of
their responsibilities, full participation and compliance with the
provisions of this section. The chancellor shall, in addition, within
amounts appropriated, allocate sufficient funds directly and to the
superintendents for teacher and principal training to meet identified
needs for school improvement.
 15. Promote the involvement and appropriate input of all members of
the school community pursuant to the provisions of this article,
including parents, teachers, and other school personnel, including:
 (a) establishing a parents' association or a parent-teachers'
association in each school under the chancellor's jurisdiction; and
ensuring that the districts do the same;
 (b) pursuant to a plan prepared in consultation with associations of
parents, and representatives of teachers, supervisors, paraprofessionals
and other school personnel within the city district, and promulgated no
later than January thirty-first, nineteen hundred ninety-eight, (i)
taking all necessary steps to ensure that no later than October first,
nineteen hundred ninety-nine, the city district and the community
districts are in full compliance, and remain in compliance thereafter,
with state and federal law and regulations concerning school-based
management and shared decision-making, including section 100.11 of the
commissioner's regulations, in a manner which balances participation by
parents with participation by school personnel in advising in the
decisions devolved to schools pursuant to sections twenty five hundred
ninety-i and twenty-five hundred ninety-r of this article, and (ii)
pursuant to such plan providing for appropriate training to any parent
and school personnel who participate in the school-based management and
shared decision-making process; and
 (c) developing, in consultation with associations of parents in the
city district, and implementing no later than October first, nineteen
hundred ninety-eight, a parental bill of rights which provides for, at
minimum:
 (i) reasonable access by parents, persons in parental relation and
guardians to schools, classrooms, and academic and attendance records of
their own children, consistent with federal and state laws, provided
that such access does not disrupt or interfere with the regular school
process;
 (ii) the rights of parents, persons in parental relation and guardians
to take legal action and appeal the decisions of the school
administration, as authorized by law;
 (iii) the right of parents, persons in parental relation and guardians
to have information on their own child's educational materials;
 (iv) access to and information about all public meetings, hearings of
the chancellor, the city board, the community superintendents, the
community boards, and the schools; and
 (v) access to information regarding programs that allow students to
apply for admission where appropriate to schools outside a student's own
attendance zone.
 The chancellor shall by rule or regulation provide for the involvement
including membership, in any parents' association or parent-teacher
association established pursuant to this subdivision, of a grandparent
who is in parental relation to a child who attends a school within the
jurisdiction of the community school district. For purposes of this
subdivision, a grandparent shall be considered to be in parental
relation to a child when such grandparent has assumed care of such child
because such child's parents are not available due to death,
imprisonment, mental illness, living outside the state, abandonment of
the child, or other circumstances. A determination of whether a
grandparent is in parental relation to a child shall be based upon the
individual circumstances surrounding guardianship and custodial care of
such child.
 16. Promulgate such rules and regulations as he or she may determine
to be necessary or convenient to accomplish the purposes of this act,
not inconsistent with the provisions of this article and the policies of
the city board.
 17. Possess those powers and duties described in section twenty-five
hundred fifty-four of this chapter, the exercise of which shall be in a
manner not inconsistent with the provisions of this article and the
policies of the city board.
 18. Possess those powers and duties contained in section nine hundred
twelve of this chapter and those provisions of article fifteen thereof
which relate to non-public schools, those powers and duties contained in
section five hundred twenty-two of the New York city charter and those
powers and duties contained in article seventy-three of this chapter,
the exercise of which shall be in a manner not inconsistent with the
provisions of this article and the policies of the city board.
 19. Delegate any of his or her powers and duties to such subordinate
officers or employees as he or she deems appropriate and to modify or
rescind any power and duty so delegated.
 20. Ensure compliance with qualifications established for all
personnel employed in the city district, including the taking of
fingerprints as a prerequisite for licensure and/or employment of such
personnel. Every set of fingerprints taken pursuant to this subdivision
shall be promptly submitted to the division of criminal justice services
where it shall be appropriately processed. Furthermore, the division of
criminal justice services is authorized to submit the fingerprints to
the federal bureau of investigation for a national criminal history
record check.
 21. Perform the functions of the bureau of audit throughout the city
district, including ensuring compliance with subdivisions thirty-six and
thirty-seven of this section.
 22. Establish uniform procedures for record keeping, accounting and
reporting throughout the city district, including pupil record keeping,
accounting and reporting.
 23. Develop an educational facilities master plan, and revisions
thereto, as defined in section twenty-five hundred ninety-o of this
article.
 24. Develop and implement a five-year educational facilities capital
plan, and amendments thereto, as defined in section twenty-five hundred
ninety-p of this article. The chancellor shall also appoint a person,
who reports directly to the chancellor or his or her designee, to assist
in the development and implementation of such plan and amendments
thereto and to oversee the school buildings program.
 25. On the chancellor's own initiative, or at the request of a
community superintendent, transfer a principal employed by a community
school district pursuant to an agreement with the employee organization
representing such principals. The chancellor shall establish a procedure
for consulting with affected parents to explain any such transfer.
Consistent with section twenty-five hundred ninety-i of this article,
including without limitation subdivision three thereof, and subdivision
one thereof with respect to the rights and obligations of a school to
which a principal is transferred, in addition to any other law providing
for the transfer of principals, the chancellor also may cause the
transfer or removal of principals for persistent educational failure,
conflicts of interest, and ethics violations, and may require principals
to participate in training and other remedial programs to address
identified factors affecting student achievement and school performance.
 26. Establish educational and experience qualifications and
requirements for all custodial positions including, but not limited to,
custodians and custodial engineers and develop standards for evaluating
the performance of all such individuals, subject to approval of the city
board. Such performance standards shall include, but not be limited to:
the cleanliness of facilities; adequacy and timeliness of minor repairs;
maintenance of good working order of facilities and grounds; general
facilities improvement; and emergency services. The chancellor shall
promulgate regulations setting forth the respective responsibilities of
the district plant manager, which shall include regular consultation and
ongoing reports to the community superintendent, and the principal of
each school for evaluating the performance of the custodial employees
assigned to his or her school, in accordance with such performance
standards, and such performance evaluations shall be given dominant
weight in any decision for the purposes of: advancement; continued
employment; building transfers; and other performance incentives. The
responsibility of the principal of each school in the evaluation of
custodial employees may be a matter for collective bargaining with
collective bargaining representatives for principals.
 27. Develop, in conjunction with each community superintendent, a plan
for providing access to school facilities in each community school
district, when not in use for school purposes, in accordance with the
provisions of section four hundred fourteen of this chapter. Such plan
shall set forth a reasonable system of fees not to exceed the actual
costs and specify that no part of any fee shall directly or indirectly
benefit or be deposited into an account which inures to the benefit of
the custodians or custodial engineers.
 28. Establish, subject to the approval of the city board, a
publicly-inclusive process for the recruitment, screening and selection
of district superintendent candidates.
 29. Promulgate regulations, subject to the approval of the city board,
establishing educational, managerial, and administrative qualifications,
performance record criteria, and performance standards for the positions
of superintendent and principal.
 30. Select a community superintendent from candidates recommended by
community boards, based upon compliance with the procedures for
selection required by subdivision twenty-eight of this section, the
qualifications required by subdivision twenty-nine of this section, and
consistent with a model contract developed by the chancellor.
 30-a. Remove a community superintendent who fails to comply with the
provisions of subdivision two of section twenty-five hundred ninety-f of
this article.
 31. Intervene in any district or school which is persistently failing
to achieve educational results and standards approved by the city board
or established by the state board of regents, or has failed to improve
its educational results and student achievement in accordance with such
standards or state or city board requirements, or in any school or
district in which there exists, in the chancellor's judgment, a state of
uncontrolled or unaddressed violence. The chancellor may, in addition to
exercising any other powers authorized by this article, require such
school principal, or district as the case may be, to prepare a
corrective action plan, with a timetable for implementation of steps
acceptable to the chancellor to reach improvement goals consistent with
city board standards and educational results. The chancellor may require
the school or district to alter or improve the corrective action plan,
or may directly modify the plan. The chancellor shall monitor
implementation of the plan, and, if the school or district fails to
implement it, may supersede any inconsistent decision of the school
principal, community board or community superintendent; assume joint or
direct control of the operation of the school or district to implement
the corrective action plan; or take any other action authorized by this
article. Any action of the chancellor to supercede an inconsistent
decision of the school principal, community board or community
superintendent, or to assume joint or direct control of the operation of
the school or district pursuant to this subdivision may be appealed to
the city board in accordance with section twenty-five hundred ninety-g
of this article.
 32. Appoint a deputy, for each borough of the city of New York,
responsible for coordinating and periodically meeting and consulting
with the borough president, the chancellor and the community
superintendents in the borough on borough-specific issues and issues of
borough-wide significance, including the provision of services in
support of schools and community districts such as transportation,
purchasing, capital planning, and coordination with municipal services,
and chancellor and city board policy with respect to the high schools.
 33. Require community school board members to participate in training
and retraining in order to promote district and school performance and
student achievement, as a continuing condition for membership.
 35. Take all necessary steps to promote the effectiveness and
integrity of school-based budgeting pursuant to section twenty-five
hundred ninety-r of this article, including the obligations imposed by
subdivision thirty-seven of this section.
 36. Develop in consultation with the city board, a procurement policy
for the city school district of the city of New York, and the districts
and public schools therein. Such policy shall ensure the wise and
prudent use of public money in the best interest of the taxpayers of the
state; guard against favoritism, improvidence, extravagance, fraud and
corruption; and ensure that contracts are awarded consistent with law
and on the basis of best value, including, but not limited to, the
following criteria: quality, cost and efficiency. Such policy shall also
include: (a) standards for quality, function and utility of all material
goods, supplies and services purchased by the chancellor,
superintendents or schools; (b) regulations for the purchase of material
goods, supplies and services by the chancellor, the superintendents and
the schools, including clearly articulated procedures which require a
clear statement of product specifications, requirements or work to be
performed, a documentable process of soliciting bids, proposals or other
offers, and a balanced and fair method, established in advance of
receipt of offers, for evaluating offers and awarding contracts; (c)
regulations which enable superintendents and schools to purchase
material goods, supplies and services directly from vendors or suppliers
when such products are available at prices or other terms more
economically beneficial for the purposes of the acquiring superintendent
or school; and (d) regulations shall include repair services and
building supplies, as defined in such regulations, for expenditures from
each district's minor repair and purchasing funds pursuant to section
twenty-five hundred ninety-r of this article.
 37. Establish, subject to the approval of the city board, guidelines
and a system of internal controls, including internal administrative
controls and internal accounting controls, with provisions for internal
audits, as such terms are defined in section nine hundred fifty of the
executive law. Such system shall also include a system of internal
control review designed to identify weaknesses and identify actions to
rectify them; a clear and concise statement of the generally applicable
management policies and standards made available to each officer and
employee relevant to fiscal and expenditure control, in addition to
education and training efforts to ensure adequate understanding of
internal control standards and evaluation techniques; and the
designation of an internal control officer for each community district,
each of whom shall report to the chancellor and the auditor general, to
execute a regular internal audit function which shall operate in
accordance with generally accepted governmental auditing standards. The
internal auditors for the community districts shall operate in
cooperation with the auditor general, appointed by the chancellor
subject to the approval of the city board, who shall, in addition to the
functions of the internal auditors, monitor and conduct random audits of
school districts at least once every two years for fraud, waste and
mismanagement. Notwithstanding any provision of state law or state, city
or city board regulation, the internal auditors, and the auditor
general, shall be entitled, upon their request, to all and any documents
and materials bearing in their judgment on the finances and
cost-effectiveness of the schools and the school districts that is in
the possession of the community districts, the schools, or any officer
thereof.
 38. to exercise all of the duties and responsibilities of the
employing board as set forth in section three thousand twenty-a of this
chapter with respect to any member of the teaching or supervisory staff
of schools under the jurisdiction of the community boards. The
chancellor shall exercise all such duties and responsibilities for all
community districts or may delegate the exercise of all such duties and
responsibilities to all of the community superintendents of the city
district.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2026
 * § 2590-i. Powers and duties of schools; principals; provisions for
the transfer of jurisdiction of high schools. 1. The principal shall be
the administrative and instructional leader of the school. Subject to
the regulations of the chancellor and applicable collective bargaining
agreements and obligations, the principal shall be responsible for the
day to day operation of the school and shall carry out these duties in
consultation with parents, teachers and other staff, and the school
based management team pursuant to section twenty-five hundred ninety-h
of this article including:
 (a) promote an equal educational opportunity for students in the
school,
 (b) subject to school-based budgeting pursuant to section twenty-five
hundred ninety-r of this article,
 (c) subject to collective bargaining obligations and agreements, the
budget applicable to the school, and the other provisions of this
article including section twenty-five hundred ninety-j of this article,
to make recommendation on staff selection, including through the
establishment of appropriate objective criteria consistent with
chancellor's regulations for filling vacancies based upon the school's
instructional and facility needs,
 (d) subject to the standards and assessments promulgated by the
chancellor, to develop school-based curricula and syllabi for
instruction, and to address other matters relating to the instruction of
students, including the selection of texts from lists approved by the
chancellor and instructional materials, consistent with regulations of
the commissioner, and subject to the approval of the superintendent, or
chancellor in the case of schools under the jurisdiction of the city
board,
 (e) subject to the approval of the superintendent, or, where
appropriate, the chancellor and within the limits of funds made
available therefor, to enhance teacher and staff development relevant to
increasing student achievement, support extended day programs, school
reform programs, and pupil-support services,
 (f) enhance pupil support services by coordinating related programs,
 (g) to make or arrange for minor repairs as delegated by the
chancellor or superintendent pursuant to regulations of the chancellor,
or as otherwise authorized by law subject to subdivisions thirty-six and
thirty-seven of section twenty-five hundred ninety-h of this article,
 (h) subject to subdivisions thirty-six and thirty-seven of section
twenty-five hundred ninety-h of this article, identifying and purchasing
equipment and supplies that can be purchased for less than if purchased
through purchasing arrangements entered into through the city board, the
chancellor or the superintendent,
 (i) to manage and operate the school building and other facilities
under its jurisdiction.
 2. (a) The principal may be removed or transferred by the
superintendent or the chancellor for persistent educational failure of
the school or other cause. Removals may be caused pursuant to section
three thousand twenty-a of this chapter if applicable. Transfers may be
caused pursuant to subdivision twenty-five of section twenty-five
hundred ninety-h of this article. Any such removal or transfer may be
appealed to the city board, during which time the superintendent may
appoint an acting principal subject to the approval of the chancellor.
Provided however that such appointee must meet qualifications pursuant
to paragraph (c) of this subdivision. Persistent educational failure of
the school shall be defined in regulations of the chancellor to include
a pattern of poor or declining achievement; a pattern of poor or
declining attendance; disruption or violence; and continuing failure to
meet chancellor's performance standards or other standards.
 (b) The principal may be required by the chancellor or the
superintendent to participate in training or other forms of staff
development or to address identified areas of educational need and
promote student achievement and school performance.
 (c) Principals shall be selected consistent with regulations of the
chancellor establishing a process that promotes parental and staff
involvement in the recruitment, screening, interviewing and
recommendation of candidates. Candidates must meet the requirements of
regulations of the chancellor establishing educational, managerial, and
administrative qualifications, including evaluation of each candidate's
record of performance in comparable positions. In the case of schools
under the jurisdiction of the community districts, a candidate approved
by a community superintendent pursuant to paragraph (e) of subdivision
one of section twenty-five hundred ninety-f of this article may
nonetheless, before assuming the position, be rejected by the chancellor
for cause. In the case of schools not under the jurisdiction of the
community districts, the chancellor shall additionally consult with
members of the school based management team prior to appointing a
principal candidate to any such school.
 3. Provisions for transfer of jurisdiction of high schools. Pursuant
to regulations of the chancellor approved by the city board, any high
school, other than a special senior academic or vocational high school
of city-wide competitive admission, may be transferred from the
jurisdiction of the city board to the jurisdiction of the community
district in which it is located, or from such community district to the
city board, upon the consent of the chancellor and the community
superintendent. In such event, the chancellor and the superintendent
shall promptly take all necessary steps to effectuate the transfer.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2026
 * § 2590-i. Powers and duties of schools; principals; provisions for
the transfer of jurisdiction of high schools. 1. The principal shall be
the administrative and instructional leader of the school. Subject to
the regulations of the chancellor and applicable collective bargaining
agreements and obligations, the principal shall be responsible for the
day to day operation of the school and shall carry out these duties in
consultation with parents, teachers and other staff pursuant to section
twenty-five hundred ninety-h of this article including:
 (a) promote an equal educational opportunity for students in the
school,
 (b) subject to school-based budgeting pursuant to section twenty-five
hundred ninety-r of this article,
 (c) subject to collective bargaining obligations and agreements, the
budget applicable to the school, and the other provisions of this
article including section twenty-five hundred ninety-j of this article,
to make recommendation on staff selection, including through the
establishment of appropriate objective criteria consistent with
chancellor's regulations for filling vacancies based upon the school's
instructional and facility needs,
 (d) subject to the standards and assessments promulgated by the
chancellor, to develop school-based curricula and syllabi for
instruction, and to address other matters relating to the instruction of
students, including the selection of texts from lists approved by the
chancellor and instructional materials, consistent with regulations of
the commissioner, and subject to the approval of the superintendent, or
chancellor in the case of schools under the jurisdiction of the city
board,
 (e) subject to the approval of the superintendent, or, where
appropriate, the chancellor and within the limits of funds made
available therefor, to enhance teacher and staff development relevant to
increasing student achievement, support extended day programs, school
reform programs, and pupil-support services,
 (f) enhance pupil support services by coordinating related programs,
 (g) to make or arrange for minor repairs as delegated by the
chancellor or superintendent pursuant to regulations of the chancellor,
or as otherwise authorized by law subject to subdivisions thirty-six and
thirty-seven of section twenty-five hundred ninety-h of this article,
 (h) subject to subdivisions thirty-six and thirty-seven of section
twenty-five hundred nine-h of this article, identifying and purchasing
equipment and supplies that can be purchased for less than if purchased
through purchasing arrangements entered into through the city board, the
chancellor or the superintendent,
 (i) to manage and operate the school building and other facilities
under its jurisdiction.
 2. (a) The principal may be removed or transferred by the
superintendent or the chancellor for persistent educational failure of
the school or other cause. Removals may be caused pursuant to section
three thousand twenty-a of this chapter if applicable. Transfers may be
caused pursuant to subdivision twenty-five of section twenty-five
hundred ninety-h of this article. Any such removal or transfer may be
appealed to the city board, during which time the superintendent may
appoint an acting principal subject to the approval of the chancellor.
Provided however that such appointee must meet qualifications pursuant
to paragraph (d) of this subdivision. Persistent educational failure of
the school shall be defined in regulations of the chancellor to include
a pattern of poor or declining achievement; a pattern of poor or
declining attendance; disruption or violence; and continuing failure to
meet chancellor's performance standards or other standards.
 (b) The principal may be required by the chancellor or the
superintendent to participate in training or other forms of staff
development or to address identified areas of educational need and
promote student achievement and school performance.
 (c) Principals shall be selected consistent with regulations of the
chancellor establishing a process that promotes parental and staff
involvement in the recruitment, screening, interviewing and
recommendation of candidates. Candidates must meet the requirements of
regulations of the chancellor and the city board establishing
educational, managerial, and administrative qualifications, including
evaluation of each candidate's record of performance in comparable
positions. In the case of schools under the jurisdiction of the
community districts, a candidate approved by a community superintendent
may nonetheless, before assuming the position, be rejected by the
chancellor for cause.
 3. Provisions for transfer of jurisdiction of high schools. Pursuant
to regulations of the chancellor approved by the city board, any high
school, other than a special senior academic or vocational high school
of city-wide competitive admission, may be transferred from the
jurisdiction of the city board to the jurisdiction of the community
district in which it is located, or from such community district to the
city board, upon the consent of the chancellor and the community
superintendent. In such event, the chancellor and the superintendent
shall promptly take all necessary steps to effectuate the transfer.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2026
 § 2590-j. Appointment and removal of persons in the teaching and
supervisory service. 1. Persons in the teaching and supervisory service
in all schools in the city system shall be appointed as prescribed by
this section.
 2. The chancellor shall promulgate minimum education and experience
requirements for all teaching and supervisory service positions which
shall not be less than minimum state requirements for certification, and
with the approval of the city board shall create and abolish the titles
of all positions in the teaching and supervisory service.
 4. (a) The chancellor shall appoint and assign teachers for all
schools and programs under the jurisdiction of the city board from
eligible lists of prospective appointees selected by random selection
from qualifying eligible lists.
 (b) The chancellor shall appoint and assign all supervisory personnel
for all schools and programs under the jurisdiction of the city board
from persons on qualifying eligible lists.
 (c) Consistent with the provisions of sections twenty-five hundred
ninety-f, twenty-five hundred ninety-h and twenty-five hundred ninety-i
of this article, the district superintendent shall appoint teachers for
all schools and programs under the community district's jurisdiction who
are assigned to the district by the chancellor from eligible lists of
prospective appointees selected by random selection from qualifying
eligible lists. Insofar as practicable the chancellor, when making such
assignments shall give effect to the requests for assignment of specific
persons by the community superintendent. The community superintendent
shall appoint such teachers to schools within such district within
thirty days if such appointment is to be effective on a date subsequent
thereto and within three days if such appointment is to be effective
immediately.
 (d) Each community superintendent shall appoint and assign all
supervisory personnel for all schools and programs under his or her
jurisdiction from persons on qualifying eligible lists except for those
personnel appointed pursuant to paragraph (d) of subdivision one of
section twenty-five hundred ninety-f of this article.
 (e) No person who is related within the third degree of consanguinity
or affinity to the chancellor or to any member of the city board or to
any community superintendent or to any member of a community board shall
commence employment with the city or community district of which such
relative is a member, chancellor or superintendent, except upon the
consent of two-thirds of the members of the city board or such community
board, as the case may be, to be determined at a public meeting of the
city board or such community board.
 5. (a) The chancellor shall cause a comprehensive reading examination
to be administered to all pupils in all schools under the jurisdiction
of the community districts annually. Prior to October first of every
year each school shall be ranked in order of the percentage of pupils
reading at or above grade level as determined by such examination, in
accordance with rules to be promulgated by the chancellor.
 (b) If the ranking of a school under the jurisdiction of a community
district falls in the lower forty-five percent of the ranking of all
such schools, as provided in paragraph (a) of this subdivision, the
community superintendent of such school (hereinafter called an eligible
school) may appoint teachers to such school in conformity with this
subdivision, any other provision of this section or chapter
notwithstanding, provided, that in the first year during which this
paragraph is operative, only a school in the lower forty percent shall
be an eligible school.
 (c) The community superintendent of each eligible school may between
October first in the year in which the foregoing examination was
administered and the following May first, appoint any person a teacher
in such school for the school year commencing in September of the year
following such examination without regard to any competitive eligibility
lists or open qualifying lists established pursuant to this section,
provided that such person, will on the effective date of such
appointment, have the education and experience qualifications for
certification as a teacher pursuant to article sixty-one of this chapter
and shall:
 (i) be on a qualifying eligible list or be on an existing competitive
eligible list for such position; or
 (ii) have passed a test or tests acceptable to the commissioner at a
pass mark established by the commissioner. This paragraph shall not
restrict the right of the chancellor to establish appropriate medical
requirements for all teachers. The chancellor shall cause such test or
tests to be offered at reasonable intervals at one or more cities in the
commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
 (d) Such community superintendent may waive his or her rights under
paragraph (c) of this subdivision and elect to appoint teachers under
paragraph (c) of subdivision four of this section.
 (e) All teachers appointed under paragraph (c) of this subdivision
shall for all purposes, have the same status, rights and duties as
teachers appointed under paragraph (c) of subdivision four of this
section.
 6. If a vacancy exists for a teaching position in any community
district for which there are no names on any appropriate eligible list
in force, the community superintendent of such district may appoint and
assign any person to fill such position who complies with paragraph (c)
of subdivision five of this section.
 6-a. (a) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any person who
has served continuously as a substitute teacher in the schools of the
city system since the fourteenth day of September, nineteen hundred
seventy shall be appointed to probationary service in the school he is
serving in as of June first, nineteen hundred seventy-two effective
September sixth, nineteen hundred seventy-two provided a vacancy exists
in the school for the school year commencing September nineteen hundred
seventy-two and provided his name appears on an appropriate eligible
list in existence on June first, nineteen hundred seventy-two without
regard to his relative standing on such list, and thereafter he shall be
subject to all the existing provisions of law and negotiated agreements
in the same manner as any other appointee.
 (b) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, persons awaiting
appointment from eligible lists shall be assigned and appointed in
ranked order by the city board on September sixth, nineteen hundred
seventy-two to those vacancies which were in existence on June first,
nineteen hundred seventy-two and continued to be in existence on
September sixth, nineteen hundred seventy-two.
 7. (a) No member of the teaching or supervisory staff of schools who
has served the full and appropriate probationary period prescribed by,
or in accordance with law, shall be found guilty of any charges except
after a hearing as provided by section three thousand twenty-a of this
chapter.
 (b) Charges may be initiated by the community superintendent against
any such employee for any of the following offenses:
 (1) Unauthorized absence from duty or excessive lateness;
 (2) Neglect of duty;
 (3) Conduct unbecoming his position, or conduct prejudicial to the
good order, efficiency or discipline of the service;
 (4) Incompetent or inefficient service;
 (5) A violation of the by-laws, rules or regulations of the city
board, chancellor, or the community board; or
 (6) Any substantial cause that renders the employee unfit to perform
his obligations properly to the service.
 (c) The community superintendent, in advance of the filing of charges
and specifications, shall inform the employee accused and the community
board of the nature of the complaint. No charge shall be brought outside
the statute of limitation period provided for in section three thousand
twenty-a of this chapter.
 (d) Upon the service of a copy of the charges upon such employee, the
community superintendent may recommend to the chancellor the suspension
of any such employee. If the chancellor shall determine that the nature
of the charge requires the immediate removal of the employee from his
assigned duties, he may suspend such employee for a period not exceeding
ninety days pending hearing and determination of charges, provided
however, that such employee shall be entitled to receive full
compensation during the period of suspension. In case the employee is
acquitted, he shall be restored to his position.
 8. The community superintendent may transfer members of the teaching
and supervisory service without their consent within the district for
the following reasons only:
 (a) Disciplinary action pursuant to subdivision seven of this section,
 (b) Excess staff in a specific school,
 (c) To staff a new school, or
 (d) To fill a vacancy in another school within the district; provided,
however, (i) that such transfers shall be made in inverse order of
seniority in the school from which made, (ii) that the school to which
the person is transferred has a higher number of vacant positions
subsequent to such transfer than the school from which transferred,
(iii) that there is no appropriate eligible list for such position, (iv)
that no other qualified person within the district makes application to
fill such position, and (v) such vacancy has existed for at least two
weeks.
 In exercising the power granted in paragraphs (b) and (c), hereof the
community superintendent shall comply with all collective negotiation
agreements.
 8-a. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision eight of this
section, a community superintendent shall request the chancellor to
transfer a principal pursuant to subdivision twenty-five of section
twenty-five hundred ninety-h of this article, or to remove or otherwise
discipline the principal pursuant to section three thousand twenty-a of
this chapter, or to require the principal to participate in training and
staff development, or to take other actions to promote student
achievement and school performance, where appropriate, consistent with
the obligations of the superintendent pursuant to section twenty-five
hundred ninety-f and the provisions of section twenty-five hundred
ninety-i of this article.
 9. (a) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, appointments of
persons to vacancies in teaching positions in the city system shall be
made in the following order:
 (1) Persons who have been displaced from other positions and persons
on preferred lists, in accordance with the provisions of section
twenty-five hundred eighty-eight of this chapter.
 (2) Persons on eligible lists who were employed in the city school
district who have served satisfactorily for two terms as a regular
appointee or as a regular substitute or as a per diem certificate holder
in any license area or four terms as a paraprofessional or school aide
provided that such service was not rendered more than five years prior
to the date of promulgation of the qualifying eligible list on which
their names appear.
 (3) All other persons, as otherwise provided in this chapter.
 (4) Nothing contained in subparagraphs two or three of this
subdivision shall be construed to prevent a community superintendent of
an eligible school as defined in subdivision five of this section from
electing to appoint persons in the manner authorized in said
subdivision.
 (b) Subject to the provisions of subdivision two of section
twenty-five hundred ninety-i of this article with respect to principals,
appointments pursuant to subparagraph two of paragraph (a) of this
subdivision shall be made in the manner prescribed in subdivision ten of
section twenty-five hundred seventy-three of this chapter and in
subdivision four of this section as if the persons covered by such
subparagraphs constituted the entire list.
 § 2590-k. Contracts with city university of New York for
administration of high schools. 1. The city board and the city
university of New York are hereby authorized and empowered to enter into
a contract or contracts whereby such university will administer not more
than five high schools under the jurisdiction of the city board selected
from among those schools which exhibit the greatest degree of
disadvantage as measured by such factors as the proportion of students
earning general diplomas, the percentage of students reading below grade
level, the attrition rate, the proportion of students residing in
officially designated poverty areas, and similar measures.
 2. Such contract may provide for the delegation by the city board of
any of its functions, powers, and duties or of a community board, or
those of the chancellor or a community superintendent, in connection
with the operation of such high schools, to the city university of New
York, except the power to appoint or terminate the employment of any
employee. The terms and conditions of employment shall continue to
remain under the jurisdiction of the city board.
 3. The provisions of section sixty-two hundred nine of this chapter
with respect to the apportionment of public school moneys shall be
applicable to the high schools included in any such contract or
contracts.
 § 2590-l. Enforcement of applicable law, regulations and directives;
establishment of appeal board. * 1. (a) If, in the judgment of the
chancellor any community district education council and/or
superintendent fails to comply with any applicable provisions of law,
by-laws, rules or regulations, standards, directives and agreements, he
or she may, in addition to or as an alternative to any other remedies
authorized by this article, including subdivision thirty-one of section
twenty-five hundred ninety-h of this article, issue an order requiring
the community district education council and/or superintendent to cease
its improper conduct or to take required action and consistent with the
provisions of this article and the educational and operational policies
of the city board, may enforce that order by the use of appropriate
means, including:
 (i) supersession of the community district education council and/or
superintendent by the chancellor or one or more trustees appointed by
him who may be, notwithstanding any other provision of law, employees of
the city board with respect to those powers and duties or decisions of
such community district education council and/or superintendent deemed
necessary to ensure compliance with the order; and
 (ii) suspension or removal of the community district education council
and/or superintendent or any member or members thereof.
 (b) Prior to the enforcement of any order authorized under this
section, the chancellor shall provide an opportunity for conciliation,
except that the chancellor without conciliation may suspend or remove
one or more members of a community district education council or a
community superintendent where the conduct (i) is criminal in nature;
(ii) poses an immediate danger to the safety or welfare of students or
any school staff or employee, or (iii) in the judgment of the
chancellor, is contrary to the best interest of the city school
district.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2026
 * 1. (a) If, in the judgment of the chancellor any community board
and/or superintendent fails to comply with any applicable provisions of
law, by-laws, rules or regulations, standards, directives and
agreements, he or she may, in addition to or as an alternative to any
other remedies authorized by this article, including subdivision
thirty-one of section twenty-five hundred ninety-h of this article,
issue an order requiring the community board and/or superintendent to
cease its improper conduct or to take required action and consistent
with the provisions of this article and the educational and operational
policies of the city board, may enforce that order by the use of
appropriate means, including:
 (i) supersession of the community board and/or superintendent by the
chancellor or one or more trustees appointed by him who may be,
notwithstanding any other provision of law, employees of the city board
with respect to those powers and duties or decisions of such community
board and/or superintendent deemed necessary to ensure compliance with
the order; and
 (ii) suspension or removal of the community board and/or
superintendent or any member or members thereof.
 (b) Prior to the enforcement of any order authorized under this
section, the chancellor shall provide an opportunity for conciliation,
except that the chancellor without conciliation may suspend or remove
one or more members of a community board or a community superintendent
where the conduct (i) is criminal in nature; (ii) poses an immediate
danger to the safety or welfare of students or any school staff or
employee, or (iii) in the judgment of the chancellor, is contrary to the
best interest of the city school district.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2026
 2. The community board or any suspended or removed member and/or
superintendent thereof may, within fifteen days after issuance of such
order, file an appeal with the city board acting as an appeal board
pursuant to subdivision ten of section twenty-five hundred ninety-g of
this article.
 * 2-a. A member of a community district education council may be
removed upon a finding that the member willfully, intentionally or
knowingly interfered with or was involved in the hiring, appointment or
assignment of employees other than as specifically authorized in this
article. Such a finding, unless judicially overturned pursuant to
article seventy-eight of the civil practice law and rules, shall
permanently disqualify that member from employment, contracting or
membership with or on any community district education council or the
city board or any employment or contractual relationship, direct or
indirect, with the city district, any community district, or any public
school in such districts.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2026
 * 2-a. A member of a community school district board may be removed
upon a finding that the member willfully, intentionally or knowingly
interfered with or was involved in the hiring, appointment or assignment
of employees other than as specifically authorized in this article. Such
a finding, unless judicially overturned pursuant to article
seventy-eight of the civil practice law and rules, shall permanently
disqualify that member from employment, contracting or membership with
or on any community board or the city board or any employment or
contractual relationship, direct or indirect, with the city district,
any community district, or any public school in such districts.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2026
 § 2590-m. Custody and disbursement of funds. * 1. Public moneys
apportioned to the city district by the state and all funds raised or
collected by the authorities of such city for school purposes or to be
used by the city board or by any community board for any purpose
authorized by this chapter, or any other funds belonging to the city
district or a community district and received from any source whatsoever
for school purposes, shall be paid into the city treasury and shall be
credited to the city board or to the respective community councils.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2026
 * 1. Public moneys apportioned to the city district by the state and
all funds raised or collected by the authorities of such city for school
purposes or to be used by the city board or by any community board for
any purpose authorized by this chapter, or any other funds belonging to
the city district or a community district and received from any source
whatsoever for school purposes, shall be paid into the city treasury and
shall be credited to the city board or to the respective community
boards.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2026
 2. The fund so received into such treasury shall be kept separate and
distinct from any other funds received therein. The officer having
charge thereof shall give such additional security for the safe custody
thereof as the corporate authorities of the city of New York shall
require.
 * 3. a. Funds credited to the city board shall be disbursed upon
written orders of the director of finance of the city signed by the
chancellor or such other officer or officers as the city board
authorize. Funds credited to a community council shall be disbursed upon
written orders of the director of finance of the city signed by the
community superintendent and such other officer or officers as such
board may authorize.
 b. If an auditor shall have been appointed by the chancellor or any
community district education council, such orders shall be signed by
such auditor; provided, however, that the chancellor and any such
district education council may in addition require the signature of such
other officer or officers as the chancellor may direct or as such
district education council may by resolution direct.
 c. Orders issued under this subdivision shall specify the purpose for
which they are drawn and the person to whom they are payable.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2026
 * 3. a. Funds credited to the city board shall be disbursed upon
written orders of the director of finance of the city signed by the
chancellor or such other officer or officers as the city board
authorize. Funds credited to a community board shall be disbursed upon
written orders of the director of finance of the city signed by the
community superintendent and such other officer or officers as such
board may authorize.
 b. If an auditor shall have been appointed by the city board or any
community board, such orders shall be signed by such auditor; provided,
however, that the city board and any such board may in addition require
the signature of such other officer or officers as it may by resolution
direct.
 c. Orders issued under this subdivision shall specify the purpose for
which they are drawn and the person to whom they are payable.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2026
 * 4. a. It shall be unlawful for the director of finance of the city
to permit any funds placed in his custody under the provisions of this
section to be used for any purpose other than that for which they are
lawfully authorized.
 b. Such funds shall be paid out only on audit of the city board
through the chancellor or the community council to which such funds are
credited, except as otherwise provided in subdivision five of this
section.
 c. Payments from such funds shall be made only by checks signed by the
director of finance of the city and payable to the person entitled
thereto and countersigned by the comptroller of the city of New York.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2026
 * 4. a. It shall be unlawful for the director of finance of the city
to permit any funds placed in his custody under the provisions of this
section to be used for any purpose other than that for which they are
lawfully authorized.
 b. Such funds shall be paid out only on audit of the city board
through the chancellor or the community board to which such funds are
credited, except as otherwise provided in subdivision five of this
section.
 c. Payments from such funds shall be made only by checks signed by the
director of finance of the city and payable to the person entitled
thereto and countersigned by the comptroller of the city of New York.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2026
 * 5. Fixed salaries, principal of and interest on indebtedness and
amounts becoming due upon lawful contracts for periods exceeding one
year may be disbursed without prior audit by the city board or the
council to which such funds are credited.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2026
 * 5. Fixed salaries, principal of and interest on indebtedness and
amounts becoming due upon lawful contracts for periods exceeding one
year may be disbursed without prior audit by the city board or the board
to which such funds are credited.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2026
 * 6. The chancellor, city board and each district education council
referred to in this section shall make, in addition to such
classification of its funds as it desires for its own use and
information, such further classification of the funds credited to it and
of the disbursement thereof as the comptroller of the city of New York
shall require; provided that the classification of funds by community
councils shall be in accordance with the altered schedules developed
pursuant to subdivision eight of section twenty-five hundred ninety-i of
this article. The chancellor, city board and community district
education councils shall furnish such data in relation to such funds and
their disbursements as the comptroller of the city of New York shall
require.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2026
 * 6. The city board and each board referred to in this section shall
make, in addition to such classification of its funds as it desires for
its own use and information, such further classification of the funds
credited to it and of the disbursement thereof as the comptroller of the
city of New York shall require; provided that the classification of
funds by community boards shall be in accordance with the altered
schedules developed pursuant to subdivision eight of section twenty-five
hundred ninety-i of this article. The city board and community boards
shall furnish such data in relation to such funds and their
disbursements as the comptroller of the city of New York shall require.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2026
 7. The comptroller of the city of New York shall audit the accounts of
the city board and each community district, and, subject to laws
safeguarding the disclosure of individual information, make public the
results of such audits, at least once every four years; provided that
this section shall not limit the obligations of the school districts
pursuant to section twenty-one hundred sixteen-a of this chapter. The
comptroller of the city of New York shall be entitled to the cooperation
of the commissioner of finance of the city of New York, the chief fiscal
investigations officer and the internal auditors appointed pursuant to
subdivision thirty-seven of section twenty-five hundred ninety-h of this
article.
 * 8. Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the powers
and duties conferred on a community district education council by this
section shall be exercised exclusively by the community superintendent
employed by such council.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2026
 * 8. Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the powers
and duties conferred on a community school board by this section shall
be exercised exclusively by the community superintendent employed by
such board.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2026
 § 2590-n. Conflicts of interest. * 1. It shall be unlawful for any
community board member, community superintendent, or any such other
officer or employee in schools and programs under the jurisdiction of
the community board as the chancellor by regulation shall specify, to be
directly or indirectly interested in the furnishing of any supplies or
materials, or in the doing of any work or labor, or in the sale or
leasing of any real estate, or in any proposal, agreement, or contract
for any of these purposes, in any case in which the price or
consideration is to be paid, in whole or in part, directly or
indirectly, out of any school moneys, or who shall have received from
any source whatever any commission or compensation in connection with
any of the matters aforesaid.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2026
 * 1. It shall be unlawful for any community board member, community
superintendent or any such other officer or employee in schools and
programs under the jurisdiction of the community board as the city board
by regulation shall specify, to be directly or indirectly interested in
the furnishing of any supplies or materials, or in the doing of any work
or labor, or in the sale or leasing of any real estate, or in any
proposal, agreement or contract for any of these purposes, in any case
in which the price or consideration is to be paid, in whole or in part,
directly or indirectly, out of any school moneys, or who shall have
received from any source whatever any commission or compensation in
connection with any of the matters aforesaid.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2026
 2. a. A community board member may not (i) use his official authority
or influence for the purpose of interfering with or affecting the result
of an election or a nomination for office; or (ii) directly or
indirectly coerce, attempt to coerce or command a community board
employee or a city board employee to pay, lend or contribute anything of
value to a party, committee, organization, agency or person for
political purposes or to participate in any political campaign.
 b. Notwithstanding any provision of this subdivision to the contrary,
a community board member may participate in, affect or aid the result of
such person's own election or nomination for office or express opinions
on political subjects and candidates.
 c. Nothing in this subdivision shall be construed (i) to limit the
applicability of section one hundred seven of the civil service law to
community board members; or (ii) to preclude a community board member
from carrying out any duty prescribed by law.
 3. Violation of this section shall constitute cause for removal from
office in accordance with notice and hearing provisions contained in
regulations and by-laws of the city board.
 4. The provisions of this section shall not apply to authors of school
books used in any of the public schools because of any interest they may
have as authors in such books.
 * § 2590-o. Educational facilities master plan. 1. In accordance with
the schedule set forth in subdivision two of this section, the
chancellor shall prepare an educational facilities master plan to take
effect on July first, nineteen hundred eighty-nine, which shall set
forth all the actions necessary to restore the city's educational
facilities to a state of good repair by January first, two thousand. The
plan shall (i) set forth the minimum acceptable standards for each type
of educational facility and the number and identity to the extent
ascertainable of facilities of each such type that the chancellor
believes do not currently meet such minimum standards, (ii) identify
those facility defects and shortcomings that most seriously impede
learning and teaching, (iii) describe the remedial measures proposed to
be taken, (iv) establish priorities for their initiation and completion,
including a list of prioritized projects to the extent ascertainable and
(v) list each proposed new educational facility and set forth a
justification, including demographic data, documenting the longterm need
therefor. In addition, the master plan shall include an estimate of its
cost and such other information as the chancellor shall determine.
 2. No later than January sixth, nineteen hundred eighty-nine, the
chancellor shall, in conjunction with the submission of the five-year
educational facilities capital plan required by section twenty-five
hundred ninety-p of this chapter, submit the master plan to each
community school board, which shall conduct a public hearing on both the
educational facilities master plan and the five-year educational
facilities capital plan and shall prepare and submit recommendations to
the chancellor on or before February twentieth, nineteen hundred
eighty-nine with respect to matters in the plans that involve that
school district. The chancellor shall consider the recommendations
received from the community school boards, and, on or before March
eighth, nineteen hundred eighty-nine, shall submit a final educational
facilities master plan to the city board for its approval. On or before
March twenty-second, nineteen hundred eighty-nine, the city board shall
approve the educational facilities master plan submitted by the
chancellor or such plan as is determined by the city board.
 ** 3. No later than January first, nineteen hundred ninety-three, the
chancellor shall prepare and submit a preliminary proposed revision to
the educational facilities master plan to the city board and to each
community school board. This proposed revision shall reflect the
progress achieved during the first three years of the master plan and
shall incorporate such changes to the master plan as the chancellor
deems necessary. Each such community school board shall conduct a public
hearing and shall prepare and submit recommendations to the chancellor
on or before March first, nineteen hundred ninety-three with respect to
matters in the plan that involve that school district. The chancellor
shall consider the recommendations received from the community school
boards, and, on or before April first, nineteen hundred ninety-three,
shall submit a final proposed revision to the master plan to the city
board for its approval. On or before May first of such year, the city
board shall approve the revision to the educational facilities master
plan submitted by the chancellor.
 ** NB Effective until June 30, 2026
 ** 3. No later than January first, nineteen hundred ninety-three, the
chancellor shall prepare and submit a preliminary proposed revision to
the educational facilities master plan to the city board and to each
community school board. This proposed revision shall reflect the
progress achieved during the first three years of the master plan and
shall incorporate such changes to the master plan as the chancellor
deems necessary. Each such community school board shall conduct a public
hearing and shall prepare and submit recommendations to the chancellor
on or before March first, nineteen hundred ninety-three with respect to
matters in the plan that involve that school district. The chancellor
shall consider the recommendations received from the community school
boards, and, on or before April first, nineteen hundred ninety-three,
shall submit a final proposed revision to the master plan to the city
board for its approval. On or before May first of such year, the city
board shall approve the revision to the educational facilities master
plan submitted by the chancellor or such plan as is determined by the
city board.
 ** NB Effective June 30, 2026
 * NB There are 2 § 2590-o's
 * § 2590-o. Neutrality of school employees in community board
elections. 1. In their official capacities during school hours all
school, community district and city district employees shall maintain a
posture of complete neutrality with respect to elections of candidates
for community board. No school, community district or city district
facilities or supplies shall be used on behalf of any candidate.
 2. The city board shall have the authority and responsibility with
regard to the investigation and trial of employees against whom
violations of this section are charged. Wilful violations of this
section shall constitute cause for removal from office or termination of
employment.
 3. The city board shall adopt regulations to achieve the purposes of
this section.
 * NB There are 2 § 2590-o's
 § 2590-p. Educational facilities capital plan. 1. In accordance with
subdivision three of this section, the chancellor shall prepare proposed
five-year educational facilities capital plans. Each such plan shall
describe each program element proposed in the plan, and shall set forth
an estimate of the cost of each program element, an estimate of the
capital funding required each year and the expected sources of such
funding. The plan shall also set forth an estimate of the cost of each
project identified in the plan, shall assign priorities to the projects
included therein and shall state the year in which each such project's
design and construction is proposed to be initiated and estimated to be
completed. In preparing the plan and each project contained therein, the
chancellor shall factor and account for the effect of data provided by
the office of city planning, the department of buildings, the department
of housing preservation and development and the department of health and
mental hygiene pursuant to subdivisions thirteen-a, thirteen-b,
thirteen-c, and thirteen-d of section seventeen hundred twenty-eight of
the public authorities law.
 2. Program elements shall mean the following categories of work and,
with respect to each such category, the plan shall include the following
information:
 a. New construction: The plan shall identify the type, approximate
size in terms of gross square footage and student capacity and
approximate location of each proposed new educational facility, and if
the construction of such new facility is to result in the closing or
replacement of an existing educational facility or facilities, the plan
shall identify each such facility to be closed or replaced.
 b. Building additions: The plan shall identify each educational
facility for which a building addition is proposed and describe the
nature, purpose and approximate size of such addition.
 c. Major modernization and rehabilitation: The plan shall identify
each educational facility at which a rehabilitation or major
modernization is to be performed, describe the general scope of such
work at each such facility and describe the nature and estimated cost of
the arrangements proposed in order to accommodate any students who will
be temporarily displaced as a result of the work.
 d. Athletic fields, playgrounds and pools: The plan shall identify
each educational facility at which an athletic field, playground or pool
is to be constructed or at which an existing athletic field, playground
or pool is to be the subject of a major repair or rehabilitation.
 e. System replacements: The plan shall identify (i) each particular
system to be replaced, in part or in its entirety, including electrical,
plumbing, boilers, elevators, heating, ventilation and air conditioning,
roof replacement, window replacement, kitchens and warming pantries,
lighting, exterior masonry and painting and plaster, (ii) the general
standards to be adopted for such replacement systems and (iii) the
number, and to the extent ascertainable, the identity of educational
facilities in each borough at which each such system replacement is to
be performed.
 f. Security: The plan shall describe the nature of security devices
and systems proposed to be installed at educational facilities and the
number, and to the extent ascertainable, the identity of facilities in
each borough at which such a security system is to be installed.
 g. Educational enhancements: The plan shall describe programs for the
redesign and reconfiguration of space within educational facilities in
order to enhance educational activities therein, including the
installation of wiring or other facilities to permit or facilitate the
use of computers or other educational devices and equipment and shall
identify the number, and to the extent ascertainable, the identity of
educational facilities in each borough at which such educational
enhancement programs shall be undertaken.
 h. Emergency, unspecified and miscellaneous: The plan shall include an
estimate of the funding requirements to perform emergency projects,
unspecified projects and miscellaneous capital activities; provided,
however, that the cost of such program element shall not exceed five
percent of the total estimated cost of the five-year capital plan.
 * 3. a. No later than January sixth, nineteen hundred eighty-nine, the
chancellor shall, in conjunction with the submission of the educational
facilities master plan required by section twenty-five hundred ninety-o
of this chapter, submit the initial proposed five-year educational
facilities capital plan to each community district education council,
which shall conduct a public hearing on both the educational facilities
master plan and the five-year educational facilities capital plan and
shall prepare and submit recommendations to the chancellor on or before
February twentieth, nineteen hundred eighty-nine with respect to matters
in the plans that involve that school district. The chancellor shall
consider the recommendations received from the community district
education councils on both the proposed educational facilities master
plan and the proposed five-year educational facilities capital plan,
and, on or before March eighth, nineteen hundred eighty-nine, shall
submit a final proposed five-year educational facilities capital plan to
the city board for its approval. On or before March twenty-second,
nineteen hundred eighty-nine, the city board shall approve the five-year
educational facilities capital plan submitted by the chancellor or such
plan as is determined by the city board, which shall take effect on July
first, nineteen hundred eighty-nine.
 b. Commencing on November first, nineteen hundred ninety-three, and
every five years thereafter, the chancellor shall submit a proposed
five-year educational facilities capital plan to take effect on the
succeeding July first to each community school district education
council, which shall conduct a public hearing and shall prepare and
submit recommendations to the chancellor on or before January first of
the ensuing year with respect to matters in the plan that involve that
school district. Upon submission of such recommendations to the
chancellor, the board shall make public, pursuant to this paragraph:
 (i) a summary of the issues raised at such hearing;
 (ii) a statement of the reasons why any significant alternative
recommendations at such hearing were or were not incorporated into the
final plan; and
 (iii) a description of any changes made to the proposed plan as a
result of the issues raised at such hearing.
 The chancellor shall consider the recommendations received from the
community district education councils, and, on or before February first
of such year, shall submit a final proposed five-year educational
facilities capital plan to the city board for its approval pursuant to
paragraph (d) of subdivision one of section twenty-five hundred ninety-g
of this article.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2026
 * 3. a. No later than January sixth, nineteen hundred eighty-nine, the
chancellor shall, in conjunction with the submission of the educational
facilities master plan required by section twenty-five hundred ninety-o
of this chapter, submit the initial proposed five-year educational
facilities capital plan to each community school board, which shall
conduct a public hearing on both the educational facilities master plan
and the five-year educational facilities capital plan and shall prepare
and submit recommendations to the chancellor on or before February
twentieth, nineteen hundred eighty-nine with respect to matters in the
plans that involve that school district. The chancellor shall consider
the recommendations received from the community school boards on both
the proposed educational facilities master plan and the proposed
five-year educational facilities capital plan, and, on or before March
eighth, nineteen hundred eighty-nine, shall submit a final proposed
five-year educational facilities capital plan to the city board for its
approval. On or before March twenty-second, nineteen hundred
eighty-nine, the city board shall approve the five-year educational
facilities capital plan submitted by the chancellor or such plan as is
determined by the city board, which shall take effect on July first,
nineteen hundred eighty-nine.
 b. Commencing on November first, nineteen hundred ninety-three, and
every five years thereafter, the chancellor shall submit a proposed
five-year educational facilities capital plan to take effect on the
succeeding July first to each community school district education
council, which shall conduct a public hearing and shall prepare and
submit recommendations to the chancellor on or before January first of
the ensuing year with respect to matters in the plan that involve that
school district. The chancellor shall consider the recommendations
received from the community school district education council, and, on
or before February first of such year, shall submit a final proposed
five-year educational facilities capital plan to the city board for its
approval. On or before March first of such year, the city board shall
approve the five-year educational facilities capital plan submitted by
the chancellor or such plan as is determined by the city board. Upon
submission of such recommendations to the chancellor, the board shall
make public, pursuant to this paragraph:
 (i) a summary of the issues raised at such hearing;
 (ii) a statement of the reasons why any significant alternative
recommendations at such hearing were or were not incorporated into the
final plan; and
 (iii) a description of any changes made to the proposed plan as a
result of the issues raised at such hearing.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2026
 * 4. Following approval by the city board of a five-year educational
facilities capital plan, the chancellor shall submit such plan to the
mayor and the council of the city of New York for their approval. After
consultation with the chancellor and the city board, the mayor shall
include in the city's executive capital budget for the fiscal year in
which the five-year plan is to commence an appropriation for educational
facilities in an amount he or she recommends as sufficient to provide
for the funding of a five-year capital program for the city board and
shall specify amounts for each fiscal year within such five year period.
Such five-year appropriation, which shall specify the annual amounts for
each fiscal year to be made available, shall be subject to adoption,
veto, and, except as hereinafter provided, amendment in accordance with
the procedures set forth in the charter of the city of New York. Upon
adoption of a five-year appropriation pursuant to such process, the
capital program of the city board shall, if the amount so appropriated
differs from the cost estimated in the plan approved by the city board,
be amended to reflect the funding so provided. No reduction shall
thereafter be made by the city in the amount of such appropriation until
completion of the plan, unless (i) the chancellor with the approval of
the city board shall so recommend or (ii) a general, across-the-board
reduction is made in the city's capital appropriations in order to
accommodate an unforeseen reduction in the availability of city capital
funds. In the event the chancellor with the approval of the city board
so recommends or such a reduction is made, the appropriation may be
reduced in accordance with such recommendation or proportionately to the
reduction in the city's general capital appropriations. In the event the
chancellor with the approval of the city board requests additional
appropriations from such city during the five-year period of the then
effective plan, the chancellor shall specify the needs to be met by such
additional appropriations. The city may appropriate an additional amount
for the five-year educational facilities capital plan; provided that in
no event shall such an additional appropriation be conditioned upon a
reduction or alteration of the five-year plan then in effect. The
authority may not spend more in any fiscal year of the capital program
than the amount specified in the five-year city appropriation therefor,
as amended from time to time; provided that any amounts not expended
during a fiscal year may be expended in any succeeding fiscal year; and
provided further that the mayor may authorize funds to be expended at a
rate faster than the amounts so specified, within the balance of the
five-year appropriation available therefor.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2026
 * 4. Following approval by the city board of a five-year educational
facilities capital plan, the chancellor shall transmit such plan to the
mayor and the council of the city of New York. After consultation with
the chancellor and the city board, the mayor shall include in the city's
executive capital budget for the fiscal year in which the five-year plan
is to commence an appropriation for educational facilities in an amount
he recommends as sufficient to provide for the funding of a five-year
capital program for the city board and shall specify amounts for each
fiscal year within such five year period. Such five-year appropriation,
which shall specify the annual amounts for each fiscal year to be made
available, shall be subject to adoption, veto and, except as hereinafter
provided, amendment in accordance with the procedures set forth in the
charter of the city of New York. Upon adoption of a five-year
appropriation pursuant to such process, the capital program of the city
board shall, if the amount so appropriated differs from the cost
estimated in the plan approved by the city board, be amended to reflect
the funding so provided. No reduction shall thereafter be made by the
city in the amount of such appropriation until completion of the plan
unless (i) the city board shall so recommend or (ii) a general,
across-the-board reduction is made in the city's capital appropriations
in order to accommodate an unforeseen reduction in the availability of
city capital funds. In the event the city board so recommends or such a
reduction is made, the appropriation may be reduced in accordance with
such recommendation or proportionately to the reduction in the city's
general capital appropriations. In the event the city board requests
additional appropriations from such city during the five-year period of
the then effective plan, the city board shall specify the needs to be
met by such additional appropriations. The city may appropriate
additional amount for the five-year educational facilities capital plan,
provided that in no event shall such an additional appropriation be
conditioned upon a reduction or alteration of the five-year plan then in
effect. The authority may not spend more in any fiscal year of the
capital program than the amount specified in the five-year city
appropriation therefor, as amended from time to time; provided that any
amounts not expended during a fiscal year may be expended in any
succeeding fiscal year, and provided further that the mayor may
authorize funds to be expended at a rate faster than the amounts so
specified, within the balance of the five-year appropriation available
therefor.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2026
 5. * a. The chancellor may in his or her discretion submit amendments
to an approved five-year educational facilities capital plan to the city
board, mayor, and city council for their approval.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2026
 * a. The chancellor may in his discretion submit amendments to an
approved five-year educational facilities capital plan to the city board
for its approval.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2026
 b. The chancellor shall submit such amendments in the event (i) the
estimated cost of any program element shall increase by more than ten
percent from the estimate contained in the plan, (ii) a project will not
be commenced within six months from the date set forth in the plan,
(iii) a project to be performed at an identified educational facility is
proposed to be performed at a different educational facility or (iv) a
project not identified in the plan, other than projects to be performed
pursuant to paragraph h of subdivision two of this section, is proposed
to be initiated.
 c. In the event the city shall appropriate an amount less than the
amount proposed to be funded by the city in the then approved five-year
educational facilities capital plan, or in the event an appropriation
shall be reduced below such level as provided in subdivision four of
this section, the chancellor shall prepare and submit to the city board
for its approval an amendment to such plan to reflect the reduced amount
of funding from the city.
 d. If the effect of any plan amendment would require an additional
appropriation by the city, no such amendment shall be implemented unless
and until the city shall make such additional appropriation.
 e. Amendments submitted by the chancellor as described in paragraph c
and in clauses (iii) and (iv) of paragraph b of this subdivision shall
also be submitted to each affected community school board, which may
conduct a public hearing and prepare and submit recommendations to the
city board within forty-five days of such submission.
 6. a. For each project included in an approved five-year educational
facilities capital plan, the chancellor shall develop a detailed scope
of the project, which shall include the following: (i) the purposes and
public to be served, (ii) the programs to be conducted in the facility,
(iii) the gross amounts of space and bulk for any building or structure,
(iv) identification of the intent to use architectural, engineering or
other consultant services and estimated fees for such consultant
services, (v) the schedule of design and construction, (vi) the total
estimated project costs, including costs for site acquisition,
preparation and tenant relocation, design, construction and equipment,
(vii) maximum estimated expenditures for the project for each fiscal
year until its completion, (viii) costs associated with maintenance and
operation of the physical plant, (ix) how the data provided by the
office of city planning, the department of buildings, the department of
housing preservation and development and the department of health and
mental hygiene pursuant to subdivisions thirteen-a, thirteen-b,
thirteen-c, and thirteen-d of section seventeen hundred twenty-eight of
the public authorities law is factored and accounted for, and (x) such
other information as the chancellor shall specify. In the event, a
project consists of a program element without identification of the
particular education facility at which such project is to be performed,
the detailed scope of the project shall specify the nature of the work
to be performed, applicable price and quality standards, a list of the
schools eligible for such work, annual performance targets and the total
estimated costs of such project during each fiscal year until its
completion.
 b. The chancellor may request the New York city school construction
authority, and the authority shall be authorized, to develop preliminary
plans for each project, to assist the chancellor in the development of
the detailed scope of project, to proceed with site acquisition for such
project and to assist in responding to emergency projects undertaken
pursuant of paragraph h of subdivision two of this section. The
authority may expend moneys for such purposes for projects to be funded
pursuant to subdivision four of this section in such amounts as are
consistent with the city capital budget appropriation therefor.
 * c. The chancellor shall prepare preliminary scopes (i) for each
project contained within the program elements defined in paragraphs a
and b of subdivision two of this section and, where appropriate,
paragraph g of subdivision two of this section, (ii) for each major
modernization project contained in paragraph c of such subdivision two,
and (iii) for each new construction project contained in paragraph d of
such subdivision two, and shall transmit such preliminary scopes to the
affected community district education councils. The community district
education council may hold hearings on such scope; provided, however,
that the community district education council must submit any comments
to the chancellor no later than thirty days following the date of
submission. The chancellor shall consider the comments in preparing the
scope that he or she will submit to the director of management and
budget of the city pursuant to paragraph d of this subdivision.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2026
 * c. The chancellor shall prepare preliminary scopes (i) for each
project contained within the program elements defined in paragraphs a
and b of subdivision two of this section and, where appropriate,
paragraph g of subdivision two of this section, (ii) for each major
modernization project contained in paragraph c of such subdivision two,
and (iii) for each new construction project contained in paragraph d of
such subdivision two, and shall transmit such preliminary scopes to the
affected community school boards. The community school board may hold
hearings on such scope, provided, however, that the community school
board must submit any comments to the chancellor no later than thirty
days following the date of submission. The chancellor shall consider the
comments in preparing the scope that he will submit to the director of
management and budget of the city pursuant to paragraph d of this
subdivision.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2026
 * d. For projects to be funded pursuant to subdivision four of this
section, the chancellor shall transmit the detailed scope of each such
project to the director of management and budget of the city for
approval.
 (i) Except as provided in paragraph b of this subdivision, no expenses
shall be incurred by the city board or the authority for any such
project prior to approval of the detailed scope of any such project.
 (ii) No detailed scope of project shall be approved unless the total
estimated costs of such project, together with the aggregate estimated
costs of all projects for which a detailed scope has theretofore been
approved, are within city capital budget appropriations available
therefor. A detailed scope of project that is not disapproved by the
director of management and budget within thirty days of its submission
shall be deemed approved. To the extent the director disapproves all or
part of a scope, he or she shall set forth in writing the reasons
therefor.
 (iii) Upon approval of the detailed scope of project, the chancellor
shall refer such project to the New York city school construction
authority for implementation in accordance with an agreement between the
authority and the city board and shall transmit the approved project
scope to the comptroller, whereupon the total estimated costs of such
project as set forth in such approved project scope shall be available
for expenditure.
 (iv) Approval of the director of management and budget shall be
required for any material change in the approved detailed scope of
project or for any increase in the total cost of such project in excess
of any reserve provided in the approved detailed scope of project. Such
approval shall be given or deemed given in the manner provided herein.
 (v) The provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to emergency
projects undertaken pursuant to paragraph h of subdivision two of this
section, the estimated costs of which, together with the costs of other
projects undertaken pursuant to said paragraph h, does not exceed the
amount set forth in the educational facilities capital plan for
activities pursuant to paragraph h of subdivision two of this section.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2026
 * d. For projects to be funded pursuant to subdivision four of this
section, the chancellor shall transmit the detailed scope of each such
project to the director of management and budget of the city for
approval.
 (i) Except as provided in paragraph b of this subdivision, no expenses
shall be incurred by the city board or the authority for any such
project prior to approval of the detailed scope of any such project.
 (ii) No detailed scope of project shall be approved unless the total
estimated costs of such project, together with the aggregate estimated
costs of all projects for which a detailed scope has theretofore been
approved, are within city capital budget appropriations available
therefor. A detailed scope of project that is not disapproved by the
director of management and budget within thirty days of its submission
shall be deemed approved. To the extent the director disapproves all or
part of a scope, he shall set forth in writing the reasons therefor.
 (iii) Upon approval of the detailed scope of project, the chancellor
shall refer such project to the New York city school construction
authority for implementation in accordance with an agreement between the
authority and the city board and shall transmit the approved project
scope to the comptroller whereupon the total estimated costs of such
project as set forth in such approved project scope shall be available
for expenditure.
 (iv) Approval of the director of management and budget shall be
required for any material change in the approved detailed scope of
project or for any increase in the total cost of such project in excess
of any reserve provided in the approved detailed scope of project. Such
approval shall be given or deemed given in the manner provided herein.
 (v) The provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to emergency
projects undertaken pursuant to paragraph h of subdivision two of this
section, the estimated costs of which, together with the costs of other
projects undertaken pursuant to said paragraph h, does not exceed the
amount set forth in the educational facilities capital plan for
activities pursuant to paragraph h of subdivision two of this section.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2026
 e. For projects contained within a five-year educational facilities
capital plan and not funded in whole or in part by the city, the
chancellor shall refer such projects to the New York city school
construction authority for implementation in accordance with any
agreement between the authority and the city board.
 * f. The chancellor and the president of the New York city school
construction authority, shall notify the mayor of the amount of
appropriated funds projected to be spent for (i) development of detailed
scopes, (ii) development of preliminary plans, (iii) site acquisition
and (iv) emergencies, and the mayor shall thereupon authorize the
issuance of bonds therefor in accordance with the local finance law and
shall notify the city comptroller of his or her authorization to expend
such amounts for such purposes. Such notice shall be given or amended at
least ten days prior to any expenditure included therein; provided that
the chancellor, the president of the authority and the mayor shall
develop procedures to expedite authorization of emergency expenditures.
Neither the city board nor the authority shall expend funds for such
purposes in excess of the amounts specified in such notice until the
chancellor shall have amended such notice to reflect such excess. Upon
approval of the detailed scope of a project, the mayor shall authorize
the issuance of bonds therefor in accordance with the local finance law
and shall notify the city comptroller of his or her authorization to
expend appropriated funds for the entire estimated cost of such project.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2026
 * f. The chancellor and the president of the New York city school
construction authority shall notify the mayor of the amount of
appropriated funds projected to be spent for (i) development of detailed
scopes, (ii) development of preliminary plans, (iii) site acquisition
and (iv) emergencies, and the mayor shall thereupon authorize the
issuance of bonds therefor in accordance with the local finance law and
shall notify the city comptroller of his authorization to expend such
amounts for such purposes. Such notice shall be given or amended at
least ten days prior to any expenditure included therein; provided that
the chancellor, the president of the authority and the mayor shall
develop procedures to expedite authorization of emergency expenditures.
Neither the city board nor the authority shall expend funds for such
purposes in excess of the amounts specified in such notice until the
chancellor shall have amended such notice to reflect such excess. Upon
approval of the detailed scope of a project, the mayor shall authorize
the issuance of bonds therefor in accordance with the local finance law
and shall notify the city comptroller of his authorization to expend
appropriated funds for the entire estimated cost of such project.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2026
 7. The provisions of subdivision a of section two hundred fourteen of
the charter of the city of New York shall not apply to a proposed
five-year appropriation made in accordance with subdivision four of this
section, and the provisions of subdivision b of section two hundred
seventeen of such charter shall apply only after the end of the fifth
year of a five-year appropriation made pursuant to such subdivision. To
the extent any other provision of chapter nine or ten of such charter is
inconsistent with the provisions of this section, the provisions of this
section shall govern.
 * § 2590-q. Budgetary and fiscal processes. 1. The chancellor shall
annually advise the community district education councils with respect
to the form and content of the budget requests and accompanying fiscal
estimates required to be submitted by the mayor of the city of New York
for the next ensuing fiscal year, together with such additional
information as he or she may require.
 4. On such date as the mayor shall direct, the chancellor shall submit
to the mayor:
 (a) estimates, as adopted by the city board, of the total sum of money
which it deems necessary for the operation of the city district (other
than functions to be financed from funds provided for in the capital
budget of the city) during the next fiscal year of the city, together
with the estimates submitted by the community district education
councils;
 (b) estimates of the amount to be received as a result of the
apportionment of moneys payable from the state in such fiscal year; and
 (c) estimates of the amount to be received for school system
expenditures by the city district in such fiscal year from sources other
than appropriations of city funds or appropriations or other provisions
of funds in the capital budget of the city or apportionment of moneys
from the state payable in such fiscal year.
 5. All estimates submitted by the chancellor shall be prepared in the
manner prescribed by the New York city charter for submission of
departmental estimates for current expenses to the mayor and shall set
forth the total amounts proposed for programs or activities of the
community district education councils in units of appropriation separate
from those set forth for programs or activities operated by the city
board; provided, however, that nothing shall prevent the inclusion in
such estimates of a unit or units of appropriation to be allocated to
community district education councils pursuant to subdivision ten of
this section to finance innovative programs or activities by such
community district education councils.
 6. In acting on the proposed units of appropriation for programs or
activities of community district education councils, the city council of
the city of New York may, subject to the veto of the mayor, increase or
decrease the total amount of each such unit of appropriation but,
notwithstanding any provision of the New York city charter or any other
law to the contrary, it shall not have power to add any other unit of
appropriation for one or more community district education councils.
 7. (b) Not later than thirty days after the amount of such funds
becomes determined by adoption of the budget pursuant to subdivision six
of this section, by allocation pursuant to subdivisions ten, eleven,
fourteen, and fifteen of this section, or otherwise, the chancellor
shall transmit to each community district education council a statement
enumerating the federal, state, city, and private funds which have been
allocated thereunder to such community district education council for
its programs.
 (c) At the same time, the chancellor shall transmit to the community
district education councils a statement of the allocation of the balance
of such funds to the several programs administered by him or her and the
city board including the distinct amounts assigned to each category of
schools and programs set forth in section twenty-five hundred ninety-i
of this article and the amount allocated for the operation of the city
board, his or her office, and the other administrative bureaus and
divisions thereof.
 9. Special estimates to meet extraordinary expenses of emergencies
which may arise in the course of a fiscal year may be submitted to the
chancellor by any community district education council and, pursuant to
subdivision six of section twenty-five hundred seventy-six of this
title, the chancellor may, in his or her discretion, submit such special
estimates to the mayor of the city of New York. The chancellor may also
submit special estimates to the mayor in connection with the schools and
programs under his or her jurisdiction.
 10. Notwithstanding any provisions of law to the contrary, any moneys
appropriated to or authorized for expenditure by the city board
including moneys so appropriated to finance innovative programs or
activities by community district education councils (but other than
moneys so appropriated for the exercise of powers or duties reserved to
the city board) may be allocated by the chancellor to any community
district education council. Allocations made pursuant to this
subdivision shall be based on the needs of the recipient community
district education councils, considered in conjunction with the needs of
the schools and programs under the jurisdiction of the city board, in
the case of moneys appropriated for innovative programs or activities,
the relative merit of the programs or activities proposed by the
respective community district education councils.
 11. The chancellor shall perform all functions in connection with
article seventy-three of this chapter; provided that the chancellor
shall allocate to the community district education councils the state
funds apportioned to the city district pursuant to such article
seventy-three, less the amount of such funds necessary to enable the
chancellor to carry out his or her responsibilities, on the basis of an
objective formula established by the chancellor and approved by the city
board annually, after consultation with the community district education
councils and the mayor, which formula shall reflect the relative
educational needs of the community districts to the maximum extent
feasible.
 12. The chancellor shall perform all functions in connection with
sections twenty-five hundred seventy-six, twenty-five hundred
seventy-seven, twenty-five hundred seventy-nine, twenty-five hundred
eighty-one, twenty-five hundred eighty-two, twenty-five hundred
eighty-three, and twenty-five hundred eighty-four of this title.
 13. The city board through the chancellor shall perform all functions
in connection with the capital budget as provided in chapter nine of the
charter of the city of New York, except as otherwise provided herein.
 14. With respect to special, federal, state, and private funds, each
community district education council may:
 (a) contract for and receive funds to be transmitted to the city board
and disbursed through the chancellor. No special funds may be used as a
means of bringing about the elimination of existing personnel lines,
titles, or employees. Community district education councils may use
budget funds allocated and resources obtained within the scope of
existing law and contractual obligations to design programs of
educational excellence tailored to the needs and peculiar
characteristics of the district;
 (b) enter into contracts necessary or convenient to the discharge of
the powers and duties with the city, state, and federal governments,
private foundations, agencies and individuals, the city board, and other
community district education councils, subject to the approval of the
chancellor;
 (c) in the case of federal or state funds not allocated to the city
district on a formula basis, to apply to the funding agency, as a local
educational agency, and to accept any funds granted or apportioned in
this connection for its use and account; provided, however, that as to
federal funds available to areas affected by federal activities pursuant
to public law eight hundred seventy-four, community councils shall not
be considered local educational agencies and shall have no power to
apply directly to the funding agency, but such funds shall be
reallocated to community district education councils by the chancellor
in accordance with a formula established by the chancellor and approved
by the city board as provided in subdivision ten of this section; and
 (d) in the case of special funds allocated to the city district on a
formula basis, to submit proposals to the chancellor for a review as to
form only and prompt transmittal to the funding agency; provided,
however, that in the case of such special funds community district
education councils shall not be considered local educational agencies;
and provided further that the total amount of such proposals submitted
by any community district education council shall not exceed the amount
of an apportionment made by the chancellor on the basis of a formula
established by the chancellor and approved by the city board, after
considering the recommendation of the chancellor and after consultation
with community district education councils and the mayor, which formula
reflects the same educational and economic factors as the formula for
apportionment of such special funds to the city district; and provided
further that each community district education council shall consult
fully with non-public school authorities on a continuing basis with
respect to any of such special funds applicable to non-public school
programs and students subject to the power and duty of the city board
through the chancellor to ensure that applicable provisions of state and
federal law and regulations with respect to programs for students in
attendance at non-public schools throughout the city district shall be
carried out.
 15. With respect to special, federal, state, and private funds, the
chancellor shall provide community district education councils with
information about the availability of such funds and furnish technical
assistance with respect to the preparation of proposals, record keeping,
and the administration of such programs.
 16. On or before October first of each year, the chancellor shall
submit to the commissioner, in the form to be prescribed by him or her,
the annual budget for the city district for the current fiscal year.
 17. (a) Each community superintendent shall prepare semi-annual
reports which shall be due by December fifteenth and April fifteenth of
each year. Each report shall include but not be limited to an accounting
of all funds received and expended by the subject community district
education council from all sources, including appropriations for
programs and activities of the district education council and receipts
from external sources.
 (b) In addition, a final year-end report shall be due on August
fifteenth and shall include an accounting of all funds received and
expended by the subject community district education council from all
sources, including appropriations for programs and activities of the
district education council.
 (c) Copies of reports outlined in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this
subdivision shall be given to the chancellor and the subject community
district education council and shall be available to the public.
 18. Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the powers
and duties conferred on a community district education council by this
section shall be exercised exclusively by the community superintendent
employed by such council.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2026
 * § 2590-q. Budgetary and fiscal processes. 1. The chancellor shall
annually advise the community boards with respect to the form and
content of the budget requests and accompanying fiscal estimates
required to be submitted by the mayor of the city of New York for the
next ensuing fiscal year, together with such additional information as
he may require.
 4. On such date as the mayor shall direct, the city board shall submit
to the mayor:
 (a) estimates, as adopted, of the total sum of money which it deems
necessary for the operation of the city district (other than functions
to be financed from funds provided for in the capital budget of the
city) during the next fiscal year of the city, together with the
estimates submitted by the community boards, as originally submitted and
as modified pursuant to subdivision three of this section;
 (b) estimates of the amount to be received as a result of the
apportionment of moneys payable from the state in such fiscal year; and
 (c) estimates of the amount to be received for school system
expenditures by the city district in such fiscal year from sources other
than appropriations of city funds or appropriations or other provisions
of funds in the capital budget of the city or apportionment of moneys
from the state payable in such fiscal year.
 5. All estimates submitted by the city board shall be prepared in the
manner prescribed by the New York city charter for submission of
departmental estimates for current expenses to the mayor and shall set
forth the total amounts proposed for programs or activities of the
community boards in units of appropriation separate from those set forth
for programs or activities operated by the city board; provided,
however, that nothing shall prevent the city board from including in
such estimates a unit or units of appropriation to be allocated to it in
its discretion, to community boards pursuant to subdivision ten of this
section to finance innovative programs or activities by such community
boards.
 6. In acting on the proposed units of appropriation for programs or
activities of community boards, the board of estimate and city council
of the city of New York may, subject to the veto of the mayor, increase
or decrease the total amount of each such unit of appropriation but,
notwithstanding any provision of the New York city charter or any other
law to the contrary, they shall not have power to add any other unit of
appropriation for one or more community boards.
 7. (b) Not later than thirty days after the amount of such funds
becomes determined by adoption of the budget pursuant to subdivision
six, by allocation pursuant to subdivisions ten, eleven, fourteen and
fifteen of this section, or otherwise, the chancellor shall transmit to
each community board a statement enumerating the federal, state, city
and private funds which have been allocated thereunder to such community
board for its programs.
 (c) At the same time, the chancellor shall transmit to the community
boards a statement of the allocation of the balance of such funds to the
several programs administered by him and the city board including the
distinct amounts assigned to each category of schools and programs set
forth in section twenty-five hundred ninety-i and the amount allocated
for the operation of the city board, his office and the other
administrative bureaus and divisions thereof.
 9. Special estimates to meet extraordinary expenses of emergencies
which may arise in the course of a fiscal year may be submitted to the
chancellor by any community board and, pursuant to subdivision six of
section twenty-five hundred seventy-six of this chapter, the chancellor
may, in its discretion, submit such special estimates to the mayor of
the city of New York. The chancellor may also submit special estimates
to the mayor in connection with the schools and programs under his
jurisdiction.
 10. Notwithstanding any provisions of law to the contrary, any moneys
appropriated to or authorized for expenditure by the city board
including moneys so appropriated to finance innovative programs or
activities by community boards (but other than moneys so appropriated
for the exercise of powers or duties reserved to the city board) may be
allocated by the chancellor to any community board. Allocations made
pursuant to this subdivision shall be based on the needs of the
recipient community boards, considered in conjunction with the needs of
the schools and programs under the jurisdiction of the city board, in
the case of moneys appropriated for innovative programs or activities,
the relative merit of the programs or activities proposed by the
respective community boards.
 11. The chancellor shall perform all functions in connection with
article seventy-three of this chapter; provided that the chancellor
shall allocate to the community boards the state funds apportioned to
the city district pursuant to article seventy-three, less the amount of
such funds necessary to enable the chancellor to carry out his
responsibilities, on the basis of an objective formula established by
the city board annually, after consultation with the community boards
and the mayor, which formula shall reflect the relative educational
needs of the community districts to the maximum extent feasible.
 12. The chancellor shall perform all functions in connection with
sections twenty-five hundred seventy-six, twenty-five hundred
seventy-seven, twenty-five hundred seventy-nine, twenty-five hundred
eighty-one, twenty-five hundred eighty-two, twenty-five hundred
eighty-three and twenty-five hundred eighty-four of this chapter.
 13. The city board through the chancellor shall perform all functions
in connection with the capital budget as provided in chapter nine of the
charter of the city of New York, except as otherwise provided herein.
 14. With respect to special, federal, state and private funds, each
community board may:
 (a) contract for and receive funds to be transmitted to the city board
and disbursed through the chancellor. No special funds may be used as a
means of bringing about the elimination of existing personnel lines,
titles or employees. Community boards may use budget funds allocated and
resources obtained within the scope of existing law and contractual
obligations to design programs of educational excellence tailored to the
needs and peculiar characteristics of the district;
 (b) enter into contracts necessary or convenient to the discharge of
the powers and duties with the city, state and federal governments,
private foundations, agencies and individuals, the city board and other
community boards subject to the approval of the chancellor;
 (c) in the case of federal or state funds not allocated to the city
district on a formula basis, to apply to the funding agency, as a local
educational agency, and to accept any funds granted or apportioned in
this connection for its use and account, provided, however, that as to
federal funds available to areas affected by federal activities pursuant
to public law eight hundred seventy-four, community boards shall not be
considered local educational agencies and shall have no power to apply
directly to the funding agency but such funds shall be reallocated to
community boards by the chancellor in accordance with a formula
determined by the city board as provided in subdivision ten of this
section; and
 (d) in the case of special funds allocated to the city district on a
formula basis, to submit proposals to the chancellor for a review as to
form only and prompt transmittal to the funding agency; provided,
however, that in the case of such special funds community boards shall
not be considered local educational agencies; and provided further that
the total amount of such proposals submitted by any community board
shall not exceed the amount of an apportionment made by the chancellor
on the basis of a formula determined by the city board, after
considering the recommendation of the chancellor and after consultation
with community boards and the mayor, which formula reflects the same
educational and economic factors as the formula for apportionment of
such special funds to the city district; and provided further that each
community board shall consult fully with non-public school authorities
on a continuing basis with respect to any of such special funds
applicable to non-public school programs and students subject to the
power and duty of the city board through the chancellor to ensure that
applicable provisions of state and federal law and regulations with
respect to programs for students in attendance at non-public schools
throughout the city district shall be carried out.
 15. With respect to special, federal, state and private funds, the
chancellor shall provide community boards with information about the
availability of such funds and furnish technical assistance with respect
to the preparation of proposals, record keeping and the administration
of such programs.
 16. On or before October first of each year, the city board shall
submit to the commissioner, in the form to be prescribed by him, the
annual budget for the city district for the current fiscal year.
 17. (a) Each community superintendent shall prepare semi-annual
reports which shall be due by December fifteenth and April fifteenth of
each year. Each report shall include but not be limited to an accounting
of all funds received and expended by the subject community board from
all sources including appropriations for programs and activities of the
school board and receipts from external sources.
 (b) In addition, a final year-end report shall be due on August
fifteenth and shall include an accounting of all funds received and
expended by the subject community board from all sources including
appropriations for programs and activities of the school board.
 (c) Copies of reports outlined in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this
subdivision shall be given to the city board and the subject community
board and shall be available to the public.
 18. Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the powers
and duties conferred on a community school board by this section shall
be exercised exclusively by the community superintendent employed by
such board.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2026
 * § 2590-r. School based budgeting and expenditure reporting. The
chancellor shall, in consultation with the city board and community
district superintendents, establish in regulations a comprehensive
process of school-based budgeting and expenditure reporting no later
than November first, nineteen hundred ninety-eight. Notwithstanding any
provision of section twenty-five hundred ninety-q of this article to the
contrary, such regulations shall include provisions for:
 a. the allocation of projected revenues among community districts and
their schools on the basis of objective formulae developed by the
chancellor, after consultation with the community councils, community
superintendents and the mayor, and approved by the city board, such
formulae shall reflect the relative educational needs of the community
districts and their schools to the maximum extent feasible;
 b. (i) following release of the executive budget of the city of New
York by the mayor of the city of New York, the chancellor to inform the
principal of each school of that school's preliminary budget allocation,
and the principal to propose a school-based budget, after consulting
with members of the school based management team and soliciting input
pursuant to sections twenty-five hundred ninety-h, and twenty-five
hundred ninety-i of this article on budget priorities from all members
of the school community;
 (ii) for schools under the jurisdiction of a community superintendent,
the principal shall be required to provide written justification, in a
form and manner prescribed by the community superintendent pursuant to
paragraph (h) of subdivision one of section twenty-five hundred ninety-f
of this article, to demonstrate that the school-based budget proposal is
aligned with the school's comprehensive educational plan;
 c. the review, modification, approval and certification of the
proposed school budget for schools under the jurisdiction of a community
superintendent pursuant to paragraph (h) of subdivision one of section
twenty-five hundred ninety-f of this article;
 d. within amounts estimated by the chancellor, the aggregation of the
proposed school-based budgets, as modified and approved by the community
superintendent, with a proposed budget for the administrative and
operational expenses of the community superintendent and community
council, as developed by the community superintendent, for submission to
the chancellor;
 e. the chancellor to develop a school-based budgeting process for
schools under his or her jurisdiction consistent with this section which
shall require that: (i) each principal provide written justification
demonstrating that the school-based budget is aligned with such school's
comprehensive educational plan; (ii) the school based management team
submit comments regarding such justification; and (iii) the chancellor
certify that the school-based budget is sufficiently aligned with such
school's comprehensive educational plan after reviewing the principal's
justification and the school based management team's comments;
 f. the aggregation of the community district budgets, as modified and
approved by the chancellor, with a proposed budget for administrative
and operational expenditures of the city board and the chancellor, as
prepared by the chancellor, for submission to and adoption by the city
board after a public hearing;
 g. after final adoption of the budget for the city district by the
mayor and city council, a process of distributing any reductions or
increases required by such adoption in an equitable manner which
considers the relative needs of community districts and schools to the
maximum extent feasible and for modifying the proposed budget
accordingly. Such process shall include an analysis of the relative
funding levels of the state, the city, the federal government, and other
sources of funds; a comparison of the level of such funding against
previous years' total appropriations and actual expenditures; and an
analysis of the distribution of funds;
 h. a comprehensive system of public reporting on the final enacted
budget including the levels of appropriation provided by the city, the
state and the federal government with a comparison of the level of such
funding against previous years' totals, and an explanation of the final
budget;
 i. procedures for schools, superintendents and the chancellor to
modify and reallocate monies in the enacted budget;
 j. a uniform system of budget requests, reports and appropriations.
Such units of appropriation shall include (i) such compensation and
benefits for staff; (ii) instruction and for pupil services, including
costs for purchases, library services, instructional materials, and all
other school-based instructional and instructional support costs
attributable to other than personal services; (iii) administrative and
non-instructional cost and (iv) extra-curricular activities;
 k. the provision of appropriate technical support and training to
school personnel, parents and other participants in school-based
budgeting;
 l. a comprehensive planning and monitoring process to promote the
implementation of school-based budgeting;
 m. an annual update of a capital plan by the superintendent with
participation of principals and schools, addressing health and safety,
maintenance, capacity and technology; and
 n. a collaborative school-based planning process involving parents,
teachers, other school personnel and, where appropriate, students to
effectuate the purposes of this section.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2026
 * § 2590-r. School based budgeting and expenditure reporting. The
chancellor shall, in consultation with the city board and community
district superintendents, establish in regulations a comprehensive
process of school-based budgeting and expenditure reporting no later
than November first, nineteen hundred ninety-eight. Notwithstanding any
provision of section twenty-five hundred ninety-q of this article to the
contrary, such regulations shall include provisions for:
 a. the allocation of projected revenues among community districts and
their schools on the basis of objective formulae developed by the
chancellor, after consultation with the community boards, community
superintendents and the mayor, and approved by the city board, such
formulae shall reflect the relative educational needs of the community
districts and their schools to the maximum extent feasible;
 b. the principal of each school to propose a school-based expenditure
budget, after soliciting input pursuant to section twenty-five hundred
ninety-h, and twenty-five hundred ninety-i of this article on budget
priorities from all members of the school community;
 c. the review, modification and approval of the proposed school budget
by the community superintendent;
 d. within amounts estimated by the chancellor, the aggregation of the
proposed school-based budgets, as modified and approved by the community
superintendent, with a proposed budget for the administrative and
operational expenses of the community superintendent and community
board, as developed by the community superintendent, for submission to
the chancellor;
 e. the chancellor to develop a school-based budgeting process for
schools under his or her jurisdiction consistent with this section;
 f. the aggregation of the community district budgets, as modified and
approved by the chancellor, with a proposed budget for administrative
and operational expenditures of the city board and the chancellor, as
prepared by the chancellor, for submission to and adoption by the city
board after a public hearing;
 g. after final adoption of the budget for the city district by the
mayor and city council, a process of distributing any reductions or
increases required by such adoption in an equitable manner which
considers the relative needs of community districts and schools to the
maximum extent feasible and for modifying the proposed budget
accordingly. Such process shall include an analysis of the relative
funding levels of the state, the city, the federal government, and other
sources of funds; a comparison of the level of such funding against
previous years' total appropriations and actual expenditures; and an
analysis of the distribution of funds;
 h. a comprehensive system of public reporting on the final enacted
budget including the levels of appropriation provided by the city, the
state and the federal government with a comparison of the level of such
funding against previous years' totals, and an explanation of the final
budget;
 i. procedures for schools, superintendents and the chancellor to
modify and reallocate monies in the enacted budget;
 j. a uniform system of budget requests, reports and appropriations.
Such units of appropriation shall include (i) such compensation and
benefits for staff; (ii) instruction and for pupil services, including
costs for purchases, library services, instructional materials, and all
other school-based instructional and instructional support costs
attributable to other than personal services; (iii) administrative and
non-instructional cost and (iv) extra-curricular activities;
 k. the provision of appropriate technical support and training to
school personnel, parents and other participants in school-based
budgeting;
 l. a comprehensive planning and monitoring process to promote the
implementation of school-based budgeting;
 m. an annual update of a capital plan by the superintendent with
participation of principals and schools, addressing health and safety,
maintenance, capacity and technology; and
 n. a collaborative school-based planning process involving parents,
teachers, other school personnel and, where appropriate, students to
effectuate the purposes of this section.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2026
 § 2590-s. Prompt payment of salaries. In a city with a population of
one million or more, all employees of the board of education shall be
paid the amount of compensation due them pursuant to collective
bargaining agreements, except as is otherwise provided in section three
thousand eleven of this chapter. If such payments are not made on the
dates so required, interest shall be recovered beginning thirty days,
following the later of the effective date of this section or the
required payment date through the day that payment is in fact tendered.
In the case of a salary differential, the date compensation is due shall
be defined as thirty days following the date an employee's application
is filed by the employee with the board of education of the city of New
York. Interest shall be computed at the rate set forth in paragraph one
of subsection (e) of section one thousand ninety-six of the tax law and
shall be added to any compensation amounts referred to in this section
that have not been paid when owed.
 * § 2590-t. New York city comptroller audits. The comptroller of the
city of New York shall have the authority to conduct operational and
programmatic audits, in addition to financial audits, of the city
district to the same extent that such comptroller has such authority for
agencies of the city of New York.
 * NB Repealed June 30, 2026
 * § 2590-u. New York city independent budget office reports. 1. The
independent budget office of the city of New York shall be authorized to
provide analysis and issue public reports regarding financial and
educational matters of the city district, to enhance official and public
understanding of such matters including but not limited to:
 (a) student graduation and dropout data;
 (b) student enrollment projections;
 (c) school utilization, class sizes and pupil-to-teacher ratios;
 (d) student assessment data;
 (e) the delivery of services to students who are in bilingual or
English as a second language programs;
 (f) the delivery of services to students with disabilities;
 (g) the utilization of federal funds including funds pursuant to title
I of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of nineteen hundred
sixty-five, as amended, directed at parental involvement; and
 (h) matters relating to city district finances.
 2. In addition to the appropriation available pursuant to section two
hundred fifty-nine of the New York city charter, the city of New York
shall appropriate during each fiscal year an amount to the independent
budget office of the city of New York not less than two and one-half per
centum of the appropriations available to pay for the expenses of the
office of management and budget of the city of New York during each
fiscal year, to carry out the duties and functions assigned in this
subdivision.
 3. The director of the independent budget office of the city of New
York shall be authorized to secure such information, data, estimates and
statistics from the city board and the chancellor as such director
determines to be necessary for the performance of the functions and
duties of such office, and the city board and the chancellor shall
provide such information, to the extent that it is available, in a
timely fashion. The director of the independent budget office of the
city of New York shall not be entitled to obtain records which are
protected by the privileges for attorney-client communications, attorney
work product, and material prepared for litigation.
 4. The director of the independent budget office of the city of New
York shall ensure that such office uses up-to-date appropriate and
professionally accepted methodologies in producing annual data reports
related to the city district and that such methodologies used are
identified in such reports.
 * NB Repealed June 30, 2026
 § 2590-v. Notice to students regarding certain test scores. The office
of the chancellor shall include a notice in the official score report of
all students who received a score of "advanced" on the seventh grade
state assessment in either English Language Arts or Mathematics,
informing the student of opportunities to apply for admission to the
specialized high schools authorized in paragraph (b) of subdivision one
of section twenty-five hundred ninety-h of this article; provided that
the chancellor shall annually notify all seventh grade students of
opportunities to apply for admission to such schools.
 ARTICLE 53
 SCHOOL ELECTIONS IN CITY SCHOOL DISTRICTS OF CITIES WITH LESS
 THAN ONE HUNDRED TWENTY-FIVE THOUSAND INHABITANTS
Section 2601. Application of article.
 2601-a. Procedures for adoption of school budgets in small city
 school districts.
 2602. Annual and special school district meetings.
 2603. Qualifications of voters.
 2604. Division of city school district into school election
 districts; elections held in schoolhouses.
 2606. Registration of voters.
 2607. Inspectors of election; organization.
 2608. Nomination and ballot.
 2609. Conduct of election; challenges.
 2610. Canvass of votes and return to board of education;
 declaration of result.
 2611. Use of voting machines.
 2613. Absentee, early mail, and military ballots.
 2614. Transmission of publicly available data to the New York
 voting and elections database.
 § 2601. Application of article. This article shall apply to each city
school district of a city which has less than one hundred twenty-five
thousand inhabitants, according to the latest federal census, except as
otherwise provided in section twenty-six hundred one-a of this chapter
and except as otherwise provided by subdivision nine-a of section
twenty-five hundred two of this chapter.
 § 2601-a. Procedures for adoption of school budgets in small city
school districts. 1. The board of education of each city school district
subject to this article shall provide for the submission of a budget for
approval of the voters pursuant to the provisions of this section and in
accordance with the requirements set forth in section two thousand
twenty-three-a of this title.
 2. The board of education shall conduct all annual and special school
district meetings for the purpose of adopting a school district budget
in the same manner as a union free school district in accordance with
the provisions of article forty-one of this title, except as otherwise
provided by this section. The annual meeting and election of each such
city school district shall be held on the third Tuesday of May in each
year, provided, however that such annual meeting and election shall be
held on the second Tuesday in May if the commissioner at the request of
a local school board certifies no later than March first that such
election would conflict with religious observances, and any school
budget revote shall be held on the date and in the same manner specified
in subdivision three of section two thousand seven of this title. The
provisions of this article, and where applicable subdivision nine-a of
section twenty-five hundred two of this title, governing the
qualification and registration of voters, and procedures for the
nomination and election of members of the board of education shall
continue to apply, and shall govern the qualification and registration
of voters and voting procedures with respect to the adoption of a school
district budget.
 3. The board of education shall prepare a proposed school district
budget for the ensuing year in accordance with the provisions of section
seventeen hundred sixteen of this chapter, including all provisions
relating to required notices and appendices to the statement of
expenditures. No board of education shall incur a school district
liability except as authorized by the provisions of section seventeen
hundred eighteen of this chapter. Such proposed budget shall be
presented in three components: a program component, a capital component
and an administrative component which shall be separately delineated in
accordance with regulations of the commissioner after consultation with
local school district officials. The administrative component shall
include, but need not be limited to, office and central administrative
expenses, traveling expenses and all compensation, salaries and benefits
of all school administrators and supervisors, including business
administrators, superintendents of schools and deputy, assistant,
associate or other superintendents under all existing employment
contracts or collective bargaining agreements, any and all expenditures
associated with the operation of the board of education, the office of
the superintendent of schools, general administration, the school
business office, consulting costs not directly related to direct student
services and programs, planning and all other administrative activities.
The program component shall include, but need not be limited to, all
program expenditures of the school district, including the salaries and
benefits of teachers and any school administrators or supervisors who
spend a majority of their time performing teaching duties, and all
transportation operating expenses. The capital component shall include,
but need not be limited to, all transportation capital, debt service,
and lease expenditures; costs resulting from judgments in tax certiorari
proceedings or the payment of awards from court judgments,
administrative orders or settled or compromised claims; and all
facilities costs of the school district, including facilities lease
expenditures, the annual debt service and total debt for all facilities
financed by bonds and notes of the school district, and the costs of
construction, acquisition, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement
of school buildings, provided that such budget shall include a rental,
operations and maintenance section that includes base rent costs, total
rent costs, operation and maintenance charges, cost per square foot for
each facility leased by the school district, and any and all
expenditures associated with custodial salaries and benefits, service
contracts, supplies, utilities, and maintenance and repairs of school
facilities. For the purposes of the development of a budget for the
nineteen hundred ninety-seven--ninety-eight school year, the board of
education shall separate its program, capital and administrative costs
for the nineteen hundred ninety-six--ninety-seven school year in the
manner as if the budget for such year had been presented in three
components. Except as provided in subdivision four of this section,
nothing in this section shall preclude the board, in its discretion,
from submitting additional items of expenditure to the voters for
approval as separate propositions or the voters from submitting
propositions pursuant to sections two thousand eight and two thousand
thirty-five of this chapter subject to the requirements set forth in
subdivision nine of section two thousand twenty-three-a of this part.
 4. The budget adoption process shall conform to the requirements set
forth in section two thousand twenty-three-a of this title. In the event
the qualified voters of the district reject the budget proposed pursuant
to subdivision three of this section, the board may propose to the
voters a revised budget pursuant to subdivision three of section two
thousand seven of this title or may adopt a contingency budget pursuant
to subdivision five of this section and subdivision five of section two
thousand twenty-two of this title. The school district budget for any
school year, or any part of such budget or any propositions involving
the expenditure of money for such school year shall not be submitted for
a vote of the qualified voters more than twice. In the event the
qualified voters reject the resubmitted budget, the board shall adopt a
contingency budget in accordance with subdivision five of this section
and subdivision five of such section two thousand twenty-two of this
title.
 5. If the qualified voters fail or refuse to vote the sum estimated to
be necessary for teachers' salaries and other ordinary contingent
expenses, the board shall adopt a contingency budget in accordance with
this subdivision and shall levy a tax for that portion of such sum
remaining after applying thereto the moneys received or to be received
from state, federal or other sources, in the same manner as if the
budget had been approved by the qualified voters; subject to the
limitations imposed in subdivision four of section two thousand
twenty-three of this chapter, subdivision eight of section two thousand
twenty-three-a of this title and this subdivision. The administrative
component shall not comprise a greater percentage of the contingency
budget exclusive of the capital component than the lesser of (1) the
percentage the administrative component had comprised in the prior year
budget exclusive of the capital component; or (2) the percentage the
administrative component had comprised in the last proposed defeated
budget exclusive of the capital component. Such contingency budget shall
include the sum determined by the board to be necessary for:
 (a) teachers' salaries, including the salaries of all members of the
teaching and supervising staff;
 (b) items of expense specifically authorized by statute to be incurred
by the board of education, including, but not limited to, expenditures
for transportation to and from regular school programs included as
ordinary contingent expenses in subdivision twelve of section
twenty-five hundred three of this chapter, expenditures for textbooks,
required services for non-public school students, school health
services, special education services, kindergarten and nursery school
programs, and the district's share of the administrative costs and costs
of services provided by a board of cooperative educational services;
 (c) items of expense for legal obligations of the district, including,
but not limited to, contractual obligations, debt service, court orders
or judgments, orders of administrative bodies or officers, and standards
and requirements of the board of regents and the commissioner that have
the force and effect of law;
 (d) the purchase of library books and other instructional materials
associated with a library;
 (e) items of expense necessary to maintain the educational programs of
the district, preserve the property of the district or protect the
health and safety of students and staff, including, but not limited to,
support services, pupil personnel services, the necessary salaries for
the necessary number of non-teaching employees, necessary legal
expenses, water and utility charges, instructional supplies for
teachers' use, emergency repairs, temporary rental of essential
classroom facilities, and expenditures necessary to advise school
district voters concerning school matters; and
 (f) expenses incurred for interschool athletics, field trips and other
extracurricular activities; and
 (g) any other item of expense determined by the commissioner to be an
ordinary contingent expense in any school district.
 6. The commissioner shall determine appeals raising questions as to
what items of expenditure are ordinary contingent expenses pursuant to
subdivision five of this section in accordance with section two thousand
twenty-four and three hundred ten of this chapter.
 7. Each year, the board of education shall prepare a school district
report card, pursuant to regulations of the commissioner, and shall make
it publicly available by transmitting it to local newspapers of general
circulation, appending it to copies of the proposed budget made publicly
available as required by law, making it available for distribution at
the annual meeting, and otherwise disseminating it as required by the
commissioner. Such report card shall include measures of the academic
performance of the school district, on a school by school basis, and
measures of the fiscal performance of the district, as prescribed by the
commissioner. Pursuant to regulations of the commissioner, the report
card shall also compare these measures to statewide averages for all
public schools, and statewide averages for public schools of comparable
wealth and need, developed by the commissioner. Such report card shall
include, at a minimum, any information on the school district regarding
pupil performance and expenditure per pupil required to be included in
the annual report by the regents to the governor and the legislature
pursuant to section two hundred fifteen-a of this chapter; and any other
information required by the commissioner. School districts (i)
identified as having fifteen percent or more of their students in
special education, or (ii) which have fifty percent or more of their
students with disabilities in special education programs or services
sixty percent or more of the school day in a general education building,
or (iii) which have eight percent or more of their students with
disabilities in special education programs in public or private separate
educational settings shall indicate on their school district report card
their respective percentages as defined in this paragraph and paragraphs
(i) and (ii) of this subdivision as compared to the statewide average.
 § 2602. Annual and special school district meetings. 1. Except as
otherwise provided in this chapter, including the provisions of this
article, an annual school election shall be held on the same day as the
annual budget vote pursuant to the provisions of article forty-one of
this chapter in each city school district.
 2. Except as otherwise provided in section twenty-six hundred one-a of
this article, special school district meetings may be called in each
city school district by the board of education thereof in accordance
with sections two thousand four and two thousand seven of this chapter,
whenever such board shall deem it necessary and proper.
 3. Notwithstanding any provisions of article forty-one of this chapter
to the contrary, the polls of such annual and special district meetings
shall be open during such consecutive hours, not less than nine,
beginning not earlier than six o'clock in the forenoon, and two of which
hours shall be after six o'clock in the evening, as the board of
education shall by resolution determine.
 § 2603. Qualifications of voters. A person shall be entitled to vote
at a school election in a city school district who is:
 1. A citizen of the United States.
 2. Eighteen years of age.
 3. a. A resident of the state and of the city school district for
thirty days next preceding the election.
 b. Where territory is added to a city school district by consolidation
or alteration of boundaries pursuant to article thirty-one of this
chapter, residence in the territory so added shall be and shall be
deemed to be residence in the city school district for the purposes of
this section.
 c. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subdivision, no
Indian who shall have resided on the Allegany Indian reservation for a
period of thirty days preceding the election at which he offers to vote,
shall be deemed ineligible to vote at any such election in the city
school district of the city of Salamanca because of his residence on
part of such reservation located outside of such city school district.
 4. No person shall have the right to register for or vote at any
school meeting or election who would not be qualified to register for or
vote at an election in accordance with the provisions of section 5-106
of the election law.
 § 2604. Division of city school district into school election
districts; elections held in schoolhouses. The board of education of
each city school district shall adopt a resolution on or before the
first day of April, preceding the first annual school election held
hereunder, dividing the city school district into school election
districts. The city school district shall be so divided that if
circumstances will permit, school election districts will be coterminous
with one or more general election districts, and that, if practicable,
there shall be a schoolhouse in each election district. The election
districts thus formed shall continue in existence until modified by
resolution of the board of education. Such resolution shall accurately
describe the boundaries of such election districts by streets, alleys
and highways, when practicable. School elections shall be held in such
school election districts so far as may be possible in the public
schoolhouses therein. If there is no public schoolhouse in a school
election district, the board of education shall by resolution designate
the place where the election in such district shall be held.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, the board of
education of any city school district of a city of less than ten
thousand inhabitants may, by resolution, designate the entire city
school district as a single school district.
 § 2606. Registration of voters. 1. The board of education except in
those city school districts which have adopted a resolution pursuant to
section twenty-five hundred thirty-one of this chapter, shall, on or
before the fifteenth day of February in each year, appoint a board of
registration for a term of one year, consisting of as many members as
the board shall deem necessary, not more than half of whom shall belong
to the same political party, and shall designate a place within the city
school district where such board of registration shall attend for the
purpose of preparing a register for each school election district. Each
member of the board of registration shall be entitled to compensation at
a rate not to exceed that paid at general elections in the city.
 2. The board of registration of such city school district shall meet
at the designated place for the purpose of preparing the registers for
such election on such day or days as shall be fixed by the board of
education, the last day of which, however, shall not be less than two
weeks preceding each school election, at such hours as the board of
education shall by resolution designate at least twenty days before the
first registration day, which hours shall include at least four hours
between seven o'clock in the morning and eight o'clock in the evening.
The registers shall, so far as practicable, be in the same form as the
register of voters in an election district for a general election in a
city or village having five thousand inhabitants or more, under the
election law. Such registers shall be arranged alphabetically by the
first letter of surnames, and the place of residence by street and
number, or by a description accurately locating such place of residence,
of each person entered in such registers shall be given.
 Notwithstanding any other general or special law, the board of
registration shall have the power to require the board of elections or
other authority having lawful custody of the register or registers used
at the general elections last preceding such school election to turn
over such register or registers to such board of registration on or
before March first of each year for use on the date or dates of such
registration and election, for the purpose of preparing the school
district registers therefrom. Such board of elections or other authority
may, however, elect to furnish, in place of the original registers
either a duplicate of the central file registration records, or a list
of registered voters, certified to be a complete and accurate copy of
the names and addresses of all persons entered in such register for the
last preceding general election as well as the names of persons who have
registered with such board of elections or other authority up to five
days before the date of furnishing such list. On the day following the
day of the election, the general election register or registers shall be
returned to the authority from whom such register or registers were
secured. In addition, the board of registration shall include in each
school district register, the names and addresses of persons who
registered for any intervening school district election, but who were
not registered for the preceding general election. The board of
registration shall, for each election of the school district, add to
such registers the names of the qualified voters of the school district
who shall present themselves personally for registration. Only those
qualified voters who are not registered under permanent personal
registration on or before the last registration day found on the
original or duplicate registers or records or list furnished by the
board of elections and have not voted at an intervening school district
election, shall be required to present themselves personally for
registration.
 3. All the provisions of the election law in relation to the
registration of voters in a city or village having five thousand
inhabitants or more, shall so far as practicable and consistent with the
provisions of this article, apply to the registration provided for in
this section.
 4. The district clerk shall furnish the necessary registration
material to the board of registration at the expense of the school
district.
 5. The board of education shall publish a notice of registration at
least once in each of the two weeks preceding the first registration day
designated, in a newspaper having a general circulation in the city
school district; or, at least two weeks preceding the first registration
day designated, the board shall post a printed copy of the notice
conspicuously in twenty places frequented by the public within such
district. Such notice shall state that at a place and hour or hours at
which the board of registration shall meet to prepare the school
election district registers, any person who has not currently registered
under permanent personal registration by the last date found on such
original or duplicate registers, or records, or list furnished by the
board of elections, and has not voted at an intervening election, must,
in order to be entitled to vote, present himself personally for
registration. Such notice shall state the last date found on such
original or duplicate registers or records or list furnished by the
board of elections.
 6. The registers prepared as provided in this section shall,
immediately upon completion and not less than two weeks prior to the
time set for the school election at which they are to be used, be filed
in the office of the clerk of the board of education, and thereafter
shall at all reasonable times be open to inspection by any qualified
voter of the school district. Upon the filing of such registers, the
board of education shall publish at least once in each of the two weeks
preceding such election in a newspaper having a general circulation in
the city school district, or shall post conspicuously in twenty places
frequented by the public within the school district, a notice stating
that the school election district registers have been filed and noting
the place at which they are on file and the hours during which they will
be open for inspection in each day up to the day set for the election.
 7. Any person who is duly qualified to vote and who registered for the
preceding general election or any intervening school district election,
and whose name was by mistake, error or neglect of the board of
registration, omitted from the school election district register, may at
any time either before or during election day request the clerk of the
board of education to place the name of such voter on the appropriate
register. If the clerk of the board of education shall find that such an
omission has been made, he shall place the voter's name on the register.
In the event of the failure, refusal or neglect of the clerk of the
board of education to comply with such request, a court, justice or
judge in a proceeding instituted by such voter may grant an order
compelling such clerk forthwith to enter the voter's name on the
register.
 8. A qualified voter may, upon the examination of the registers, file
a challenge of the qualifications as a voter of any person whose name
appears on such registers. Such challenges shall be written, shall be
under oath and shall be on blanks to be furnished by the board of
education.
 9. Challenges shall be received and preserved by the clerk of the
board or other person designated by the board, and upon receipt thereof,
the clerk shall file such challenge or copy thereof with the register,
and shall place the words "to be challenged on the day of election"
opposite the name of such person on the register.
 10. The clerk of the board of education shall cause a copy of the
appropriate register of such school district to be delivered on the day
of the election before the opening of the polls to the inspectors of
election at each voting place within the district at the place or places
where the election is to be held.
 11. School elections in any school district subject to the provisions
of this article, shall hereafter be conducted in the manner provided in
this article, and no person shall be entitled to vote whose name does
not appear upon the register of the school election district in which he
claims to be entitled to vote.
 Any person who has moved from one school election district to another,
in the same city school district and who has not registered in the new
school election district, and who is still registered in the district
from which he moved, may vote in the election district in which he is
registered. Such person must at the time of voting advise the election
inspectors of his new address and they shall advise the board of
registration to correct such registration.
 12. The provisions of this section shall not apply with respect to any
person registered to vote pursuant to the provisions of section three
hundred fifty-two of the election law.
 § 2607. Inspectors of election; organization. Not less than ten days
prior to each special or annual election, the board of education shall
appoint for each election district three qualified voters residing
therein to act as inspectors of election in such election district at
such election. The clerk of the board of education shall give written
notice of appointment to the persons so appointed. If a person appointed
an inspector of election refuses to accept such appointment or fails to
serve, the board may appoint a qualified voter of the school election
district to fill the vacancy. Additional inspectors of elections for
each district may be appointed for one or more of such school election
districts when, in the opinion of the board, special circumstances exist
requiring the services of such additional inspectors. Such inspectors
shall, before opening the polls in the election district for which they
are appointed, organize by electing one of their number as chairperson
and one as poll clerk. The chairperson may also appoint one of the
inspectors as an assistant poll clerk. Each inspector shall receive for
his or her services a compensation to be fixed by the board of
education, not to exceed the basic compensation paid to inspectors of
election at the preceding general elections, as fixed by the governing
body of the city in which such school district is wholly or partly
located, to be paid out of the school funds in the same manner as other
claims against the city school district. Notwithstanding the foregoing
provisions of this section, a person seventeen years of age who is
enrolled in a school district and fulfilling the requirements of section
thirty-two hundred seven-a of this chapter shall be eligible to be
appointed as, and to perform the duties of, an election inspector or
poll clerk as provided in this article.
 § 2608. Nomination and ballot. 1. Candidates for members of the board
of education in a city school district shall be nominated by petition
directed to the board of education and signed by at least one hundred
persons qualified to vote at school elections in such district. Such
petition shall contain the names and residences of the candidates for
the vacancies in the board of education to be filled at the annual
election. Where a proposition has been adopted by the voters of such
district to require that each vacancy on the board of education to be
filled shall be considered a separate specific office, a separate
petition shall be required to nominate a candidate to each separate
office and such petition shall describe the specific vacancy on the
board of education for which the candidate is nominated, which
description shall include at least the length of the term of office and
the name of the last incumbent, if any. Such petitions shall be filed in
the office of the clerk of the board of education between the hours of
nine a.m. and five p.m., on or before the twentieth day preceding the
day of the annual election. The clerk shall refuse to accept petitions
signed by an insufficient number of qualified voters, or petitions which
are not timely. If a candidate for whom a nominating petition for the
office of member of a board of education has been duly filed withdraws
such petition, dies or becomes otherwise ineligible to hold such office
at a time which is later than fifteen days before the last day for the
filing of nominating petitions as provided in this subdivision, the time
for filing nominating petitions for such office shall be extended to
five p.m. on the fifteenth day after the date on which the candidate
withdrew, died or otherwise became ineligible to hold such office,
provided that no such nominating petition may be filed after five p.m.
on the seventh day preceding the election.
 2. The board of education shall cause to be printed official ballots
containing the names of all candidates as above provided, except that
the board may refuse to have the names of ineligible candidates placed
on such ballots. The names of the candidates shall be arranged in the
order as determined by the drawing by lot in accordance with the
provisions of paragraph b of subdivision two of section two thousand
thirty-two of this law. Blank spaces shall be provided so that voters
may vote for candidates who have not been nominated for the offices to
be filled at such elections. The form of such ballots shall conform
substantially to the form of ballots used at general elections as
prescribed in the election law. Such ballots shall be printed at the
expense of the city school district.
 3. There shall be delivered to the inspectors in each school election
district on the day of the annual election, before the opening of the
polls therein, a supply of such ballots which shall at least equal the
number of qualified voters entitled to vote in such district.
 4. Such ballots shall have printed thereon instructions as to the
marking of the ballots and the number of candidates for the several
offices for which a voter is permitted to vote.
 5. If official ballots are not furnished as above provided, an
election of members of a board of education in a city school district
shall not be declared invalid or illegal because of the use of ballots
which do not conform to the requirements of this section or of the
provisions of the election law, provided the intent of the voter may be
ascertained from the use of such irregular or defective ballots and such
use was not fraudulent and did not substantially affect the result of
the election.
 § 2609. Conduct of election; challenges. 1. Such elections shall be
conducted, so far as may be, in accordance with the provisions of the
election law, relative to general elections, except as otherwise
provided herein. Ballot boxes shall be provided by the board of
education for each school election district, at least one to contain the
ballots voted and at least one other for the rejected or defective
ballots.
 2. All persons whose names appear upon the register prepared for such
election as residing in such election district shall be permitted to
vote and shall be given ballots for such purpose.
 Where the general election registers have been turned over to the
board of education, the board may require that the registers be used on
election day for the purpose of verifying the signature of each voter.
Where the board of elections, or other authority having lawful custody
of the register or registers, has elected to furnish certified registry
lists in place of the original registers, the board of education may
require that any voter offer evidence to prove his identity before being
permitted to vote. In such case, not less than ten days prior to
election day, the board shall establish reasonable rules and regulations
governing the evidence necessary to prove the identity of each voter.
 3. Booths shall be provided and voters shall be required to enter such
booths for the purpose of marking their ballots. The ballots when
presented to the inspector shall be folded so as to conceal the names of
the candidates for whom the voter has voted.
 4. All voters entitled to vote who are in the place where the election
is held at or before the time of closing the polls shall be allowed to
vote. The inspectors shall keep a poll list, containing the name and
address of each qualified elector who votes at such election for the
candidates or propositions voted for thereat.
 4-a. (a) At each such election there shall be conspicuously placed, by
the inspectors of election, distance markers at a distance of one
hundred feet from the polling place. Such distance markers shall
indicate the prohibition contained in paragraph (b) of this subdivision
and shall be so placed at least one-half hour before the opening of the
polls and shall remain until the polls are closed.
 (b) Where such markers are so placed and the polls are open, no person
shall do any electioneering within the polling place, or within one
hundred feet therefrom in any public street, or within such distance in
any place in a public manner and no banner, poster or placard on behalf
of or in opposition to any candidate or issue to be voted upon shall be
allowed in or upon the polling place or within one hundred feet
therefrom during the election. For the purposes of this subdivision, the
one hundred foot distance shall be deemed to include a one hundred foot
radial measured from the entrances, designated by the inspectors of
election, to a building where such election is being held. This section
shall not be deemed to prohibit the board of trustees or board of
education from displaying within any polling place a copy or copies of
any proposition to be voted upon.
 (c) Any person who wilfully violates the provisions of paragraph (b)
of this subdivision shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
 5. Any qualified voter of a city school district may challenge the
right of a person to vote at the time when he requests a ballot. All
persons named upon the applicable register as having been challenged
prior to the day of the election shall also be challenged before they
are given ballots to vote. The chairman of the board of inspectors shall
administer to each person so challenged the following oath: "I do
solemnly swear (or affirm) that I am a citizen of the United States;
that I am of the age of eighteen years or more; that I have been an
inhabitant of the State for the past year, a resident of the county for
the past four months and for the thirty days past an actual resident of
this city school district and am therefore qualified to vote at this
election." If the person challenged so swears or affirms, he shall be
permitted to vote at such election; but if he shall refuse to so swear
or affirm, he shall not be given a ballot or be permitted to vote.
 6. A person who wilfully swears or affirms falsely as to his right to
vote at such election after his right to vote has been challenged is
guilty of perjury and may be punished in the manner provided by law for
the punishment of such crime. A person who is not qualified to vote at
such election who shall vote thereat, although not challenged, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than
twenty-five dollars, or by imprisonment for not less than thirty days,
or by both such fine and imprisonment.
 § 2610. Canvass of votes and return to board of education; declaration
of result. 1. Immediately upon the close of the polls the inspectors of
each school election district shall count the ballots found in the
ballot box without unfolding them, except so far as is necessary to
ascertain that each ballot is single. They shall compare the number of
ballots found in the ballot box with the number of persons recorded on
the poll list as having voted at the election. If the number of ballots
found in the ballot box shall exceed the number of names, such ballots
shall be replaced without being unfolded in the box from which they were
taken and shall be thoroughly mingled in such box and one of the
inspectors designated by the board shall then publicly draw out as many
ballots as shall be equal to the number of excess ballots. The ballots
so drawn out shall be enclosed without unfolding in an envelope which
shall be sealed and endorsed with a statement of the number of such
excess ballots withdrawn from the box and shall be signed by the
inspector who withdrew such ballots. Such envelope with the excess
ballots therein shall be placed in the box for the defective or spoiled
ballots.
 2. The ballots shall be counted or canvassed by the inspectors in the
manner provided for the canvassing of ballots at a general election
pursuant to the election law except as otherwise provided herein. The
votes cast for each candidate or proposition shall be tallied and
counted by the inspectors and a statement shall be made containing the
names of each candidate receiving votes in such district and the number
of votes cast for each candidate or proposition. Such statement shall
also give the number and describe the ballots which are declared void
and shall also specify the number of wholly blank ballots cast. Such
statement shall be signed by the inspectors. The ballots which were
declared void and not counted shall be enclosed in an envelope which
shall be sealed and endorsed as containing void ballots and signed by
the inspectors. Such envelope shall be placed in the ballot box
containing the defective and spoiled ballots.
 3. After the ballots are counted and the statements have been made as
required herein the ballots shall be replaced in the ballot box. Each
box shall be securely locked and sealed and deposited by an inspector
designated for the purpose with the clerk of the board of education. The
unused ballots shall be placed in a sealed package and returned by the
inspector designated for such purpose to such clerk at the same time
that such ballot boxes are delivered to him. The statement of the
canvass of the votes shall be delivered to the clerk of the board of
education either after the close of the polls on the day of the annual
or special election or on the day following the annual or special
election as the board of education shall determine by resolution adopted
at the last meeting of such board held before such election.
 4. The board of education shall meet at the usual place of meeting at
such time as the statement of the canvass of the votes shall have been
delivered to the clerk of the board of education on the day of the
annual or special election or at eight o'clock in the evening of the day
following such election and shall forthwith examine and tabulate the
statements of the result of the election in the several school election
districts. Such board shall canvass the returns as contained in such
statements and shall determine the number of votes cast for each
candidate or proposition in the several school election districts. The
board shall thereupon declare the result of the canvass. The candidates
receiving a plurality of the votes cast respectively for the several
offices shall be declared elected. Where more than one office is to be
filled by such election and there is a variance in the length of the
terms for which such offices are to be filled as authorized by this
chapter, or where one or more persons are to be elected for a full term
or terms and one or more persons are to be elected for the unexpired
portion of a term or terms, or both, the candidate receiving the largest
number of votes shall be entitled to the longest term and the candidates
receiving the next highest numbers of votes shall be entitled, in
decreasing order of the respective numbers of votes, to the several
offices, in decreasing order of the length of such terms or unexpired
portions of terms. The proposition or propositions receiving a majority
of the votes cast therefor shall be declared adopted, except as
otherwise provided by law. The clerk of the board of education shall
record the result of the election as announced by the board of
education.
 5. The clerk of the board of education shall within twenty-four hours
after the result of the election has been declared serve a written
notice either personally or by mail upon each person declared to be
elected as a member of the board of education.
 6. In the event that more eligible persons than the number remaining
to be elected receive, for the same office or offices, an equal number
of votes sufficient that fewer persons receiving such number of votes
would be elected, the board of education shall call a special run-off
election to be held within forty-five days following the general or
special election at which such tie vote was cast to determine which of
such candidates shall be elected to such office. The only persons who
shall be deemed nominated for such run-off election shall be the
candidates who have received such equal number of votes.
 § 2611. Use of voting machines. The board of education of a city
school district may authorize the use of voting machines at a school
election. When such voting machines are used the provisions of section
two thousand thirty-five of this chapter shall apply to and govern the
use of such machines in such school election.
 § 2613. Absentee, early mail, and military ballots. The board of
education of each city school district to which this article applies
shall provide for absentee ballots in accordance with the provisions of
section two thousand eighteen-a of this title, early mail ballots in
accordance with the provisions of section two thousand eighteen-e of
this title, and military ballots in accordance with section two thousand
eighteen-d of this title.
 § 2614. Transmission of publicly available data to the New York voting
and elections database. Upon the certification of election results and
the completion of the voter history file after each election, each
school district that holds elections pursuant to this article shall
transmit copies of records required to be transmitted pursuant to
section 3-112 of the election law in a manner and time provided for in
such section.
 ARTICLE 55
REGULATION BY BOARDS OF EDUCATION OF CONDUCT ON SCHOOL DISTRICT PROPERTY
Section 2801. Codes of conduct on school property.
 2801-a. School safety plans.
 2801-b. New York state school safety improvement teams.
 2802. Uniform violent incident reporting system.
 2803. Use of internet-enabled devices during the school day.
 2814. Omnibus school violence prevention grant program.
 § 2801. Codes of conduct on school property. 1. For purposes of this
section, school property means in or within any building, structure,
athletic playing field, playground, parking lot or land contained within
the real property boundary line of a public elementary or secondary
school; or in or on a school bus, as defined in section one hundred
forty-two of the vehicle and traffic law; and a school function shall
mean a school-sponsored or school-authorized extra-curricular event or
activity regardless of where such event or activity takes place,
including any event or activity that may take place in another state.
 2. The board of education or the trustees, as defined in section two
of this chapter, of every school district within the state, however
created, and every board of cooperative educational services and county
vocational extension board, shall adopt and amend, as appropriate, a
code of conduct for the maintenance of order on school property,
including a school function, which shall govern the conduct of students,
teachers and other school personnel as well as visitors and shall
provide for the enforcement thereof. Such policy may be adopted by the
school board or trustees only after at least one public hearing that
provides for the participation of school personnel, parents, students
and any other interested parties. Such code of conduct shall include, at
a minimum:
 a. provisions regarding conduct, dress and language deemed appropriate
and acceptable on school property, including a school function, and
conduct, dress and language deemed unacceptable and inappropriate on
school property, including a school function, and provisions regarding
acceptable civil and respectful treatment of teachers, school
administrators, other school personnel, students and visitors on school
property, including a school function, including the appropriate range
of disciplinary measures which may be imposed for violation of such
code, and the roles of teachers, administrators, other school personnel,
the board of education and parents;
 b. standards and procedures to assure security and safety of students
and school personnel;
 c. provisions for the removal from the classroom and from school
property, including a school function, of students and other persons who
violate the code;
 d. disciplinary measures to be taken in incidents involving the
possession or use of illegal substances or weapons, the use of physical
force, vandalism, violation of another student's civil rights and
threats of violence;
 e. provisions for detention, suspension and removal from the classroom
of students, consistent with section thirty-two hundred fourteen of this
chapter and other applicable federal, state and local laws including
provisions for the school authorities to establish policies and
procedures to ensure the provision of continued educational programming
and activities for students removed from the classroom, placed in
detention, or suspended from school;
 f. procedures by which violations are reported, determined, discipline
measures imposed and discipline measures carried out;
 g. provisions ensuring such code and the enforcement thereof are in
compliance with state and federal laws relating to students with
disabilities;
 h. provisions setting forth the procedures by which local law
enforcement agencies shall be notified of code violations which
constitute a crime;
 i. provisions setting forth the circumstances under and procedures by
which persons in parental relation to the student shall be notified of
code violations;
 j. provisions setting forth the circumstances under and procedures by
which a complaint in criminal court, a juvenile delinquency petition or
person in need of supervision petition as defined in articles three and
seven of the family court act will be filed;
 k. circumstances under and procedures by which referral to appropriate
human service agencies shall be made;
 l. a minimum suspension period, for students who repeatedly are
substantially disruptive of the educational process or substantially
interfere with the teacher's authority over the classroom, provided that
the suspending authority may reduce such period on a case by case basis
to be consistent with any other state and federal law. For purposes of
this section, the definition of "repeatedly are substantially
disruptive" shall be determined in accordance with the regulations of
the commissioner;
 m. a minimum suspension period for acts that would qualify the pupil
to be defined as a violent pupil pursuant to paragraph a of subdivision
two-a of section thirty-two hundred fourteen of this chapter, provided
that the suspending authority may reduce such period on a case by case
basis to be consistent with any other state and federal law; and
 n. provisions to comply with article two of this chapter.
 * 3. The district code of conduct shall be developed in collaboration
with student, teacher, administrator, and parent organizations, school
safety personnel and other school personnel and shall be approved by the
board of education, or other governing body, or by the chancellor of the
city school district in the case of the city school district of the city
of New York. In the city school district of the city of New York, each
community district education council shall be authorized to adopt and
implement additional policies, which are consistent with the city
district's district-wide code of conduct, to reflect the individual
needs of each community school district provided that such additional
policies shall require the approval of the chancellor.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2026
 * 3. The district code of conduct shall be developed in collaboration
with student, teacher, administrator, and parent organizations, school
safety personnel and other school personnel and shall be approved by the
board of education, or other governing body, or by the chancellor of the
city school district in the case of the city school district of the city
of New York. In the city school district of the city of New York, each
community school district board shall be authorized to adopt and
implement additional policies, which are consistent with the city
district's district-wide code of conduct, to reflect the individual
needs of each community school district provided that such additional
policies shall require the approval of the chancellor.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2026
 4. The board of education, chancellor or other governing body shall
provide copies of a summary of the code of conduct to all students at a
general assembly held at the beginning of the school year and shall make
copies of the code available to persons in parental relation to students
at the beginning of each school year, and shall mail a plain language
summary of such code to all persons in parental relation to students
before the beginning of each school year, and make it available
thereafter upon request. The board of education, chancellor or other
governing body shall take reasonable steps to ensure community awareness
of the code provisions.
 5. a. The board of education, chancellor or other governing body shall
annually review and update the district's codes of conduct if necessary,
taking into consideration the effectiveness of code provisions and the
fairness and consistency of its administration. Each school district is
authorized to establish a committee and to facilitate the review of the
code of conduct and the district's response to code of conduct
violations. Any such committee shall be comprised of similar individuals
described in subdivision three of this section. The school board,
chancellor, or other governing body shall reapprove any such updated
code only after at least one public hearing that provides for the
participation of school personnel, parents, students and any other
interested parties.
 b. Each district shall file a copy of its codes of conduct with the
commissioner and all amendments to such code shall be filed with the
commissioner no later than thirty days after their adoption.
 § 2801-a. School safety plans. 1. The board of education or trustees,
as defined in section two of this chapter, of every school district
within the state, however created, and every board of cooperative
educational services and county vocational education and extension board
and the chancellor of the city school district of the city of New York
shall adopt and amend a comprehensive district-wide school safety plan
and building-level emergency response plans regarding crisis
intervention, emergency response and management, provided that in the
city school district of the city of New York, such plans shall be
adopted by the chancellor of the city school district. Such plans shall
be developed by a district-wide school safety team and a building-level
emergency response team established pursuant to subdivision four of this
section and shall be in a form developed by the commissioner in
consultation with the division of criminal justice services, the
superintendent of the state police and any other appropriate state
agencies. The commissioner, in consultation with the superintendent of
the state police, is authorized to develop an appeals process from
duplicative requirements of a district-wide school safety plan for
school districts having only one school building.
 2. Such comprehensive district-wide safety plan shall be developed by
the district-wide school safety team and shall include at a minimum:
 a. policies and procedures for responding to implied or direct threats
of violence by students, teachers, other school personnel including bus
drivers and monitors, as well as visitors to the school, including
threats by students against themselves, which for the purposes of this
section shall include suicide;
 b. policies and procedures for responding to acts of violence by
students, teachers, other school personnel including bus drivers and
monitors, as well as visitors to the school, including consideration of
zero-tolerance policies for school violence;
 c. appropriate prevention and intervention strategies such as:
 (i) collaborative arrangements with state and local law enforcement
officials, designed to ensure that school safety officers and other
security personnel are adequately trained, including being trained to
de-escalate potentially violent situations, and are effectively and
fairly recruited;
 (ii) non-violent conflict resolution training programs;
 (iii) peer mediation programs and youth courts; and
 (iv) extended day and other school safety programs;
 d. policies and procedures for contacting appropriate law enforcement
officials in the event of a violent incident;
 e. policies and procedures for contacting parents, guardians or
persons in parental relation to the students of the district in the
event of a violent incident and policies and procedures for contacting
parents, guardians or persons in parental relation to an individual
student of the district in the event of an implied or direct threat of
violence by such student against themselves, which for purposes of this
section shall include suicide;
 f. policies and procedures relating to school building security,
including where appropriate the use of school safety officers and/or
security devices or procedures. District-wide school safety teams shall
consider, as part of its reviews of the comprehensive district-wide
safety plan, the installation of a panic alarm system. For purposes of
this paragraph, "panic alarm system" shall mean a silent security system
signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal
a life-threatening or emergency situation requiring a response from
local law enforcement or, in the case of a school building located in a
municipality in which there is no municipal police department, a
location designated by the superintendent of state police and may
include one or more of the following: wired panic button or buttons,
wireless panic button or buttons or a mobile or computer application;
 g. policies and procedures for the dissemination of informative
materials regarding the early detection of potentially violent
behaviors, including but not limited to the identification of family,
community and environmental factors, to teachers, administrators, school
personnel including bus drivers and monitors, persons in parental
relation to students of the district, students and other persons deemed
appropriate to receive such information;
 h. policies and procedures for annual school safety training for staff
and students; provided that the district must certify to the
commissioner that all staff have undergone annual training on the
emergency response plan, and that the school safety training include
components on violence prevention, mental health and sudden cardiac
arrest, such training may be implemented and conducted in conjunction
with existing professional development and training; provided however
that new employees hired after the start of the school year shall
receive training within thirty days of such hire or as part of a
district's existing new hire training program, whichever is sooner;
 i. protocols for responding to bomb threats, hostage-takings,
intrusions and kidnappings;
 j. strategies for improving communication among students and between
students and staff and reporting of potentially violent incidents, such
as the establishment of youth-run programs, peer mediation, conflict
resolution, creating a forum or designating a mentor for students
concerned with bullying or violence and establishing anonymous reporting
mechanisms for school violence;
 k. a description of the duties of hall monitors and any other school
safety personnel, the training required of all personnel acting in a
school security capacity, and the hiring and screening process for all
personnel acting in a school security capacity;
 l. the designation of the superintendent, or superintendent's
designee, as the district chief emergency officer responsible for
coordinating communication between school staff and law enforcement and
first responders, and ensuring staff understanding of the district-level
safety plan. The chief emergency officer shall also be responsible for
ensuring the completion and yearly updating of building-level emergency
response plans;
 m. protocols for responding to a declared state disaster emergency
involving a communicable disease that are substantially consistent with
the provisions of section twenty-seven-c of the labor law; and
 n. policies and procedures relating to sudden cardiac arrest. The
district-wide school safety team shall develop and implement a cardiac
emergency response plan that addresses the use of appropriate personnel
to respond to incidents involving any individual experiencing sudden
cardiac arrest or similar life-threatening emergency on any school site
owned or operated by a school or at a location of a school sponsored
event, including but not limited to all athletic programs. Such plan
shall be a written document and shall include specific procedures for
incidents involving an individual experiencing sudden cardiac arrest or
a similar life-threatening emergency while attending or participating in
an athletic practice or event while on school grounds that are venue
specific. Each plan shall integrate nationally recognized,
evidence-based core elements, such as those recommended by the American
Heart Association. School officials shall consider how to best integrate
their cardiac emergency response plan into community EMS responder
protocols. The district-wide school safety team may provide first aid,
CPR, and AED training for relevant staff, including members of
building-level emergency response teams provided for in subdivision four
of this section, provided that such training shall be voluntary.
 3. A building level emergency response plan, developed by the
building-level emergency response team defined in subdivision four of
this section, shall be kept confidential, including but not limited to
the floor plans, blueprints, schematics or other maps of the school
interior, school grounds and road maps of the immediate surrounding
area, and shall not be disclosed except to authorized department or
school staff, and law enforcement officers, and shall include the
following elements:
 a. policies and procedures for response to emergency situations, such
as those requiring evacuation, sheltering, lock-down, and sudden cardiac
arrest. These policies shall include, at a minimum, evacuation routes,
shelter sites, and procedures for addressing medical needs,
transportation and emergency notification of parents and guardians;
 b. designation of an emergency response team comprised of school
personnel, law enforcement officials, fire officials and representatives
from local regional and/or state emergency response agencies, other
appropriate incident response teams, and a post-incident response team
that includes appropriate school personnel, medical personnel, mental
health counselors and others who can assist the school community in
coping with the aftermath of a violent incident;
 c. floor plans, blueprints, schematics or other maps of the school
interior, school grounds and road maps of the immediate surrounding
area;
 d. establishment of internal and external communication systems in
emergencies which may include the installation of a panic alarm system;
 e. definition of the chain of command in a manner consistent with the
national interagency incident management system/incident command system;
 f. coordination of the emergency response plan with the state-wide
plan for disaster mental health services to assure that the school has
access to federal, state and local mental health resources in the event
of a violent incident;
 g. procedures for review and the conduct of drills and other exercises
to test components of the emergency response plan; and
 h. policies and procedures for securing and restricting access to the
crime scene in order to preserve evidence in cases of violent crimes on
school property.
 4. Each district-wide school safety team shall be appointed by the
board of education, or the chancellor in the case of the city school
district of the city of New York, and shall include but not be limited
to representatives of the school board, teacher, administrator, and
parent organizations, school safety personnel, and other school
personnel including bus drivers and monitors. At the discretion of the
board of education, or the chancellor in the case of the city of New
York, a student may be allowed to participate on the safety team,
provided however, that no portion of a confidential building-level
emergency response plan shall be shared with such student nor shall such
student be present where details of a confidential building-level
emergency response plan or confidential portions of a district-wide
emergency response strategy are discussed. Each building-level emergency
response team shall be appointed by the building principal, in
accordance with regulations or guidelines prescribed by the board of
education, chancellor or other governing body. Such building-level teams
shall include but not be limited to representatives of teacher,
administrator, and parent organizations, school safety personnel and
other school personnel including bus drivers and monitors, community
members, law enforcement officials, fire officials or other emergency
response agencies, and any other representatives the board of education,
chancellor or other governing body deems appropriate.
 5. The district-wide safety plan and building-level emergency response
plans shall be reviewed by the appropriate team on at least an annual
basis and updated as needed.
 6. Each board of education, chancellor or other governing body shall
make each district-wide safety plan available for public comment at
least thirty days prior to its adoption. Such district-wide plans may be
adopted by the school board only after at least one public hearing that
provides for the participation of school personnel, parents, students
and any other interested parties. Each district shall file a copy of its
district-wide safety plan with the commissioner and all amendments to
such plan shall be filed with the commissioner no later than thirty days
after their adoption.
 7. Each board of education, chancellor or other governing body or
officer shall ensure a copy of each building-level emergency response
plan and any amendments thereto, shall be filed with the appropriate
local law enforcement agency and with the state police within thirty
days of its adoption. Building-level emergency response plans shall be
confidential and shall not be subject to disclosure under article six of
the public officers law or any other provision of law. If the board of
education, chancellor or other governing body or chancellor fails to
file such plan as required by this section, the commissioner may, in an
amount determined by the commissioner, withhold public money from the
district until the district is in compliance.
 8. The commissioner shall annually report to the governor and the
legislature on the implementation and compliance with the provisions of
this section.
 9. Whenever it shall have been demonstrated to the satisfaction of the
commissioner that a school district has failed to adopt a code of
conduct which fully satisfies the requirements of section twenty-eight
hundred one of this article, or a district-wide safety plan or
building-level emergency response plans which satisfies the requirements
of this section, or to faithfully and completely implement all three,
the commissioner may, on thirty days notice to the district, withhold
from the district monies to be paid to such district for the current
school year pursuant to section thirty-six hundred nine-a of this
chapter, exclusive of monies to be paid in respect of obligations to the
retirement systems for school and district staff and pursuant to
collective bargaining agreements, or the commissioner may direct the
district to expend up to such amount upon the development and
implementation of a code of conduct and a school district safety plan as
required by such sections. Prior to such withholding or redirection, the
commissioner shall provide the district an opportunity to present
evidence of extenuating circumstances; when combined with evidence that
the district shall promptly comply within short time frames that shall
be established by the commissioner as part of an agreement between the
district and the commissioner, the commissioner may temporarily stay the
withholding or redirection of funds pending implementation of such
agreement. If the district promptly and fully complies with the
agreement and is in full compliance with this section and section
twenty-eight hundred one of this article, the commissioner shall abate
the withholding in its entirety. Any failure to meet the obligations of
the compliance agreement by the district within the time frames
established shall be considered a willful violation of a commissioner's
order by the members of the district board for purposes of subdivision
one of section three hundred six of the education law. Notwithstanding
any other law, rule or regulation, such transfer shall take effect upon
filing of a notice thereof with the director of the budget and the
chairs of the senate finance and assembly ways and means committees.
 10. Every school shall define the roles and areas of responsibility of
school personnel, security personnel and law enforcement in response to
student misconduct that violates the code of conduct. A school district
or charter school that employs, contracts with, or otherwise retains law
enforcement or public or private security personnel, including school
resource officers, shall establish a written contract or memorandum of
understanding that is developed with stakeholder input, including, but
not limited to, parents, students, school administrators, teachers,
collective bargaining units, parent and student organizations and
community members, as well as probation officers, prosecutors, defense
counsels and courts that are familiar with school discipline. Such
written contract or memorandum of understanding shall define the
relationship between a school district or charter school, school
personnel, students, visitors, law enforcement, and public or private
security personnel. Such contract or memorandum of understanding shall
be consistent with the code of conduct, define law enforcement or
security personnel's roles, responsibilities and involvement within a
school and clearly delegate the role of school discipline to the school
administration. Such written contract or memorandum of understanding
shall be incorporated into and published as part of the district safety
plan.
 § 2801-b. New York state school safety improvement teams. The governor
shall establish New York state school safety improvement teams, which
may be composed of representatives from the division of homeland
security and emergency services, the division of state police, the
division of criminal justice services, and the department. Such New York
State School Safety Improvement Teams shall review and assess school
safety plans submitted, on a voluntary basis, by school districts having
a population of less than one hundred twenty-five thousand inhabitants,
boards of cooperative educational services, nonpublic schools, and
county vocational education and extension boards, and may make
recommendations to improve such school safety plans.
 § 2802. Uniform violent incident reporting system. 1. The
commissioner, in conjunction with the division of criminal justice
services, shall promulgate regulations defining "violent or disruptive
incidents" for the purposes of this section.
 2. The commissioner, in conjunction with the division of criminal
justice services, shall establish a statewide uniform violent incident
reporting system which public school districts, boards of cooperative
educational services and county vocational education and extension
boards shall follow.
 3. The uniform violent incident reporting system shall require public
school districts, boards of cooperative educational services and county
vocational education and extension boards to annually report to the
commissioner in a form and by a date prescribed by the commissioner, the
following information concerning violent and disruptive incidents that
occurred in the prior school year:
 a. the type of offenders;
 b. if any offender is a student, the age and grade of the student;
 c. the location at which the incident occurred;
 d. the type of incident;
 e. whether the incident occurred during or outside of regular school
hours;
 f. where the incident involves a weapon, whether the weapon was a
firearm, knife or other weapon;
 g. the actions taken by the school in response to the incident,
including when the incident was reported to law enforcement officials
and whether disciplinary action was taken against the offenders;
 h. any student discipline or referral action taken against a
student/offender, including but not limited to an out-of-school
suspension, an involuntary transfer to an alternative placement, an
in-school suspension, a referral for community service, a referral for
counseling, or a referral to the juvenile justice system, and the
duration of such action; and
 i. the nature of the victim and the victim's age and grade where
appropriate.
 4. The commissioner shall require a summary of such information to be
included, in a form prescribed by the commissioner, in the school
district report cards or board of cooperative educational services
report cards required by this chapter.
 5. By April first of each year, the commissioner shall report to the
governor, the legislature and the regents concerning the prevalence of
violence and disruptive incidents in the public schools, and the
effectiveness of school programs undertaken to reduce violence and
assure the safety and security of students and school personnel. The
report shall summarize the information available from the incident
reporting system, and compare the incidence of violent and disruptive
incidents of schools and school districts and boards with other schools
and school districts and boards based on similarity in size and grade
levels and other characteristics, including student need and resources,
as determined by the commissioner. The report shall also, to the extent
possible, relate the results available from the incident reporting
system, together with such other analysis and information as the
commissioner determines is appropriate, to the effectiveness of school
violence measures undertaken by participating schools and school
districts, including the school codes and school safety plans required
by sections twenty-eight hundred one and twenty-eight hundred one-a of
this article.
 6. The commissioner, in conjunction with the commissioner of the
division of criminal justice services, shall promulgate regulations to
implement the provisions of this section and to assure to the extent
practicable that the reports used by school districts are uniform and
comparable with respect to the types of incidents reported and the
responses of the schools and the school districts. Such regulations
shall provide for the confidentiality of all personally identifiable
information and shall ensure that any personally identifiable
information which is collected is used only for its intended purpose.
 7. Notwithstanding any other provision of state or local law, rule or
regulation to the contrary, any student who attends a persistently
dangerous public elementary or secondary school, as determined by the
commissioner pursuant to paragraph a of this subdivision, or who is a
victim of a violent criminal offense, as defined pursuant to paragraph b
of this subdivision, that occurred on the grounds of a public elementary
or secondary school that the student attends, shall be allowed to attend
a safe public school within the local educational agency to the extent
required by section eighty-five hundred thirty-two of the Elementary and
Secondary Education Act of nineteen hundred sixty-five, as amended.
 a. The commissioner shall annually determine which public elementary
and secondary schools are persistently dangerous in accordance with
regulations of the commissioner developed in consultation with a
representative sample of local educational agencies. Such determination
shall be based on data submitted through the uniform violent incident
reporting system over a period prescribed in the regulations, which
shall not be less than two years.
 b. Each local educational agency required to provide unsafe school
choice shall establish procedures for determinations by the
superintendent of schools or other chief school officer of whether a
student is the victim of a violent criminal offense that occurred on
school grounds of the school that the student attends. Such
superintendent of schools or other chief school officer shall, prior to
making any such determination, consult with any law enforcement agency
investigating such alleged violent criminal offense and consider any
reports or records provided by such agency. The trustees or board of
education or other governing board of a local educational agency may
provide, by local rule or by-law, for appeal of the determination of the
superintendent of schools to such governing board. Notwithstanding any
other provision of law to the contrary, the determination of such chief
school officer pursuant to this paragraph shall not have collateral
estoppel effect in any student disciplinary proceeding brought against
the alleged victim or perpetrator of such violent criminal offense. For
purposes of this subdivision, "violent criminal offense" shall mean a
crime that involved infliction of serious physical injury upon another
as defined in the penal law, a sex offense that involved forcible
compulsion or any other offense defined in the penal law that involved
the use or threatened use of a deadly weapon.
 c. Each local educational agency, as defined in subsection thirty of
section eighty-one hundred one of the Elementary and Secondary Education
Act of nineteen hundred sixty-five, as amended, that is required to
provide school choice pursuant to section eighty-five hundred thirty-two
of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of nineteen hundred
sixty-five, as amended, shall establish procedures for notification of
parents of, or persons in parental relation to, students attending
schools that have been designated as persistently dangerous and parents
of, or persons in parental relation to, students who are victims of
violent criminal offenses of their right to transfer to a safe public
school within the local educational agency and procedures for such
transfer, except that nothing in this subdivision shall be construed to
require such notification where there are no other public schools within
the local educational agency at the same grade level or such transfer to
a safe public school within the local educational agency is otherwise
impossible or to require a local educational agency that has only one
public school within the local educational agency or only one public
school at each grade level to develop such procedures. The commissioner
shall be authorized to adopt any regulations deemed necessary to assure
that local educational agencies implement the provisions of this
subdivision.
 § 2803. Use of internet-enabled devices during the school day. 1. For
purposes of this section:
 (a) "Internet-enabled devices" shall mean and include any smartphone,
tablet, smartwatch, or other device capable of connecting to the
internet and enabling the user to access content on the internet,
including social media applications; provided, however, that
"internet-enabled devices" shall not include:
 (i) non-internet-enabled devices such as cellular phones or other
communication devices not capable of connecting to the internet or
enabling the user to access content on the internet; or
 (ii) internet-enabled devices supplied by the school district, charter
school, or board of cooperative educational services that are used for
an educational purpose.
 (b) "School day" shall mean the entirety of every instructional day as
required by subdivision seven of section thirty-six hundred four of this
chapter during all instructional time and non-instructional time,
including but not limited to homeroom periods, lunch, recess, study
halls, and passing time.
 (c) "School grounds" shall mean in or on or within any building,
structure, athletic playing field, playground, or land contained within
the real property boundary line of a district elementary, intermediate,
junior high, vocational, or high school, a charter school, or a board of
cooperative educational services facility.
 2. Notwithstanding paragraph b of subdivision one of section
twenty-eight hundred fifty-four of this chapter, each school district,
charter school, and board of cooperative educational services shall
adopt a written policy prohibiting the use of internet-enabled devices
by students during the school day anywhere on school grounds. Each
school district, charter school, and board of cooperative educational
services shall consult local stakeholders, including but not limited to
the employee organization representing each bargaining unit within the
school building, parents, and students, in the development of such
policy prior to its adoption.
 3. The policy adopted and implemented pursuant to subdivision two of
this section shall include one or more methods for persons in parental
relation to a student to contact the student during the school day and
provide for written notification to such persons in parental relation to
a student of these methods at the beginning of each school year and upon
enrollment.
 4. The policy adopted and implemented pursuant to subdivision two of
this section shall include one or more methods for on-site storage where
students may store their internet-enabled devices during the school day,
which may include student lockers.
 5. (a) The policy adopted and implemented pursuant to subdivision two
of this section may authorize student use of an internet-enabled device
during the school day on school grounds:
 (i) if authorized by a teacher, principal, or the school district,
charter school, or board of cooperative educational services for a
specific educational purpose;
 (ii) where necessary for the management of a student's healthcare;
 (iii) in the event of an emergency;
 (iv) for translation services;
 (v) on a case-by-case basis, upon review and determination by a school
psychologist, school social worker, or school counselor, for a student
caregiver who is routinely responsible for the care and wellbeing of a
family member; or
 (vi) where required by law.
 (b) The policy may not prohibit a student's use of an internet-enabled
device where such use is included in the student's:
 (i) individualized education program; or
 (ii) plan developed pursuant to section five hundred four of the
federal rehabilitation act of 1973, 29 U.S.C. 794.
 6. No later than August first, two thousand twenty-five, each school
district, charter school, and board of cooperative educational services
shall adopt and publish in a clearly visible and accessible location on
its website the internet-enabled device policy established pursuant to
subdivision two of this section. Translation of such policy into any of
the twelve most common non-English languages spoken by limited-English
proficient individuals in the state, based on the data in the most
recent American community survey published by the United States census
bureau, shall be provided upon request by a student or persons in
parental relation to a student.
 7. (a) No later than September first, two thousand twenty-six, and
each September first thereafter, each school district, charter school,
and board of cooperative educational services shall publish an annual
report on its website detailing enforcement of the policy within the
district, charter school, or board of cooperative educational services
in the prior school year, including non-identifiable demographic data of
students who have faced disciplinary action for non-compliance and
analysis of any demographic disparities in enforcement of the policy. If
a statistically significant disparate enforcement impact is identified,
such report shall include a mitigation action plan.
 (b) Each school district, charter school, and board of cooperative
educational services shall not permit the suspension of a student if the
sole grounds for the suspension is that the student accessed an
internet-enabled device in violation of the policy adopted and
implemented pursuant to subdivision two of this section.
 § 2814. Omnibus school violence prevention grant program. 1. Within
amounts appropriated for implementation of extended day programs and
school violence prevention programs, the commissioner is hereby
authorized and directed to award grants on a competitive basis to school
districts. Such grants shall be for one or more of the following
pursuant to this section: school safety and violence prevention programs
consistent with the purposes of the school safety plans required by
section twenty-eight hundred one-a of this article and extended day
activities defined in this section. School districts shall be prohibited
from using funds awarded pursuant to this section to displace school
district after-school funding in existence as of the effective date of
this article.
 a. School safety activities. Programs eligible for funding pursuant to
this section may include, but not be limited to: (i) safe corridors
programs; (ii) diversity programs; (iii) collaborative school safety
programs with law enforcement agencies or community-based organizations;
(iv) metal detectors, intercom and other intra-school communication
devices and other devices to increase school security and the safety of
school personnel and students; (v) programs which facilitate and promote
community involvement in school facility planning; (vi) school
anti-violence education programs; and (vii) other programs including
comprehensive school-based intervention models, approved by the
commissioner, that reduce violence and improve school safety.
Comprehensive school based intervention models shall coordinate with and
collaborate with other services currently being provided in the school
district, incorporate appropriate school violence prevention and
intervention services, and coordinate appropriate funding sources to
ensure the efficient delivery of services. Such comprehensive
school-based intervention models shall also include provisions for the
involvement of teachers, parents, school administrators in the
development and implementation of the program, a detailed statement
identifying specific performance goals, a proposed timetable for
implementation and achievement of such goals and specific assessment
methods which will be used to measure student and school progress. For
purposes of this section, school anti-violence education programs shall
include school-based or school affiliated programs that are operated by
nonprofit organizations during or after the school day and provides
evidence-based trauma support and group counseling for youth impacted by
gun violence, anti-gun violence education, or youth empowerment
programming for students impacted by gun violence, and shall only be
deemed eligible if such programs identify measurable objectives and
specific assessment methods, and shall not include any program that uses
firearms for training or demonstration in such program.
 b. Extended day activities. (i) Eligible extended day activities under
this paragraph shall be for programs conducted outside the regular
school day whereby students can participate in extra curricular
enrichment activities including but not limited to athletics, academic
enrichment, art, music, drama, academic tutoring, mentoring, community
services and related programs that will increase student achievement and
contribute to school violence prevention. Such activities conducted
outside the regular school day shall be offered collaboratively between
not-for-profit educational organizations, community based organizations,
other agencies approved by the commissioner and public elementary or
secondary schools, and where applicable, school districts.
 (ii) Grantees receiving funding pursuant to this subdivision may
expend no more than five percent of grants for administration and no
more than five percent for grantee training.
 2. In the event the appropriation for the purposes of this section in
any year is insufficient to pay all claims pursuant to this subdivision,
the commissioner shall pay such claims on a prorated basis among all
districts filing such claims until the appropriation is exhausted.
 3. Programs supported by grants pursuant to this section shall not be
eligible aid pursuant to any other provision of this chapter.
 ARTICLE 56
 CHARTER SCHOOLS
Section 2850. Short title; purpose.
 2851. Eligible applicants; applications; submission.
 2852. Issuance of charter.
 2853. Charter school organization; oversight; facilities.
 2854. General requirements.
 2855. Causes for revocation or termination.
 2856. Financing of charter schools.
 2857. Notice; review and assessment.
 § 2850. Short title; purpose. 1. This article shall be known and may
be cited as the "New York charter schools act of nineteen hundred
ninety-eight".
 2. The purpose of this article is to authorize a system of charter
schools to provide opportunities for teachers, parents, and community
members to establish and maintain schools that operate independently of
existing schools and school districts in order to accomplish the
following objectives:
 (a) Improve student learning and achievement;
 (b) Increase learning opportunities for all students, with special
emphasis on expanded learning experiences for students who are at-risk
of academic failure;
 (c) Encourage the use of different and innovative teaching methods;
 (d) Create new professional opportunities for teachers, school
administrators and other school personnel;
 (e) Provide parents and students with expanded choices in the types of
educational opportunities that are available within the public school
system; and
 (f) Provide schools with a method to change from rule-based to
performance-based accountability systems by holding the schools
established under this article accountable for meeting measurable
student achievement results.
 § 2851. Eligible applicants; applications; submission. 1. An
application to establish a charter school may be submitted by teachers,
parents, school administrators, community residents or any combination
thereof. Such application may be filed in conjunction with a college,
university, museum, educational institution, not-for-profit corporation
exempt from taxation under paragraph 3 of subsection (c) of section 501
of the internal revenue code or for-profit business or corporate entity
authorized to do business in New York state. Provided however,
for-profit business or corporate entities shall not be eligible to
submit an application to establish a charter school pursuant to
subdivision nine-a of section twenty-eight hundred fifty-two of this
article, or operate or manage a charter school for a charter issued
pursuant to subdivision nine-a of section twenty-eight hundred fifty-two
of this article. For charter schools established in conjunction with a
for-profit business or corporate entity, the charter shall specify the
extent of the entity's participation in the management and operation of
the school.
 2. The information provided on the application shall be consistent
with the provisions of this article and other applicable laws, rules and
regulations. Such information shall include:
 (a) A mission statement for the school and a description of an
educational program that implements one or more of the purposes
described in subdivision two of section twenty-eight hundred fifty of
this article.
 (b) A description of student achievement goals for the school's
educational program and the chosen methods of evaluating that students
have attained the skills and knowledge specified for those goals. Such
educational program shall meet or exceed the student performance
standards adopted by the board of regents for other public schools.
 (c) The proposed governance structure of the school, including a list
of members of the initial board of trustees, a description of the
qualifications, terms and method of appointment or election of trustees,
the organizational structure of the school, a procedure for conducting
and publicizing monthly board of trustee meetings at each charter
school, and the processes to be followed by the school to promote
parental and staff involvement in school governance.
 (d) Admission policies and procedures for the school, which shall be
consistent with the requirements of subdivision two of section
twenty-eight hundred fifty-four of this article.
 (e) A proposed budget and fiscal plan for the school, including
supporting evidence that the fiscal plan is sound and that sufficient
start-up funds will be available to the charter school.
 (f) Requirements and procedures for programmatic and independent
fiscal audits at least once annually, with such audits being comparable
in scope to those required of other public schools.
 (g) The hiring and personnel policies and procedures of the school,
including the qualifications to be used in the hiring of teachers,
school administrators and other school employees, and a description of
staff responsibilities.
 (h) The rules and procedures by which students may be disciplined,
including but not limited to expulsion or suspension from the school,
which shall be consistent with the requirements of due process and with
federal laws and regulations governing the placement of students with
disabilities.
 (i) The number of students to be served by the school, which number
shall be at least fifty at a single site and the minimum number of
teachers to be employed at the school, which shall be at least three.
Provided, however, that a charter school may serve fewer than fifty
students or employ fewer than three teachers in the school's first year
of operation or if the applicant presents a compelling justification,
such as the school would serve a geographically remote region.
 (j) Information regarding the facilities to be used by the school,
including the location of the school, if known, and the means by which
pupils will be transported to and from the school. If the facilities to
be used by the proposed school are not known at the time the application
is submitted, the applicant shall notify the charter entity and, if
applicable, the board of regents within ten business days of acquiring
facilities for such school; provided, however, that the charter school
must obtain a certificate of occupancy for such facilities prior to the
date on which instruction is to commence at the school.
 (k) The name of the proposed charter school, which shall include the
words "charter school" and which shall not include the name or
identification of a for-profit business or corporate entity.
 (l) A description of the ages and grade levels to be served by the
school.
 (m) Identification and background information on all applicants and
proposed members of the board of trustees.
 (n) The school calendar and school day schedule, which shall provide
at least as much instruction time during a school year as required of
other public schools.
 (o) Types and amounts of insurance coverage to be obtained by the
school, which shall include adequate insurance for liability, property
loss and the personal injury of students. The commissioner and the
superintendent of financial services may jointly promulgate regulations
to implement the provisions of this paragraph.
 (p) The term of the proposed charter, which shall not exceed five
years; provided however, in the case of charters issued pursuant to
subdivision nine-a of section twenty-eight hundred fifty-two of this
article the term of such proposed charter shall not exceed five years in
which instruction is provided to pupils plus the period commencing with
the effective date of the charter and ending with the opening of the
school for instruction.
 (q) Evidence of adequate community support for and interest in the
charter school sufficient to allow the school to reach its anticipated
enrollment, and an assessment of the projected programmatic and fiscal
impact of the school on other public and nonpublic schools in the area.
 (r) A description of the health and food services to be provided to
students attending the school.
 (s) Methods and strategies for serving students with disabilities in
compliance with all federal laws and regulations relating thereto.
 (t) Procedures to be followed in the case of the closure or
dissolution of the charter school, including provisions for the transfer
of students and student records to the school district in which the
charter school is located and for the disposition of the school's assets
to the school district in which the charter school is located or another
charter school located within the school district. Notwithstanding any
other provision of law or of a charter to the contrary, such procedures
shall ensure that upon dissolution of a charter school, any funds
remaining in the possession of the charter school that can be attributed
to public funding, after all of its debts and obligations have been
paid, shall be paid over to each school district having resident
children served by the charter school in the school year in which the
charter was dissolved or the last year in which students were enrolled
in the charter school, in the same proportion as the number of students
placed by each school district and served by the charter school in the
last school year in which children were served by the charter school,
bears to the total number of students served by the charter school in
such school year. Provided, however, that nothing in this subdivision
shall be construed to require a charter school to pay to such districts
any remaining funds that can be attributed to gifts, donations, grants
or other authorized charitable contributions.
 (u) Requirements for the grant of a diploma, if the school serves the
twelfth grade.
 (v) A code of ethics for the charter school, setting forth for the
guidance of its trustees, officers and employees the standards of
conduct expected of them including standards with respect to disclosure
of conflicts of interest regarding any matter brought before the board
of trustees.
 (w) A description of the residential facilities, if any, provided by
the charter school.
 (x) Any other information relevant to the issuance of a charter
required by the charter entity.
 3. An applicant shall submit the application to a charter entity for
approval. For purposes of this article, a charter entity shall be:
 (a) The board of education of a school district eligible for an
apportionment of aid under subdivision four of section thirty-six
hundred two of this chapter, provided that a board of education shall
not approve an application for a school to be operated outside the
school district's geographic boundaries and further provided that in a
city having a population of one million or more, the chancellor of any
such city school district shall be the charter entity established by
this paragraph;
 (b) The board of trustees of the state university of New York; or
 (c) The board of regents.
 The board of regents shall be the only entity authorized to issue a
charter pursuant to this article. Notwithstanding any provision of this
subdivision to the contrary, an application for the conversion of an
existing public school to a charter school shall be submitted to, and
may only be approved by, the charter entity set forth in paragraph (a)
of this subdivision. Notwithstanding any law, rule or regulation to the
contrary, any such application for conversion shall be consistent with
this section but shall not be subject to the process pursuant to
subdivision nine-a of section twenty-eight hundred fifty-two of this
article, and the charter entity shall require that the parents or
guardians of a majority of the students then enrolled in the existing
public school vote in favor of converting the school to a charter
school.
 4. Charters may be renewed, upon application, for a term of up to five
years in accordance with the provisions of this article for the issuance
of such charters pursuant to section twenty-eight hundred fifty-two of
this article; provided, however, that a renewal application shall
include:
 (a) A report of the progress of the charter school in achieving the
educational objectives set forth in the charter.
 (b) A detailed financial statement that discloses the cost of
administration, instruction and other spending categories for the
charter school that will allow a comparison of such costs to other
schools, both public and private. Such statement shall be in a form
prescribed by the board of regents.
 (c) Copies of each of the annual reports of the charter school
required by subdivision two of section twenty-eight hundred fifty-seven
of this article, including the charter school report cards and the
certified financial statements.
 (d) Indications of parent and student satisfaction.
 (e) The means by which the charter school will meet or exceed
enrollment and retention targets as prescribed by the board of regents
or the board of trustees of the state university of New York, as
applicable, of students with disabilities, English language learners,
and students who are eligible applicants for the free and reduced price
lunch program which shall be considered by the charter entity prior to
approving such charter school's application for renewal. When developing
such targets, the board of regents and the board of trustees of the
state university of New York shall ensure (1) that such enrollment
targets are comparable to the enrollment figures of such categories of
students attending the public schools within the school district, or in
a city school district in a city having a population of one million or
more inhabitants, the community school district, in which the charter
school is located; and (2) that such retention targets are comparable to
the rate of retention of such categories of students attending the
public schools within the school district, or in a city school district
in a city having a population of one million or more inhabitants, the
community school district, in which the proposed charter school would be
located.
 Such renewal application shall be submitted to the charter entity no
later than six months prior to the expiration of the charter; provided,
however, that the charter entity may waive such deadline for good cause
shown.
 5. Notwithstanding any provision of law, rule or regulation to the
contrary for a period of one year from the effective date of this
subdivision, a charter school approved by a charter entity listed in
subdivision three of this section may apply at any time during this
period to another charter entity, defined in paragraph (a), (b) or (c)
of subdivision three of this section to request such other charter
entity to oversee and supervise such charter school. All standards and
requirements established in the original charter agreement shall remain
in effect until the scheduled expiration of such charter agreement and
provided however that all obligations of the previous charter entity to
oversee and supervise a charter school shall terminate upon the transfer
of authorization of such charter school to a new charter entity, as
defined in subdivision five of section twenty-eight hundred fifty-two of
this article, and the previous charter entity shall provide in a timely
fashion information relevant to the charter as requested by such other
charter entity. A charter school that seeks to change its charter entity
must have met all other requirements of this article and cannot be in
violation of any legal requirement, in probationary status, or slated
for closure.
 § 2852. Issuance of charter. 1. A charter entity that receives an
application for approval of a charter school shall act on each request
received prior to July first of a calendar year on or before January
first of the succeeding calendar year, and a proposed charter between
the applicant and the charter entity resulting from such application
shall be executed on or before February first of such succeeding year.
Nothing in this subdivision shall be construed to prevent a charter
entity from receiving or acting upon an application at any time. This
subdivision shall not apply to applications that are submitted pursuant
to subdivision nine-a of this section.
 2. An application for a charter school shall not be approved unless
the charter entity finds that:
 (a) the charter school described in the application meets the
requirements set out in this article and all other applicable laws,
rules and regulations;
 (b) the applicant can demonstrate the ability to operate the school in
an educationally and fiscally sound manner;
 (c) granting the application is likely to improve student learning and
achievement and materially further the purposes set out in subdivision
two of section twenty-eight hundred fifty of this article;
 (d) in a school district where the total enrollment of resident
students attending charter schools in the base year is greater than five
percent of the total public school enrollment of the school district in
the base year (i) granting the application would have a significant
educational benefit to the students expected to attend the proposed
charter school or (ii) the school district in which the charter school
will be located consents to such application; and
 (e) for applicants for an initial charter pursuant to paragraph (b-1)
of subdivision nine of this section in a school district located in a
city with a population of one million or more, the total enrollment of
students attending charter schools within the community district in
which the charter school will be located in the base year is less than
or equal to fifty-five percent of the total public school enrollment
attending within such community district in the base year.
 In reviewing applications, the charter entity is encouraged to give
preference to applications that demonstrate the capability to provide
comprehensive learning experiences to students identified by the
applicants as at risk of academic failure.
 3. A charter entity is not required to approve a charter and may
require an applicant to modify or supplement an application as a
condition of approval. An existing private school shall not be eligible
to convert to a charter school. In determining whether an application
involves the conversion of an existing private school, the charter
entity and the board of regents shall consider such factors as: (a)
whether the charter school would have the same or substantially the same
board of trustees and/or officers as an existing private school; (b)
whether a substantial proportion of employees of the charter school
would be drawn from such existing private school; (c) whether a
substantial portion of the assets and property of such existing private
school would be transferred to the charter school; (d) whether the
charter school would be located at the same site as such existing
private school; (e) upon renewal only, whether such private school
closed within one year of establishment of the charter school; and (f)
upon renewal only, whether a substantial portion of the charter school's
students were drawn from such existing private school.
 4. Each individual applicant seeking to establish a charter school
shall submit a full set of fingerprints to the charter entity for the
purpose of obtaining a state and federal criminal records check. The
division of criminal justice services is authorized to provide this
information to the federal bureau of investigation and to perform a
state and federal criminal records check on each applicant and report
the results to the charter entity and the board of regents. The criminal
records check shall be completed to the satisfaction of the charter
entity prior to approval of the application. The department and the
division of criminal justice services shall enter into any memoranda of
agreement necessary to implement the requirements of this subdivision.
 5. Upon approval of an application by a charter entity, the applicant
and charter entity shall enter into a proposed agreement allowing the
applicants to organize and operate a charter school. Such written
agreement, known as the charter, shall include (a) the information
required by subdivision two of section twenty-eight hundred fifty-one of
this article, as modified or supplemented during the approval process,
(b) in the case of charters to be issued pursuant to subdivision nine-a
of this section, information required by such subdivision, (c) any other
terms or conditions required by applicable laws, rules and regulations,
and (d) any other terms or conditions, not inconsistent with law, agreed
upon by the applicant and the charter entity. In addition, the charter
shall include the specific commitments of the charter entity relating to
its obligations to oversee and supervise the charter school. Within five
days after entering into a proposed charter, the charter entity other
than the board of regents shall submit to the board of regents a copy of
the charter, the application and supporting documentation for final
approval and issuance by the board of regents in accordance with
subdivisions five-a and five-b of this section.
 5-a. Upon receipt of a proposed charter submitted by a charter entity,
the board of regents shall review such proposed charter in accordance
with the standards set forth in subdivision two of this section, and any
other applicable specifications required by this article. The board of
regents shall either (a) approve and issue the charter as proposed by
the charter entity or (b) return the proposed charter to the charter
entity for reconsideration with the written comments and recommendations
of the board of regents. If the board of regents fails to act on such
proposed charter within ninety days of its submission to the board of
regents in accordance with the previous sentence, the proposed charter
shall be deemed to have been approved and issued by the board of regents
at the expiration of such period.
 5-b. If the board of regents returns a proposed charter to the charter
entity pursuant to the provisions of subdivision five-a of this section,
such charter entity shall reconsider the proposed charter, taking into
consideration the comments and recommendation of the board of regents.
Thereafter, the charter entity shall resubmit the proposed charter to
the board of regents with modifications, provided that the applicant
consents in writing to such modifications, resubmit the proposed charter
to the board of regents without modifications, or abandon the proposed
charter. The board of regents shall review each such resubmitted
proposed charter in accordance with the provisions of subdivision five-a
of this section; provided, however, that it shall be the duty of the
board of regents to approve and issue a proposed charter resubmitted by
the charter entity described in paragraph (b) of subdivision three of
section twenty-eight hundred fifty-one of this article within thirty
days of the resubmission of such proposed charter or such proposed
charter shall be deemed approved and issued at the expiration of such
period.
 6. The denial of an application for a charter school by a charter
entity shall be in writing and shall state the reasons for the denial.
Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, such denial is
final and shall not be reviewable in any court or by any administrative
body.
 7. (a) A revision of a charter shall be made only upon the approval of
the charter entity and the board of regents in accordance with the
provisions of subdivisions five-a and five-b of this section.
 (b) When a revision of a charter involves the relocation of a charter
school to a different school district, the proposed new school district
shall be given at least forty-five days notice of the proposed
relocation. In addition, the applicant shall provide an analysis of the
community support for such relocation and of the projected programmatic
and fiscal impact of the charter school on the proposed new school
district of location and other public and nonpublic schools in the area.
 8. A charter entity shall not charge a fee or require reimbursement of
expenses for considering a charter application, for approving a charter
application or for providing oversight of a charter school.
 9. The total number of charters issued pursuant to this article
statewide shall not exceed four hundred sixty. (a) All charters issued
on or after July first, two thousand fifteen and counted toward the
numerical limits established by this subdivision shall be issued by the
board of regents upon application directly to the board of regents or on
the recommendation of the board of trustees of the state university of
New York pursuant to a competitive process in accordance with
subdivision nine-a of this section. Fifty of such charters issued on or
after July first, two thousand fifteen, and no more, shall be granted to
a charter for a school to be located in a city having a population of
one million or more. The failure of any body to issue the regulations
authorized pursuant to this article shall not affect the authority of a
charter entity to propose a charter to the board of regents or the board
of regents' authority to grant such charter. A conversion of an existing
public school to a charter school, or the renewal or extension of a
charter approved by any charter entity, shall not be counted toward the
numerical limits established by this subdivision.
 (b) A charter that has been surrendered, revoked or terminated on or
before July first, two thousand fifteen, including a charter that has
not been renewed by action of its charter entity, may be reissued
pursuant to paragraph (a) of this subdivision by the board of regents
either upon application directly to the board of regents or on the
recommendation of the board of trustees of the state university of New
York pursuant to a competitive process in accordance with subdivision
nine-a of this section. Provided that such reissuance shall not be
counted toward the statewide numerical limit established by this
subdivision, and provided further that no more than twenty-two charters
may be reissued pursuant to this paragraph.
 (b-1) A charter that has been surrendered, revoked or terminated after
January first, two thousand fifteen, but before July first, two thousand
twenty-two, including a charter that has not been renewed by action of
its charter entity, may be reissued once pursuant to paragraph (a) of
this subdivision by the board of regents either upon application
directly to the board of regents or on the recommendation of the board
of trustees of the state university of New York pursuant to a
competitive process in accordance with subdivision nine-a of this
section. Provided that such reissuance shall not be counted toward the
numerical limits established by this subdivision, and provided further
that no more than twenty-two charters may be reissued pursuant to this
paragraph, provided that fourteen of such reissued charters shall be
allocated for, and shall not be counted toward the numerical limit in, a
city having a population of one million or more established in paragraph
(a) of this subdivision. Nothing herein shall be construed to allow more
than fourteen such charters to be reissued in a city having a population
of one million or more.
 (c) For purposes of determining the total number of charters issued
within the numerical limits established by this subdivision, the
approval date of the charter entity shall be the determining factor.
 (d) Notwithstanding any provision of this article to the contrary, any
charter authorized to be issued by chapter fifty-seven of the laws of
two thousand seven effective July first, two thousand seven, and that
remains unissued as of July first, two thousand fifteen, may be issued
pursuant to the provisions of law applicable to a charter authorized to
be issued by such chapter in effect as of June fifteenth, two thousand
fifteen; provided however that nothing in this paragraph shall be
construed to increase the numerical limit applicable to a city having a
population of one million or more as provided in paragraph (a) of this
subdivision, as amended by a chapter of the laws of two thousand fifteen
which added this paragraph.
 9-a. (a) The board of regents is hereby authorized and directed to
issue four hundred sixty charters statewide upon either applications
submitted directly to the board of regents or upon the recommendation of
the board of trustees of the state university of New York pursuant to a
competitive request for proposals process.
 The board of regents shall make a determination to issue a charter
pursuant to a request for proposals no later than December thirty-first
of each year.
 (b) The board of regents and the board of trustees of the state
university of New York shall each develop such request for proposals in
a manner that facilitates a thoughtful review of charter school
applications, considers the demand for charter schools by the community,
and seeks to locate charter schools in a region or regions where there
may be a lack of alternatives and access to charter schools would
provide new alternatives within the local public education system that
would offer the greatest educational benefit to students. Applications
shall be evaluated in accordance with the criteria and objectives
contained within a request for proposals. The board of regents and the
board of trustees of the state university of New York shall not consider
any applications which do not rigorously demonstrate that they have met
the following criteria:
 (i) that the proposed charter school would meet or exceed enrollment
and retention targets, as prescribed by the board of regents or the
board of trustees of the state university of New York, as applicable, of
students with disabilities, English language learners, and students who
are eligible applicants for the free and reduced price lunch program.
When developing such targets, the board of regents and the board of
trustees of the state university of New York, shall ensure (1) that such
enrollment targets are comparable to the enrollment figures of such
categories of students attending the public schools within the school
district, or in a city school district in a city having a population of
one million or more inhabitants, the community school district, in which
the proposed charter school would be located; and (2) that such
retention targets are comparable to the rate of retention of such
categories of students attending the public schools within the school
district, or in a city school district in a city having a population of
one million or more inhabitants, the community school district, in which
the proposed charter school would be located; and
 (ii) that the applicant has conducted public outreach, in conformity
with a thorough and meaningful public review process prescribed by the
board of regents and the board of trustees of the state university of
New York, to solicit community input regarding the proposed charter
school and to address comments received from the impacted community
concerning the educational and programmatic needs of students.
 (c) The board of regents and the board of trustees of the state
university of New York shall grant priority based on a scoring rubric to
those applications that best demonstrate how they will achieve the
following objectives, and any additional objectives the board of regents
and the board of trustees of the state university of New York, may
prescribe:
 (i) increasing student achievement and decreasing student achievement
gaps in reading/language arts and mathematics;
 (ii) increasing high school graduation rates and focusing on serving
specific high school student populations including, but not limited to,
students at risk of not obtaining a high school diploma, re-enrolled
high school drop-outs, and students with academic skills below grade
level;
 (iii) focusing on the academic achievement of middle school students
and preparing them for a successful transition to high school;
 (iv) utilizing high-quality assessments designed to measure a
student's knowledge, understanding of, and ability to apply, critical
concepts through the use of a variety of item types and formats;
 (v) increasing the acquisition, adoption, and use of local
instructional improvement systems that provide teachers, principals, and
administrators with the information and resources they need to inform
and improve their instructional practices, decision-making, and overall
effectiveness;
 (vi) partnering with low performing public schools in the area to
share best educational practices and innovations;
 (vii) demonstrating the management and leadership techniques necessary
to overcome initial start-up problems to establish a thriving,
financially viable charter school;
 (viii) demonstrating the support of the school district in which the
proposed charter school will be located and the intent to establish an
ongoing relationship with such school district.
 (d) No later than November first, two thousand ten, and of each
succeeding year, after a thorough review of applications received, the
board of trustees of the state university of New York shall recommend
for approval to the board of regents the qualified applications that it
has determined rigorously demonstrate the criteria and best satisfy the
objectives contained within a request for proposals, along with
supporting documentation outlining such determination.
 (e) Upon receipt of a proposed charter to be issued pursuant to this
subdivision submitted by a charter entity, the board of regents or the
board of trustees of the state university of New York, shall review,
recommend and issue, as applicable, such charters in accordance with the
standards established in this subdivision.
 (f) The board of regents shall be the only entity authorized to issue
a charter pursuant to this article. The board of regents shall consider
applications submitted directly to the board of regents and applications
recommended by the board of trustees of the state university of New
York. Provided, however, that all such recommended applications shall be
deemed approved and issued pursuant to the provisions of subdivisions
five, five-a and five-b of this section.
 (g) Each application submitted in response to a request for proposals
pursuant to this subdivision shall also meet the application
requirements set out in this article and any other applicable laws,
rules and regulations.
 (h) During the development of a request for proposals pursuant to this
subdivision the board of regents and the board of trustees of the state
university of New York shall each afford the public an opportunity to
submit comments and shall review and consider the comments raised by all
interested parties.
 10. Except in the case of a charter school formed by a school district
as a charter entity pursuant to paragraph (a) of subdivision three of
section twenty-eight hundred fifty-one of this article, a charter school
formed by approval of the regents or by operation of law on or after
March fifteenth in any school year shall not commence instruction until
July of the second school year next following.
 § 2853. Charter school organization; oversight; facilities. 1.
Organization and legal status. (a) Upon the approval of a charter by
the board of regents, the board of regents shall incorporate the charter
school as an education corporation for a term not to exceed five years,
provided however in the case of charters issued pursuant to subdivision
nine-a of section twenty-eight hundred fifty-two of this article the
board of regents shall incorporate the charter school as an education
corporation for a term not to exceed five years in which instruction is
provided to pupils plus the period commencing with the effective date of
the charter and ending with the opening of the school for instruction.
Such certificate of incorporation shall not modify or limit any terms of
the charter approved by the board of regents. Upon approval of an
application to renew a charter, the board of regents shall extend the
certificate of incorporation for a term not to exceed five years. Upon
termination or nonrenewal of the charter of a charter school pursuant to
section twenty-eight hundred fifty-five of this article, the certificate
of incorporation of the charter school shall be revoked by the board of
regents pursuant to section two hundred nineteen of this chapter,
provided that compliance with the notice and hearing requirements of
such section twenty-eight hundred fifty-five of this article shall be
deemed to satisfy the notice and hearing requirements of such section
two hundred nineteen. It shall be the duty of the trustees of the
charter school to obtain federal tax-exempt status no later than one
year following approval of a charter school by the board of regents. For
purposes of this article, "certificate of incorporation" shall mean the
provisional charter issued by the board of regents to form the charter
school as an educational corporation pursuant to sections two hundred
sixteen and two hundred seventeen of this chapter.
 (b) An education corporation organized to operate a charter school
shall have all corporate powers necessary and desirable for carrying out
a charter school program in accordance with the provisions of this
article, other applicable laws and regulations and the terms of the
charter, including all of the powers of an education corporation formed
to operate an elementary or secondary school and those powers granted
under the provisions of the not-for-profit corporation law that are made
applicable to charter schools by section two hundred sixteen-a of this
chapter. The powers of the trustees of the charter school shall include
those powers specified in section two hundred twenty-six of this
chapter.
 (b-1) An education corporation operating a charter school shall be
authorized to operate more than one school or house any grade at more
than one site, provided that a charter must be issued for each such
additional school or site in accordance with the requirements for the
issuance of a charter pursuant to this article and that each such
additional school or site shall count as a charter issued pursuant to
subdivision nine of section twenty eight hundred fifty-two of this
article; and provided further that:
 (A) a charter school may operate in more than one building at a single
site; and
 (B) a charter school which provides instruction to its students at
different locations for a portion of their school day shall be deemed to
be operating at a single site.
 (c) A charter school shall be deemed an independent and autonomous
public school, except as otherwise provided in this article, and a
political subdivision having boundaries coterminous with the school
district or community school district in which the charter school is
located. The charter entity and the board of regents shall be deemed to
be the public agents authorized to supervise and oversee the charter
school.
 (d) The powers granted to a charter school under this article
constitute the performance of essential public purposes and governmental
purposes of this state. A charter school shall be exempt to the same
extent as other public schools from all taxation, fees, assessments or
special ad valorem levies on its earnings and its property, including
property leased by the charter school. Instruments of conveyance to or
from a charter school and any bonds or notes issued by a charter school,
together with the income therefrom, shall at all times be exempt from
taxation.
 (e) A charter school shall not have the power to levy taxes or to
acquire property by eminent domain.
 (f) The board of trustees of the charter school shall have final
authority for policy and operational decisions of the school. Nothing
herein shall prohibit the board of trustees of a charter school from
delegating decision-making authority to officers and employees of the
school in accordance with the provisions of the charter.
 (g) Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no civil
liability shall attach to any charter entity, the board of regents, or
to any of their members or employees, individually or collectively, for
any acts or omissions of the charter school. Neither the local school
district, the charter entity nor the state shall be liable for the debts
or financial obligations of a charter school or any person or corporate
entity who operates a charter school.
 2. The board of regents and charter entity shall oversee each school
approved by such entity, and may visit, examine into and inspect any
charter school, including the records of such school, under its
oversight. Oversight by a charter entity and the board of regents shall
be sufficient to ensure that the charter school is in compliance with
all applicable laws, regulations and charter provisions.
 2-a. For schools approved by an entity described in paragraph (b) or
(c) of subdivision three of section twenty-eight hundred fifty-one of
this article, the school district in which the charter school is located
shall have the right to visit, examine into, and inspect the charter
school for the purpose of ensuring that the school is in compliance with
all applicable laws, regulations and charter provisions. Any evidence of
non-compliance may be forwarded by such school district to the board of
regents and the charter entity for action pursuant to section
twenty-eight hundred fifty-five of this article.
 3. Facilities. (a) A charter school may be located in part of an
existing public school building, in space provided on a private work
site, in a public building or in any other suitable location. Provided,
however, before a charter school may be located in part of an existing
public school building, the charter entity shall provide notice to the
parents or guardians of the students then enrolled in the existing
school building and shall hold a public hearing for purposes of
discussing the location of the charter school. A charter school may own,
lease or rent its space.
 (a-1) (i) For charters issued pursuant to subdivision nine-a of
section twenty-eight hundred fifty-two of this article located outside a
city school district in a city having a population of one million or
more inhabitants, the department shall approve plans and specifications
and issue certificates of occupancy for such charter schools. Such
charter schools shall comply with all department health, sanitary, and
safety requirements applicable to facilities and shall be treated the
same as other public schools for purposes of local zoning, land use
regulation and building code compliance. Provided however, that the
department shall be authorized to grant specific exemptions from the
requirements of this paragraph to charter schools upon a showing that
compliance with such requirements creates an undue economic hardship or
that some other good cause exists that makes compliance with this
paragraph extremely impractical. A demonstrated effort to overcome the
stated obstacles must be provided.
 (ii) In a city school district in a city with a population of one
million or more, all charters authorized to be issued by the chapter of
the laws of two thousand ten which amended this subdivision shall be
obligated to comply with the department's health, safety and sanitary
requirements applicable to facilities to the same extent as non-charter
public schools in such a city school district.
 (a-2) A charter school shall be deemed a nonpublic school for purposes
of local zoning, land use regulation and building code compliance if it
has been granted an exemption by the department pursuant to paragraph
(a-1) of this subdivision or if its charter was not issued pursuant to
subdivision nine-a of section twenty-eight hundred fifty-two of this
article.
 (a-3)(1) Before a charter school may be located or co-located in an
existing public school building in a city school district in a city
having a population of one million or more inhabitants, the chancellor
shall identify which public school buildings may be subject to location
or co-location, provide the rationale as to why such public school
building is identified for location or co-location and shall make all
such information publicly available, including via the city board's
official internet website. In addition, the chancellor shall provide
widespread notice of such information including to the community
superintendent, community district education council and the
school-based management team. After a public school building has been
selected for a proposed location or co-location, the chancellor shall
develop a building usage plan in accordance with this paragraph.
 (2) The building usage plan shall be developed by the chancellor for
each school that has been definitively identified for a location or
co-location. The building usage plan shall include, but need not be
limited to, the following information:
 (A) the actual allocation and sharing of classroom and administrative
space between the charter and non-charter schools;
 (B) a proposal for the collaborative usage of shared resources and
spaces between the charter school and the non-charter schools, including
but not limited to, cafeterias, libraries, gymnasiums and recreational
spaces, including playgrounds which assures equitable access to such
facilities in a similar manner and at reasonable times to non-charter
school students as provided to charter school students;
 (C) justification of the feasibility of the proposed allocations and
schedules set forth in clauses (A) and (B) of this subparagraph and how
such proposed allocations and shared usage would result in an equitable
and comparable use of such public school building;
 (D) building safety and security;
 (E) communication strategies to be used by the co-located schools; and
 (F) collaborative decision-making strategies to be used by the
co-located schools including the establishment of a shared space
committee pursuant to paragraph (a-four) of this subdivision.
 (3) A building usage plan developed by the chancellor in accordance
with this paragraph shall be included within the educational impact
statement required by paragraph (b) of subdivision two-a of section
twenty-five hundred ninety-h of this title and be subject to the
requirements of subdivision two-a of such section prior to approval by
the board of education pursuant to paragraph h of subdivision one of
section twenty-five hundred ninety-g of this title.
 (4) A building usage plan developed by the chancellor in accordance
with this paragraph may be revised and such revision shall require board
of education approval consistent with the requirements pursuant to
subdivision seven of section twenty-five hundred ninety-g of this title.
 (5) The building usage plan shall be made publicly available by the
chancellor, including via the city board's official internet website,
and a copy shall also be filed with the city board, the impacted
community district education council, community boards, community
superintendent, and school based management team.
 (a-4) In a city school district in a city having a population of one
million or more inhabitants, a shared space committee shall be
established in each public school building in which one or more charter
schools are located or co-located within a public school building with
non-charter public schools. The shared space committee shall be
comprised of the principal, a teacher, and a parent of each co-located
school. Such committee shall conduct regular meetings, at least four
times per school year, to review implementation of the building usage
plan developed pursuant to paragraph (a-three) of this subdivision.
 (a-5) Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, in a city school
district in a city having a population of one million or more
inhabitants, the determination to locate or co-locate a charter school
within a public school building and the implementation of and compliance
with the building usage plan developed pursuant to paragraph (a-three)
of this subdivision that has been approved by the board of education of
such city school district pursuant to paragraph (h) of subdivision one
of section twenty-five hundred ninety-g of this title and after
satisfying the requirements of subdivision two-a of section twenty-five
hundred ninety-h of this title may be appealed to the commissioner
pursuant to section three hundred ten of this chapter. Provided further,
the revision of a building usage plan approved by the board of education
consistent with the requirements pursuant to subdivision seven of
section twenty-five hundred ninety-g of this title may also be appealed
to the commissioner on the grounds that such revision fails to meet the
standards set forth in clause (B) of subparagraph two of paragraph (a-3)
of this subdivision. Following a petition for such appeal pursuant to
this paragraph, such city school district shall have ten days to
respond. The petition must be dismissed, adjudicated or disposed of by
the commissioner within ten days of the receipt of the city school
district's response.
 (b) A charter school may pledge, assign or encumber its assets to be
used as collateral for loans or extensions of credit; provided, however,
that a charter school shall not pledge or assign monies provided, or to
be provided, pursuant to subdivision one of section twenty-eight hundred
fifty-six of this article in connection with the purchase or
construction, acquisition, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement
of a school facility.
 (c) The office of general services shall annually publish a list of
vacant and unused buildings and vacant and unused portions of buildings
that are owned by the state and that may be suitable for the operation
of a charter school. Such list shall be provided to applicants for
charter schools and to existing charter schools. At the request of a
charter school or a prospective applicant, a school district shall make
available a list of vacant and unused school buildings and vacant and
unused portions of school buildings, including private school buildings,
within the school district that may be suitable for the operation of a
charter school.
 (d) Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, in a city
school district in a city having a population of one million or more
inhabitants, the chancellor must first authorize in writing any proposed
capital improvements or facility upgrades in excess of five thousand
dollars, regardless of the source of funding, made to accommodate the
co-location of a charter school within a public school building. For any
such improvements or upgrades that have been approved by the chancellor,
capital improvements or facility upgrades shall be made in an amount
equal to the expenditure of the charter school for each non-charter
public school within the public school building. For any capital
improvements or facility upgrades in excess of five thousand dollars
that have been approved by the chancellor, regardless of the source of
funding, made in a charter school that is already co-located within a
public school building, matching capital improvements or facility
upgrades shall be made in an amount equal to the expenditure of the
charter school for each non-charter public school within the public
school building within three months of such improvements or upgrades.
 (e) In a city school district in a city having a population of one
million or more inhabitants, charter schools that first commence
instruction or that require additional space due to an expansion of
grade level, pursuant to this article, approved by their charter entity
for the two thousand fourteen--two thousand fifteen school year or
thereafter and request co-location in a public school building shall be
provided access to facilities pursuant to this paragraph for such
charter schools that first commence instruction or that require
additional space due to an expansion of grade level, pursuant to this
article, approved by their charter entity for those grades newly
provided.
 (1) Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, within
the later of (i) five months after a charter school's written request
for co-location and (ii) thirty days after the charter school's charter
is approved by its charter entity, the city school district shall
either: (A) offer at no cost to the charter school a co-location site in
a public school building approved by the board of education as provided
by law, or (B) offer the charter school space in a privately owned or
other publicly owned facility at the expense of the city school district
and at no cost to the charter school. The space must be reasonable,
appropriate and comparable and in the community school district to be
served by the charter school and otherwise in reasonable proximity.
 (2) No later than thirty days after approval by the board of education
or expiration of the offer period prescribed in subparagraph one of this
paragraph, the charter school shall either accept the city school
district's offer or appeal in accordance with subparagraph three of this
paragraph. If no appeal is taken, the city's offer or refusal to make an
offer shall be final and non-reviewable. The charter school may appeal
as early as issuance of an educational impact statement for the proposed
co-location.
 (3) The charter school shall have the option of appealing the city
school district's offer or failure to offer a co-location site through
binding arbitration in accordance with subparagraph seven of this
paragraph, an expedited appeal to the commissioner pursuant to section
three hundred ten of this chapter and the procedures prescribed in
paragraph (a-5) of this subdivision, or a special proceeding pursuant to
article seventy-eight of the civil practice law and rules. In any such
appeal, the standard of review shall be the standard prescribed in
section seventy-eight hundred three of the civil practice law and rules.
 (4) If the appeal results in a determination in favor of the city
school district, the city's offer shall be final and the charter school
may either accept such offer and move into the space offered by the city
school district at the city school district's expense, or locate in
another site at the charter school's expense.
 (5) For a new charter school whose charter is granted or for an
existing charter school whose expansion of grade level, pursuant to this
article, is approved by their charter entity, if the appeal results in a
determination in favor of the charter school, the city school district
shall pay the charter school an amount attributable to the grade level
expansion or the formation of the new charter school that is equal to
the lesser of:
 (A) the actual rental cost of an alternative privately owned site
selected by the charter school or
 (B) thirty percent of the product of the charter school's basic
tuition for the current school year and (i) for a new charter school
that first commences instruction on or after July first, two thousand
fourteen, the charter school's current year enrollment; or (ii) for a
charter school which expands its grade level, pursuant to this article,
the positive difference of the charter school's enrollment in the
current school year minus the charter school's enrollment in the school
year prior to the first year of the expansion.
 (6) An arbitration in an appeal pursuant to this paragraph shall be
conducted by a single arbitrator selected in accordance with this
subparagraph from a list of arbitrators from the American arbitration
association's panel of labor arbitrators, with relevant biographical
information, submitted by such association to the commissioner pursuant
to paragraph a of subdivision three of section three thousand twenty-a
of this chapter. Upon request by the charter school, the commissioner
shall forthwith send a copy of such list and biographical information
simultaneously to the charter school and city school district. The
parties shall, by mutual agreement, select an arbitrator from the list
within fifteen days from receipt of the list, and if the parties fail to
agree on an arbitrator within such fifteen day period or fail within
such fifteen day period to notify the commissioner that an arbitrator
has been selected, the commissioner shall appoint an arbitrator from the
list to serve as the arbitrator. The arbitration shall be conducted in
accordance with the American arbitration association's rules for labor
arbitration, except that the arbitrator shall conduct a pre-hearing
conference within ten to fifteen days of agreeing to serve and the
arbitration shall be completed and a decision rendered within the time
frames prescribed for hearings pursuant to section three thousand
twenty-a of this chapter. The arbitrator's fee shall not exceed the rate
established by the commissioner for hearings conducted pursuant to
section three thousand twenty-a of this chapter, and the cost of such
fee, the arbitrator's necessary travel and other reasonable expenses,
and all other hearing expenses shall be borne equally by the parties to
the arbitration.
 4. Public and private assistance to charter schools. * (a) For
purposes of sections seven hundred one, seven hundred eleven, seven
hundred fifty-one and nine hundred twelve of this chapter, a charter
school shall be deemed a nonpublic school in the school district within
which the charter school is located. Special education programs and
services shall be provided to students with a disability attending a
charter school in accordance with the individualized education program
recommended by the committee or subcommittee on special education of the
student's school district of residence. The charter school may arrange
to have such services provided by such school district of residence or
by the charter school directly or by contract with another provider.
Where the charter school arranges to have the school district of
residence provide such special education programs or services, such
school district shall provide services in the same manner as it serves
students with disabilities in other public schools in the school
district, including the provision of supplementary and related services
on site to the same extent to which it has a policy or practice of
providing such services on the site of such other public schools.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2027
 * (a) For purposes of sections seven hundred one, seven hundred
eleven, seven hundred fifty-one and nine hundred twelve of this chapter,
a charter school shall be deemed a nonpublic school in the school
district within which the charter school is located. Special education
programs and services shall be provided to students with a disability
attending a charter school in accordance with the individualized
education program recommended by the committee or subcommittee on
special education of the student's school district of residence. The
charter school may arrange to have such services provided by such school
district of residence or by the charter school directly or by contract
with another provider.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2027
 (b) For purposes of section thirty-six hundred thirty-five of this
chapter, a charter school shall be deemed a nonpublic school. The
charter and application therefor shall set forth the manner in which
students ineligible for transportation pursuant to section thirty-six
hundred thirty-five of this chapter shall be transported to and from
school. Any supplemental transportation provided by a charter school
shall comply with all transportation safety laws and regulations
applicable to other public schools. A school district may enter into a
contract for the provision of supplemental transportation services to a
charter school, and any such services shall be provided by the school
district at cost.
 (c) A charter school may contract with the governing body of a public
college or university for the use of a school building and grounds, the
operation and maintenance thereof. Any such contract shall provide such
services or facilities at cost. A school district shall permit any
charter school granted approval to co-locate, to use such services and
facilities without cost.
 (d) Private persons and organizations are encouraged to provide
funding and other assistance to the establishment or operation of
charter schools.
 (e) The school district of residence of children attending a charter
school may, but is not required to, allow such children to participate
in athletic and extra-curricular activities of the district's schools.
 § 2854. General requirements. 1. Applicability of other laws. (a)
Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, to the extent that
any provision of this article is inconsistent with any other state or
local law, rule or regulation, the provisions of this article shall
govern and be controlling.
 (b) A charter school shall meet the same health and safety, civil
rights, and student assessment requirements applicable to other public
schools, except as otherwise specifically provided in this article. A
charter school shall be exempt from all other state and local laws,
rules, regulations or policies governing public or private schools,
boards of education, school districts and political subdivisions,
including those relating to school personnel and students, except as
specifically provided in the school's charter or in this article.
Nothing in this subdivision shall affect the requirements of compulsory
education of minors established by part one of article sixty-five of
this chapter.
 (c) A charter school shall be subject to the financial audits, the
audit procedures, and the audit requirements set forth in the charter,
and shall be subject to audits of the comptroller of the city school
district of the city of New York for charter schools located in New York
city, and to the audits of the comptroller of the state of New York for
charter schools located in the rest of the state, at his or her
discretion, with respect to the school's financial operations. Such
procedures and standards shall be consistent with generally accepted
accounting and audit standards. Independent fiscal audits shall be
required at least once annually.
 (d) A charter school shall design its educational programs to meet or
exceed the student performance standards adopted by the board of regents
and the student performance standards contained in the charter. Students
attending charter school shall be required to take regents examinations
to the same extent such examinations are required of other public school
students. A charter school offering instruction in the high school
grades may grant regents diplomas and local diplomas to the same extent
as other public schools, and such other certificates and honors as are
specifically authorized by their charter, and in testimony thereof give
suitable certificates, honors and diplomas under its seal; and every
certificate and diploma so granted shall entitle the conferee to all
privileges and immunities which by usage or statute are allowed for
similar diplomas of corresponding grade granted by any other public
school.
 (e) A charter school shall be subject to the provisions of articles
six and seven of the public officers law.
 (f) A charter school shall be subject to the provisions of sections
eight hundred, eight hundred one, eight hundred two, eight hundred
three, eight hundred four, eight hundred four-a, eight hundred five,
eight hundred five-a, eight hundred five-b and eight hundred six of the
general municipal law to the same extent such sections apply to school
districts.
 2. Admissions; enrollment; students. (a) A charter school shall be
nonsectarian in its programs, admission policies, employment practices,
and all other operations and shall not charge tuition or fees; provided
that a charter school may require the payment of fees on the same basis
and to the same extent as other public schools. A charter school shall
not discriminate against any student, employee or any other person on
the basis of ethnicity, national origin, gender, or disability or any
other ground that would be unlawful if done by a school. Admission of
students shall not be limited on the basis of intellectual ability,
measures of achievement or aptitude, athletic ability, disability, race,
creed, gender, national origin, religion, or ancestry; provided,
however, that nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the
establishment of a single-sex charter school or a charter school
designed to provide expanded learning opportunities for students at-risk
of academic failure or students with disabilities and English language
learners; and provided, further, that the charter school shall
demonstrate good faith efforts to attract and retain a comparable or
greater enrollment of students with disabilities, English language
learners, and students who are eligible applicants for the free and
reduced price lunch program when compared to the enrollment figures for
such students in the school district in which the charter school is
located. A charter shall not be issued to any school that would be
wholly or in part under the control or direction of any religious
denomination, or in which any denominational tenet or doctrine would be
taught.
 (b) Any child who is qualified under the laws of this state for
admission to a public school is qualified for admission to a charter
school. Applications for admission to a charter school shall be
submitted on a uniform application form created by the department and
shall be made available by a charter school in languages predominately
spoken in the community in which such charter school is located. The
school shall enroll each eligible student who submits a timely
application by the first day of April each year, unless the number of
applications exceeds the capacity of the grade level or building. In
such cases, students shall be accepted from among applicants by a random
selection process, provided, however, that an enrollment preference
shall be provided to pupils returning to the charter school in the
second or any subsequent year of operation and pupils residing in the
school district in which the charter school is located, and siblings of
pupils already enrolled in the charter school. Preference may also be
provided to children of employees of the charter school or charter
management organization, provided that such children of employees may
constitute no more than fifteen percent of the charter school's total
enrollment. The commissioner shall establish regulations to require that
the random selection process conducted pursuant to this paragraph be
performed in a transparent and equitable manner and to require that the
time and place of the random selection process be publicized in a manner
consistent with the requirements of section one hundred four of the
public officers law and be open to the public. For the purposes of this
paragraph and paragraph (a) of this subdivision, the school district in
which the charter school is located shall mean, for the city school
district of the city of New York, the community district in which the
charter school is located.
 (c) A charter school shall serve one or more of the grades one through
twelve, and shall limit admission to pupils within the grade levels
served. Nothing herein shall prohibit a charter school from establishing
a kindergarten program.
 (d) A student may withdraw from a charter school at any time and
enroll in a public school. A charter school may refuse admission to any
student who has been expelled or suspended from a public school until
the period of suspension or expulsion from the public school has
expired, consistent with the requirements of due process.
 3. School personnel. (a) An employee of a charter school shall be an
employee of the education corporation formed to operate the charter
school and not an employee of the local school district in which the
charter school is located. An employee of a charter school shall be
deemed to be a public employee solely for purposes of article fourteen
of the civil service law, except for section two hundred twelve of such
law, and for no other purposes unless otherwise specified in this
article, the board of trustees of the charter school shall constitute a
board of education solely for purposes of article fourteen of the civil
service law, except for section two hundred twelve of such law, and for
no other purposes unless otherwise specified in this article, a charter
school shall be deemed to be a public employer solely for purposes of
article fourteen of the civil service law, except for section two
hundred twelve of such law, and for no other purposes unless otherwise
specified in this article, and the chief executive officer of the
charter school shall be the person designated as such by the board of
trustees of the charter school.
 (a-1) The board of trustees of a charter school shall employ and
contract with necessary teachers, administrators and other school
personnel. Such teachers shall be certified in accordance with the
requirements applicable to other public schools; provided, however, that
a charter school may employ as teachers (i) uncertified teachers with at
least three years of elementary, middle or secondary classroom teaching
experience; (ii) tenured or tenure track college faculty; (iii)
individuals with two years of satisfactory experience through the Teach
for America program; and (iv) individuals who possess exceptional
business, professional, artistic, athletic, or military experience,
provided, however, that such teachers described in clauses (i), (ii),
(iii), and (iv) of this paragraph shall not in total comprise more than
the sum of: (A) thirty per centum of the teaching staff of a charter
school, or five teachers, whichever is less; plus (B) five teachers of
mathematics, science, computer science, technology, or career and
technical education; plus (C) five additional teachers. A teacher
certified or otherwise approved by the commissioner shall not be
included in the numerical limits established by the preceding sentence.
 (a-2) (i) The board of trustees of a charter school shall require, for
purposes of a criminal history record check, the fingerprinting of all
prospective employees pursuant to section three thousand thirty-five of
this chapter, who do not hold valid clearance pursuant to such section
or pursuant to section three thousand four-b of this chapter or section
five hundred nine-cc or twelve hundred twenty-nine-d of the vehicle and
traffic law. Prior to initiating the fingerprinting process, the
prospective employer shall furnish the applicant with the form described
in paragraph (c) of subdivision thirty of section three hundred five of
this chapter and shall obtain the applicant's consent to the criminal
history records search. Every set of fingerprints taken pursuant to this
paragraph shall be promptly submitted to the commissioner for purposes
of clearance for employment.
 (ii) Upon the recommendation of the chief executive officer of the
charter school, the board of trustees of a charter school may
conditionally appoint a prospective employee. A request for conditional
clearance shall be forwarded to the commissioner along with the
prospective employee's fingerprints, as required by subparagraph (i) of
this paragraph. Such appointment shall not commence until notification
by the commissioner that the prospective employee has been conditionally
cleared for employment and shall terminate forty-five days after such
notification of conditional clearance or when the prospective employer
is notified of a determination by the commissioner to grant or deny
clearance, whichever occurs earlier, and may not be extended or renewed
unless the commissioner issues a new conditional clearance after finding
that there was good cause for failing to obtain clearance within such
period, provided that if clearance is granted, the appointment shall
continue and the conditional status shall be removed. Prior to
commencement of such conditional appointment, the prospective employer
shall obtain a signed statement for conditional appointment from the
prospective employee, indicating whether, to the best of his or her
knowledge, he or she has a pending criminal charge or criminal
conviction in any jurisdiction outside the state.
 (iii) Upon the recommendation of the chief executive officer of the
charter school, the board of trustees of a charter school may make an
emergency conditional appointment when an unforeseen emergency vacancy
has occurred. When such appointment is made, the process for conditional
appointment pursuant to subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph must also be
initiated. Emergency conditional appointment may commence prior to
notification from the commissioner on conditional clearance but shall
terminate twenty business days from the date such appointment commences
or when the prospective employer is notified by the commissioner
regarding conditional clearance, whichever occurs earlier, provided that
if conditional clearance is granted, the appointment shall continue as a
conditional appointment. Prior to the commencement of such appointment,
the prospective employer must obtain a signed statement for emergency
conditional appointment from the prospective employee, indicating
whether, to the best of his or her knowledge, he or she has a pending
criminal charge or criminal conviction in any jurisdiction. An
unforeseen emergency vacancy shall be defined as: (1) a vacancy that
occurred less than ten business days before the start of any school
session, including summer school, or during any school session,
including summer school, without sufficient notice to allow for
clearance or conditional clearance; (2) when no other qualified person
is available to fill the vacancy temporarily; and (3) when emergency
conditional appointment is necessary to maintain services which the
charter school is legally required to provide or services necessary to
protect the health, education or safety of students or staff. The
provisions of clause one of this subparagraph shall not apply if the
board finds that the charter school has been unable to fill the vacancy
despite good faith efforts to fill such vacancy in a manner which would
have allowed sufficient time for clearance or conditional clearance.
 (iv) Shall develop a policy for the safety of the children who have
contact with an employee holding conditional appointment or emergency
conditional appointment.
 (a-3) The board of trustees of a charter school shall upon
commencement and termination of employment of an employee by the charter
school district, provide the commissioner with the name of and position
held by such employee.
 (b) The school employees of a charter school that has been converted
from an existing public school who are eligible for representation under
article fourteen of the civil service law shall be deemed to be included
within the negotiating unit containing like titles or positions, if any,
for the school district in which such charter school is located and
shall be subject to the collective bargaining agreement covering that
school district negotiating unit; provided, however, that a majority of
the members of a negotiating unit within a charter school may modify, in
writing, a collective bargaining agreement for the purposes of
employment in the charter school with the approval of the board of
trustees of the charter school.
 (b-1) The employees of a charter school that is not a conversion from
an existing public school shall not be deemed members of any existing
collective bargaining unit representing employees of the school district
in which the charter school is located, and the charter school and its
employees shall not be subject to any existing collective bargaining
agreement between the school district and its employees. Provided,
however, that (i) if the student enrollment of the charter school on the
first day on which the charter school commences student instruction
exceeds two hundred fifty or if the average daily student enrollment of
such school exceeds two hundred fifty students at any point during the
first two years after the charter school commences student instruction,
all employees of the school who are eligible for representation under
article fourteen of the civil service law shall be deemed to be
represented in a separate negotiating unit at the charter school by the
same employee organization, if any, that represents like employees in
the school district in which such charter school is located; (ii) the
provisions of subparagraph (i) of this paragraph may be waived in up to
ten charters issued on the recommendation of the charter entity set
forth in paragraph (b) of subdivision three of section twenty-eight
hundred fifty-one of this article; (iii) the provisions of subparagraph
(i) of this paragraph shall not be applicable to the renewal or
extension of a charter; and (iv) nothing in this sentence shall be
construed to subject a charter school subject to the provisions of this
paragraph or its employees to any collective bargaining agreement
between any public school district and its employees or to make the
employees of such charter school part of any negotiating unit at such
school district. The charter school may, in its sole discretion, choose
whether or not to offer the terms of any existing collective bargaining
to school employees.
 (c) The employees of the charter school may be deemed employees of the
local school district for the purpose of providing retirement benefits,
including membership in the teachers' retirement system and other
retirement systems open to employees of public schools. The financial
contributions for such benefits shall be the responsibility of the
charter school and the school's employees. The commissioner, in
consultation with the comptroller, shall develop regulations to
implement the provisions of this paragraph in a manner that allows
charter schools to provide retirement benefits to its employees in the
same manner as other public school employees.
 (c-1) Reasonable access. (i) If employees of the charter school are
not represented, any charter school chartered pursuant to this article
must afford reasonable access to any employee organization during the
reasonable proximate period before any representation question is
raised; or
 (ii) If the employee organization is a challenging organization,
reasonable access must be provided to any organization seeking to
represent employees beginning with a date reasonably proximate to a
challenge period. Reasonableness is defined, at a minimum, as access
equal to that provided to the incumbent organization.
 (c-2) Employer neutrality. It shall be an improper practice for a
charter school board of directors, chief administrative officer and
their agents to commit any of the acts set forth in subdivision one of
section two hundred nine-a of the civil service law and could in
accordance with section twenty-eight hundred fifty-five of this article,
result in the revocation of the charter.
 (d) A teacher employed by a school district may make a written request
to the board of education for an extended leave of absence to teach at a
charter school. Approval for such a leave of absence for a period of
three years or less shall not be unreasonably withheld. If such approval
is granted to a teacher by the school district, the teacher may return
to teach in the school district during such period of leave without the
loss of any right of certification, retirement, seniority, salary status
or any other benefit provided by law or by collective bargaining
agreement. If an appropriate position is unavailable, the teacher's name
shall be placed on a preferred eligible list of candidates for
appointment to a vacancy that may thereafter occur in an office or
position similar to the one such teacher filled in such school district
immediately prior to the leave of service.
 (d-1) In a school district of a city having a population of one
million or more, a principal employed by such school district may make a
written request to the board of education for an extended leave of
absence to serve as a principal of a charter school. Approval for such a
leave of absence for a period of three years or less shall not be
unreasonably withheld. If such approval is granted to a principal by the
school district, the principal may return to serve as a principal in the
school district during such period of leave without the loss of any
right of certification, retirement, seniority, salary status or any
other benefit provided by law or by collective bargaining agreement. If
an appropriate position is unavailable, the principal's name shall be
placed on a preferred eligible list of candidates for appointment to a
vacancy that may thereafter occur in an office or position similar to
the one such principal filled in such school district immediately prior
to the leave of service.
 § 2855. Causes for revocation or termination. 1. The charter entity,
or the board of regents, may terminate a charter upon any of the
following grounds:
 (a) When a charter school's outcome on student assessment measures
adopted by the board of regents falls below the level that would allow
the commissioner to revoke the registration of another public school,
and student achievement on such measures has not shown improvement over
the preceding three school years;
 (b) Serious violations of law;
 (c) Material and substantial violation of the charter, including
fiscal mismanagement;
 (d) When the public employment relations board makes a determination
that the charter school demonstrates a practice and pattern of egregious
and intentional violations of subdivision one of section two hundred
nine-a of the civil service law involving interference with or
discrimination against employee rights under article fourteen of the
civil service law; or
 (e) Repeated failure to comply with the requirement to meet or exceed
enrollment and retention targets of students with disabilities, English
language learners, and students who are eligible applicants for the free
and reduced price lunch program pursuant to targets established by the
board of regents or the board of trustees of the state university of New
York, as applicable. Provided, however, if no grounds for terminating a
charter are established pursuant to this section other than pursuant to
this paragraph, and the charter school demonstrates that it has made
extensive efforts to recruit and retain such students, including
outreach to parents and families in the surrounding communities, widely
publicizing the lottery for such school, and efforts to academically
support such students in such charter school, then the charter entity or
board of regents may retain such charter.
 2. Notice of intent to revoke a charter shall be provided to the board
of trustees of a charter school at least thirty days prior to the
effective date of the proposed revocation. Such notice shall include a
statement of reasons for the proposed revocation. The charter school
shall be allowed at least thirty days to correct the problems associated
with the proposed revocation. Prior to revocation of the charter, a
charter school shall be provided an opportunity to be heard, consistent
with the requirements of due process. Upon the termination of a charter,
the charter school shall proceed with dissolution pursuant to the
procedures of the charter and direction of the charter entity and the
board of regents.
 3. In addition to the provisions of subdivision two of this section,
the charter entity or the board of regents may place a charter school
falling within the provisions of subdivision one of this section on
probationary status to allow the implementation of a remedial action
plan. The failure of a charter school to comply with the terms and
conditions of a remedial action plan may result in summary revocation of
the school's charter.
 4. Any individual or group may bring a complaint to the board of
trustees of a charter school alleging a violation of the provisions of
this article, the charter, or any other provision of law relating to the
management or operation of the charter school. If, after presentation of
the complaint to the board of trustees of a charter school, the
individual or group determines that such board has not adequately
addressed the complaint, they may present that complaint to the charter
entity, which shall investigate and respond. If, after presentation of
the complaint to the charter entity, the individual or group determines
that the charter entity has not adequately addressed the complaint, they
may present that complaint to the board of regents, which shall
investigate and respond. The charter entity and the board of regents
shall have the power and the duty to issue appropriate remedial orders
to charter schools under their jurisdiction to effectuate the provisions
of this section.
 5. The regulatory power of the board of regents and the commissioner
shall not extend to charter schools except as otherwise specifically
provided in this article.
 § 2856. Financing of charter schools. * 1. (a) The enrollment of
students attending charter schools shall be included in the enrollment,
attendance, membership and, if applicable, count of students with
disabilities of the school district in which the pupil resides. The
charter school shall report all such data to the school districts of
residence in a timely manner. Each school district shall report such
enrollment, attendance and count of students with disabilities to the
department. The school district of residence shall pay directly to the
charter school for each student enrolled in the charter school who
resides in the school district the charter school basic tuition, which
shall be:
 (i) for school years prior to the two thousand nine--two thousand ten
school year, an amount equal to one hundred percent of the amount
calculated pursuant to paragraph f of subdivision one of section
thirty-six hundred two of this chapter for the school district for the
year prior to the base year increased by the percentage change in the
state total approved operating expense calculated pursuant to paragraph
t of subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter
from two years prior to the base year to the base year;
 (ii) for the two thousand nine--two thousand ten school year, the
charter school basic tuition shall be the amount payable by such
district as charter school basic tuition for the two thousand eight--two
thousand nine school year;
 (iii) for the two thousand ten--two thousand eleven through two
thousand thirteen--two thousand fourteen school years, the charter
school basic tuition shall be the basic tuition computed for the two
thousand ten--two thousand eleven school year pursuant to the provisions
of subparagraph (i) of this paragraph;
 (iv) for the two thousand fourteen--two thousand fifteen, two thousand
fifteen--two thousand sixteen and two thousand sixteen--two thousand
seventeen school years, the charter school basic tuition shall be the
sum of the lesser of the charter school basic tuition computed for the
two thousand ten--two thousand eleven school year pursuant to the
provisions of subparagraph (i) of this paragraph or the charter school
basic tuition computed for the current year pursuant to the provisions
of subparagraph (i) of this paragraph plus the supplemental basic
tuition;
 (v) for the two thousand seventeen--two thousand eighteen school year,
the charter school basic tuition shall be the sum of (A) the charter
school basic tuition for the two thousand sixteen--two thousand
seventeen school year plus (B) five hundred dollars;
 (vi) for the two thousand eighteen--two thousand nineteen school year,
the charter school basic tuition shall be the lesser of (A) the product
of (i) the charter school basic tuition calculated for the base year
multiplied by (ii) the average of the quotients for each school year in
the period commencing with the year five years prior to the base year
and finishing with the year prior to the base year of the total approved
operating expense for such school district calculated pursuant to
paragraph t of subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this
chapter for each such year divided by the total approved operating
expense for such district for the immediately preceding year, provided
that the highest and lowest annual quotients shall be excluded from the
calculation of such average or (B) the quotient of the total general
fund expenditures for the school district calculated pursuant to an
electronic data file created for the purpose of compliance with
paragraph b of subdivision twenty-one of section three hundred five of
this chapter published annually on May fifteenth for the year prior to
the base year divided by the total estimated public enrollment for the
school district pursuant to paragraph n of subdivision one of section
thirty-six hundred two of this chapter for the year prior to the base
year.
 (vii) for the two thousand nineteen--two thousand twenty school year
the charter school basic tuition shall be the lesser of (A) the product
of (i) the charter school basic tuition calculated for the base year
multiplied by (ii) the average of the quotients for each school year in
the period commencing with the year three years prior to the base year
and finishing with the year prior to the base year of the total approved
operating expense for such school district calculated pursuant to
paragraph t of subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this
chapter for each such year divided by the total approved operating
expense for such district for the immediately preceding year provided
that the highest annual quotient calculated pursuant to this
subparagraph shall be replaced by the average quotient calculated
pursuant to subparagraph (vi) of this paragraph or (B) the quotient of
the total general fund expenditures for the school district calculated
pursuant to an electronic data file created for the purpose of
compliance with paragraph b of subdivision twenty-one of section three
hundred five of this chapter published annually on May fifteenth for the
year prior to the base year divided by the total estimated public
enrollment for the school district pursuant to paragraph n of
subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter for
the year prior to the base year.
 (viii) for the two thousand twenty--two thousand twenty-one and two
thousand twenty-one--two thousand twenty-two school years, the charter
school basic tuition shall be the lesser of (A) the product of (i) the
charter school basic tuition calculated for the base year multiplied by
(ii) the average of the quotients for each school year in the period
commencing with the year three years prior to the base year and
finishing with the year prior to the base year of the total approved
operating expense for such school district calculated pursuant to
paragraph t of subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this
chapter for each such year divided by the total approved operating
expense for such district for the immediately preceding year multiplied
by, for the two thousand twenty--two thousand twenty-one school year
only, (iii) nine hundred forty-five one-thousandths (0.945) or (B) the
quotient of the total general fund expenditures for the school district
calculated pursuant to an electronic data file created for the purpose
of compliance with paragraph b of subdivision twenty-one of section
three hundred five of this chapter published annually on May fifteenth
for the year prior to the base year divided by the total estimated
public enrollment for the school district pursuant to paragraph n of
subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter for
the year prior to the base year.
 (ix) for the two thousand twenty-two--two thousand twenty-three
through two thousand twenty-four--two thousand twenty-five school years
the charter school basic tuition shall be the lesser of (A) the product
of (i) the charter school basic tuition calculated for the base year
multiplied by (ii) the average of the quotients for each school year in
the period commencing with the year four years prior to the base year
and finishing with the year prior to the base year, excluding the two
thousand twenty--two thousand twenty-one school year, of the total
approved operating expense for such school district calculated pursuant
to paragraph t of subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of
this chapter for each such year divided by the total approved operating
expense for such district for the immediately preceding year or (B) the
quotient of the total general fund expenditures for the school district
calculated pursuant to an electronic data file created for the purpose
of compliance with paragraph b of subdivision twenty-one of section
three hundred five of this chapter published annually on May fifteenth
for the year prior to the base year divided by the total estimated
public enrollment for the school district pursuant to paragraph n of
subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter for
the year prior to the base year.
 (x) for the two thousand twenty-five--two thousand twenty-six school
year and thereafter the charter school basic tuition shall be the lesser
of (A) the product of (i) the charter school basic tuition calculated
for the base year multiplied by (ii) the average of the quotients for
each school year in the period commencing with the year three years
prior to the base year and finishing with the year prior to the base
year of the total approved operating expense for such school district
calculated pursuant to paragraph t of subdivision one of section
thirty-six hundred two of this chapter for each such year divided by the
total approved operating expense for such district for the immediately
preceding year or (B) the quotient of the total general fund
expenditures for the school district calculated pursuant to an
electronic data file created for the purpose of compliance with
paragraph b of subdivision twenty-one of section three hundred five of
this chapter published annually on May fifteenth for the year prior to
the base year divided by the total estimated public enrollment for the
school district pursuant to paragraph n of subdivision one of section
thirty-six hundred two of this chapter for the year prior to the base
year.
 For the purposes of this subdivision, the "supplemental basic tuition"
shall be (A) for a school district for which the charter school basic
tuition computed for the current year is greater than or equal to the
charter school basic tuition for the two thousand ten--two thousand
eleven school year pursuant to the provisions of subparagraph (i) of
this paragraph, (1) for the two thousand fourteen--two thousand fifteen
school year two hundred and fifty dollars, and (2) for the two thousand
fifteen--two thousand sixteen school year three hundred and fifty
dollars, and (3) for the two thousand sixteen--two thousand seventeen
school year five hundred dollars, and (4) for the two thousand
seventeen--two thousand eighteen school year and thereafter, the sum of
(i) the supplemental basic tuition calculated for the two thousand
sixteen--two thousand seventeen school year plus (ii) five hundred
dollars, and (B) for school years prior to the two thousand
seventeen--two thousand eighteen school year, for a school district for
which the charter school basic tuition for the two thousand ten--two
thousand eleven school year is greater than the charter school basic
tuition for the current year pursuant to the provisions of subparagraph
(i) of this paragraph, the positive difference of the charter school
basic tuition for the two thousand ten--two thousand eleven school year
minus the charter school basic tuition for the current year pursuant to
the provisions of subparagraph (i) of this paragraph and (C) for school
years following the two thousand sixteen--two thousand seventeen school
years, for a school district for which the charter school basic tuition
for the two thousand ten--two thousand eleven school year is greater
than the charter school basic tuition for the current year pursuant to
the provisions of subparagraph (i) of this paragraph, the sum of (i) the
supplemental basic tuition calculated for the two thousand sixteen--two
thousand seventeen school year plus (ii) five hundred dollars.
 (b) The school district shall also pay directly to the charter school
any federal or state aid attributable to a student with a disability
attending charter school in proportion to the level of services for such
student with a disability that the charter school provides directly or
indirectly. Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary,
amounts payable pursuant to this subdivision from state or local funds
may be reduced pursuant to an agreement between the school and the
charter entity set forth in the charter. Payments made pursuant to this
subdivision shall be made by the school district in six substantially
equal installments each year beginning on the first business day of July
and every two months thereafter. Amounts payable under this subdivision
shall be determined by the commissioner. Amounts payable to a charter
school in its first year of operation shall be based on the projections
of initial-year enrollment set forth in the charter until actual
enrollment data is reported to the school district by the charter
school. Such projections shall be reconciled with the actual enrollment
as actual enrollment data is so reported and at the end of the school's
first year of operation and each subsequent year based on a final report
of actual enrollment by the charter school, and any necessary
adjustments resulting from such final report shall be made to payments
during the school's following year of operation.
 (c) Notwithstanding any other provision of this subdivision to the
contrary, payment of the federal aid attributable to a student with a
disability attending a charter school shall be made in accordance with
the requirements of section 8065-a of title twenty of the United States
code and sections 76.785-76.799 and 300.209 of title thirty-four of the
code of federal regulations.
 (d) School districts shall be eligible for an annual apportionment
equal to the amount of the supplemental basic tuition for the charter
school in the base year for the expenses incurred in the two thousand
fourteen--two thousand fifteen, two thousand fifteen--two thousand
sixteen, two thousand sixteen--two thousand seventeen school years and
thereafter. Provided that for expenses incurred in the two thousand
twenty--two thousand twenty-one school year, for a city school district
in a city having a population of one million or more, the annual
apportionment shall be reduced by thirty-five million dollars
($35,000,000) upon certification by the director of the budget of the
availability of a grant in the same amount from the elementary and
secondary school emergency relief funds provided through the American
rescue plan act of 2021 (P.L. 117-2). Provided further that for expenses
incurred in the two thousand twenty-three--two thousand twenty-four
school year, for a city school district in a city having a population of
one million or more, the annual apportionment shall be reduced by
thirty-five million dollars ($35,000,000) upon certification by the
director of the budget of the availability of a grant in the same amount
from the elementary and secondary school emergency relief funds provided
through the American rescue plan act of 2021 (P.L. 117-2).
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2027
 * 1. (a) The enrollment of students attending charter schools shall be
included in the enrollment, attendance and, if applicable, count of
students with disabilities of the school district in which the pupil
resides. The charter school shall report all such data to the school
districts of residence in a timely manner. Each school district shall
report such enrollment, attendance and count of students with
disabilities to the department. The school district of residence shall
pay directly to the charter school for each student enrolled in the
charter school who resides in the school district the charter school
basic tuition which shall be:
 (i) for school years prior to the two thousand nine--two thousand ten
school year, an amount equal to one hundred percent of the amount
calculated pursuant to paragraph f of subdivision one of section
thirty-six hundred two of this chapter for the school district for the
year prior to the base year increased by the percentage change in the
state total approved operating expense calculated pursuant to paragraph
t of subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter
from two years prior to the base year to the base year;
 (ii) for the two thousand nine--two thousand ten school year, the
charter school basic tuition shall be the amount payable by such
district as charter school basic tuition for the two thousand eight--two
thousand nine school year;
 (iii) for the two thousand ten--two thousand eleven through two
thousand thirteen--two thousand fourteen school years, the charter
school basic tuition shall be the basic tuition computed for the two
thousand ten--two thousand eleven school year pursuant to the provisions
of subparagraph (i) of this paragraph;
 (iv) for the two thousand fourteen--two thousand fifteen, two thousand
fifteen--two thousand sixteen and two thousand sixteen--two thousand
seventeen school years, the charter school basic tuition shall be the
sum of the lesser of the charter school basic tuition computed for the
two thousand ten--two thousand eleven school year pursuant to the
provisions of subparagraph (i) of this paragraph or the charter school
basic tuition computed for the current year pursuant to the provisions
of subparagraph (i) of this paragraph plus the supplemental basic
tuition;
 (v) for the two thousand seventeen--two thousand eighteen school year,
the charter school basic tuition shall be the sum of (A) the charter
school basic tuition for the two thousand sixteen--two thousand
seventeen school year plus (B) five hundred dollars;
 (vi) for the two thousand eighteen--two thousand nineteen school year,
the charter school basic tuition shall be the lesser of (A) the product
of (i) the charter school basic tuition calculated for the base year
multiplied by (ii) the average of the quotients for each school year in
the period commencing with the year five years prior to the base year
and finishing with the year prior to the base year of the total approved
operating expense for such school district calculated pursuant to
paragraph t of subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this
chapter for each such year divided by the total approved operating
expense for such district for the immediately preceding year, provided
that the highest and lowest annual quotients shall be excluded from the
calculation of such average or (B) the quotient of the total general
fund expenditures for the school district calculated pursuant to an
electronic data file created for the purpose of compliance with
paragraph b of subdivision twenty-one of section three hundred five of
this chapter published annually on May fifteenth for the year prior to
the base year divided by the total estimated public enrollment for the
school district pursuant to paragraph n of subdivision one of section
thirty-six hundred two of this chapter for the year prior to the base
year.
 (vii) for the two thousand nineteen--two thousand twenty school year
the charter school basic tuition shall be the lesser of (A) the product
of (i) the charter school basic tuition calculated for the base year
multiplied by (ii) the average of the quotients for each school year in
the period commencing with the year three years prior to the base year
and finishing with the year prior to the base year of the total approved
operating expense for such school district calculated pursuant to
paragraph t of subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this
chapter for each such year divided by the total approved operating
expense for such district for the immediately preceding year provided
that the highest annual quotient calculated pursuant to this
subparagraph shall be replaced by the average quotient calculated
pursuant to subparagraph (vi) of this paragraph or (B) the quotient of
the total general fund expenditures for the school district calculated
pursuant to an electronic data file created for the purpose of
compliance with paragraph b of subdivision twenty-one of section three
hundred five of this chapter published annually on May fifteenth for the
year prior to the base year divided by the total estimated public
enrollment for the school district pursuant to paragraph n of
subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter for
the year prior to the base year.
 (viii) for the two thousand twenty--two thousand twenty-one and two
thousand twenty-one--two thousand twenty-two school years, the charter
school basic tuition shall be the lesser of (A) the product of (i) the
charter school basic tuition calculated for the base year multiplied by
(ii) the average of the quotients for each school year in the period
commencing with the year three years prior to the base year and
finishing with the year prior to the base year of the total approved
operating expense for such school district calculated pursuant to
paragraph t of subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this
chapter for each such year divided by the total approved operating
expense for such district for the immediately preceding year multiplied
by, for the two thousand twenty--two thousand twenty-one school year
only, (iii) nine hundred forty-five one-thousandths (0.945) or (B) the
quotient of the total general fund expenditures for the school district
calculated pursuant to an electronic data file created for the purpose
of compliance with paragraph b of subdivision twenty-one of section
three hundred five of this chapter published annually on May fifteenth
for the year prior to the base year divided by the total estimated
public enrollment for the school district pursuant to paragraph n of
subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter for
the year prior to the base year.
 (ix) for the two thousand twenty-two--two thousand twenty-three
through two thousand twenty-four--two thousand twenty-five school years
the charter school basic tuition shall be the lesser of (A) the product
of (i) the charter school basic tuition calculated for the base year
multiplied by (ii) the average of the quotients for each school year in
the period commencing with the year four years prior to the base year
and finishing with the year prior to the base year, excluding the two
thousand twenty--two thousand twenty-one school year, of the total
approved operating expense for such school district calculated pursuant
to paragraph t of subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of
this chapter for each such year divided by the total approved operating
expense for such district for the immediately preceding year or (B) the
quotient of the total general fund expenditures for the school district
calculated pursuant to an electronic data file created for the purpose
of compliance with paragraph b of subdivision twenty-one of section
three hundred five of this chapter published annually on May fifteenth
for the year prior to the base year divided by the total estimated
public enrollment for the school district pursuant to paragraph n of
subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter for
the year prior to the base year.
 (x) for the two thousand twenty-five--two thousand twenty-six school
year and thereafter the charter school basic tuition shall be the lesser
of (A) the product of (i) the charter school basic tuition calculated
for the base year multiplied by (ii) the average of the quotients for
each school year in the period commencing with the year three years
prior to the base year and finishing with the year prior to the base
year of the total approved operating expense for such school district
calculated pursuant to paragraph t of subdivision one of section
thirty-six hundred two of this chapter for each such year divided by the
total approved operating expense for such district for the immediately
preceding year or (B) the quotient of the total general fund
expenditures for the school district calculated pursuant to an
electronic data file created for the purpose of compliance with
paragraph b of subdivision twenty-one of section three hundred five of
this chapter published annually on May fifteenth for the year prior to
the base year divided by the total estimated public enrollment for the
school district pursuant to paragraph n of subdivision one of section
thirty-six hundred two of this chapter for the year prior to the base
year.
 For the purposes of this subdivision, the "supplemental basic tuition"
shall be (A) for a school district for which the charter school basic
tuition computed for the current year is greater than or equal to the
charter school basic tuition for the two thousand ten--two thousand
eleven school year pursuant to the provisions of subparagraph (i) of
this paragraph, (1) for the two thousand fourteen--two thousand fifteen
school year two hundred and fifty dollars, and (2) for the two thousand
fifteen--two thousand sixteen school year three hundred and fifty
dollars, and (3) for the two thousand sixteen--two thousand seventeen
school year five hundred dollars, and (4) for the two thousand
seventeen--two thousand eighteen school year and thereafter, the sum of
(i) the supplemental basic tuition calculated for the two thousand
sixteen--two thousand seventeen school year plus (ii) five hundred
dollars, and (B) for school years prior to the two thousand
seventeen--two thousand eighteen school year, for a school district for
which the charter school basic tuition for the two thousand ten--two
thousand eleven school year is greater than the charter school basic
tuition for the current year pursuant to the provisions of subparagraph
(i) of this paragraph, the positive difference of the charter school
basic tuition for the two thousand ten--two thousand eleven school year
minus the charter school basic tuition for the current year pursuant to
the provisions of subparagraph (i) of this paragraph and (C) for school
years following the two thousand sixteen--two thousand seventeen school
years, for a school district for which the charter school basic tuition
for the two thousand ten--two thousand eleven school year is greater
than the charter school basic tuition for the current year pursuant to
the provisions of subparagraph (i) of this paragraph, the sum of (i) the
supplemental basic tuition calculated for the two thousand sixteen--two
thousand seventeen school year plus (ii) five hundred dollars.
 (b) The school district shall also pay directly to the charter school
any federal or state aid attributable to a student with a disability
attending charter school in proportion to the level of services for such
student with a disability that the charter school provides directly or
indirectly. Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary,
amounts payable pursuant to this subdivision may be reduced pursuant to
an agreement between the school and the charter entity set forth in the
charter. Payments made pursuant to this subdivision shall be made by the
school district in six substantially equal installments each year
beginning on the first business day of July and every two months
thereafter. Amounts payable under this subdivision shall be determined
by the commissioner. Amounts payable to a charter school in its first
year of operation shall be based on the projections of initial-year
enrollment set forth in the charter. Such projections shall be
reconciled with the actual enrollment at the end of the school's first
year of operation, and any necessary adjustments shall be made to
payments during the school's second year of operation.
 (c) School districts shall be eligible for an annual apportionment
equal to the amount of the supplemental basic tuition for the charter
school in the base year for the expenses incurred in the two thousand
fourteen--two thousand fifteen, two thousand fifteen--two thousand
sixteen, two thousand sixteen--two thousand seventeen school years and
thereafter. Provided that for expenses incurred in the two thousand
twenty--two thousand twenty-one school year, for a city school district
in a city having a population of one million or more, the annual
apportionment shall be reduced by thirty-five million dollars
($35,000,000) upon certification by the director of the budget of the
availability of a grant in the same amount from the elementary and
secondary school emergency relief funds provided through the American
rescue plan act of 2021 (P.L. 117-2). Provided further that for expenses
incurred in the two thousand twenty-three--two thousand twenty-four
school year, for a city school district in a city having a population of
one million or more, the annual apportionment shall be reduced by
thirty-five million dollars ($35,000,000) upon certification by the
director of the budget of the availability of a grant in the same amount
from the elementary and secondary school emergency relief funds provided
through the American rescue plan act of 2021 (P.L. 117-2).
 * NB Effective June 30, 2027
 2. In the event of the failure of the school district to make payments
required by this section, the state comptroller shall deduct from any
state funds which become due to such school district an amount equal to
the unpaid obligation. The comptroller shall pay over such sum to the
charter school upon certification of the commissioner. The commissioner
shall promulgate regulations to implement the provisions of this
subdivision.
 3. Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit any person
or organization from providing funding or other assistance to the
establishment or operation of a charter school. The board of trustees of
a charter school is authorized to accept gifts, donations or grants of
any kind made to the charter school and to expend or use such gifts,
donations or grants in accordance with the conditions prescribed by the
donor; provided, however, that no gift, donation or grant may be
accepted if subject to a condition that is contrary to any provision of
law or term of the charter.
 § 2857. Notice; review and assessment. 1. The board of regents shall
distribute information announcing the availability of the charter school
process described in this article to each local school district and
public postsecondary educational institution. At each significant stage
of the chartering process, the charter entity and the board of regents
shall provide appropriate notification to the school district in which
the charter school is located and to public and nonpublic schools in the
same geographic area as the proposed charter school. Such notification
shall be provided by each charter entity within thirty days of its
receipt of an application for formation of a new charter school or for
renewal of an existing charter school, and at least forty-five days
prior to initial approval of the charter application by the charter
entity. Prior to the issuance, revision, or renewal of a charter, the
school district in which the charter school is located shall hold a
public hearing to solicit comments from the community in connection with
the foregoing. Such hearing shall be held within the community
potentially impacted by the proposed charter school. When a revision
involves the relocation of a charter school to a different school
district, the proposed new school district shall also hold such hearing.
In addition, such school districts shall be given an opportunity to
comment on the proposed charter to the charter entity and such charter
entity shall consider any comments raised and submit any such comments
to the board of regents with the application for issuance, revision, or
renewal of a charter.
 1-a. In the event the school district fails to conduct a public
hearing, the board of regents shall conduct a public hearing to solicit
comments from the community in connection with the issuance, revision,
or renewal of a charter.
 2. Each charter school shall submit to the charter entity and to the
board of regents an annual report. Such report shall be issued no later
than the first day of August of each year for the preceding school year
and shall be made publicly available by such date and shall be posted on
the charter school's website. The annual report shall be in such form as
shall be prescribed by the commissioner and shall include at least the
following components:
 (a) a charter school report card, which shall include measures of the
comparative academic and fiscal performance of the school, as prescribed
by the commissioner in regulations adopted for such purpose. Such
measures shall include, but not be limited to, graduation rates, dropout
rates, performance of students on standardized tests, college entry
rates, total spending per pupil and administrative spending per pupil.
Such measures shall be presented in a format that is easily comparable
to similar public schools. In addition, the charter school shall ensure
that such information is easily accessible to the community including
making it publicly available by transmitting it to local newspapers of
general circulation and making it available for distribution at board of
trustee meetings.
 (b) discussion of the progress made towards achievement of the goals
set forth in the charter.
 (c) a certified financial statement setting forth, by appropriate
categories, the revenues and expenditures for the preceding school year,
including a copy of the most recent independent fiscal audit of the
school and any audit conducted by the comptroller of the state of New
York.
 (d) efforts taken by the charter school in the existing school year,
and a plan for efforts to be taken in the succeeding school year, to
meet or exceed enrollment and retention targets set by the board of
regents or the board of trustees of the state university of New York, as
applicable, of students with disabilities, English language learners,
and students who are eligible applicants for the free and reduced price
lunch program established pursuant to paragraph (e) of subdivision four
of section twenty-eight hundred fifty-one of this article.
 3. The board of regents shall report annually to the governor, the
temporary president of the senate, and the speaker of the assembly the
following information:
 (a) The number, distribution, and a brief description of new charter
schools established during the preceding year;
 (a-1) A list including the number of charter schools closed during the
preceding year, and a brief description of the reasons therefor
including, but not limited to, non-renewal of the charter or revocation
of the charter;
 (b) The department's assessment of the current and projected
programmatic and fiscal impact of charter schools on the delivery of
services by school districts;
 (c) The academic progress of students attending charter schools, as
measured against comparable public and nonpublic schools with similar
student population characteristics wherever practicable;
 (d) A list of all actions taken by a charter entity on charter
application and the rationale for the renewal or revocation of any
charters; and
 (e) Any other information regarding charter schools that the board of
regents deems necessary.
 The format for this annual report shall be developed in consultation
with representatives of school districts and charter school officials.
 4. The board of regents shall review the educational effectiveness of
the charter school approach authorized by this article and the effect of
charter schools on the public and nonpublic school systems. Not later
than December thirty-first, two thousand three, the board of regents
shall report to the governor, the temporary president of the senate, the
speaker of the assembly and the board of regents with recommendations to
modify, expand, or terminate that approach. Such report shall include,
for each charter school, a copy of the school's mission statement,
attendance statistics and dropout rates, student performance on
standardized assessment tests, projections of financial stability, and,
wherever practicable, comparisons to other public schools.
 5. The board of regents shall on an annual basis review and make
available to school districts best educational practices employed by
charter schools.