 TITLE VI
 SPECIAL SCHOOLS AND INSTRUCTION
Article 81 Education of children residing in child care institutions
 (§§ 4001-4006).
 83 Indian schools (§§ 4101-4119).
 85 Instruction of the deaf and of the blind (§§ 4201-4213).
 87 New York State School for the Blind (§§ 4301-4318).
 88 New York State School for the Deaf (§§ 4351-4358).
 89 Children with handicapping conditions (§§ 4401--4410-c).
 90 Gifted education (§§ 4451-4453).
 91 School camps (§§ 4501-4502).
 93 Career, practical arts, continuing adult education and
 vocational and educational guidance (§§ 4601-4607).
 95 Farm schools in counties (§§ 4701-4712).
 97 Home schools in certain cities (§§ 4801-4815).
 99 New York nautical school (§§ 4901-4904).
 101 Private trade and correspondence schools (§§ 5001-5010).
 103 Workplace literacy programs (§§ 5100-5102).
 105 Research Institute on Addictions (§§ 5200-5201).
 ARTICLE 81
 EDUCATION OF CHILDREN RESIDING IN CHILD CARE INSTITUTIONS
Section 4001. Definitions.
 4002. Educational services.
 4003. Annual tuition and maintenance reimbursement procedures.
 4004. Financial responsibility.
 4005. Placement and evaluation of children.
 4006. Notification procedures for determination of residence.
 § 4001. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms
shall be defined as follows:
 1. "Authorized agency" shall have the meaning defined in section three
hundred seventy-one of the social services law.
 2. "Child care institution" shall mean any facility serving thirteen
or more children licensed by the department of social services pursuant
to title one of article seven of the social services law operated by an
authorized agency, or a residential treatment facility for children and
youth, whether or not such residential treatment facility is operated by
an authorized agency, except that Blythedale Children's Hospital shall
be a child care institution. This definition shall not include any
facility operated by a state agency or department other than the office
of mental health. It shall not include group homes or urban homes
operated by or contracted for by the division for youth.
 3. "County" shall mean the county executive, or if there is none, the
chairman of the county legislative body of the county which is
responsible for a child in a child care institution or a private school,
except within the city of New York, in which case county shall mean the
mayor of said city.
 4. "Child with a handicapping condition" shall mean a person between
the ages of five and twenty-one who has been identified through
appropriate evaluation and assessment as having a disability arising
from cognitive, emotional or physical factors, or any combination
thereof, which interferes with the child's ability to benefit from
regular education.
 5. "Maintenance" shall mean the amount charged for room and board,
residential care and medical expenses, including those expenses
reimbursable pursuant to title nineteen of the federal social security
act, defined in accordance with the regulations of the commissioner of
social services for a child care institution pursuant to section three
hundred ninety-eight-a of the social services law. Maintenance shall not
include expenses which are otherwise reimbursable to a residential
facility by a federal, state or local agency, shall be approved by the
state commissioner of social services and the director of the budget and
shall not be otherwise payable or reimbursable.
 6. "Public agency" shall mean the family court, the division for youth
or the local social services district.
 7. "Residential treatment facility for children and youth" shall have
the meaning defined in section 1.03 of the mental hygiene law. Such
facilities may be operated by an authorized agency, subject to the
regulation of the office of mental health.
 8. "Special act school district" shall mean those school districts
enumerated in chapter five hundred sixty-six of the laws of nineteen
hundred sixty-seven as amended.
 9. "Tuition" shall mean the per pupil cost of all instructional
services, supplies and equipment, and the operation of instructional
facilities as determined by the commissioner. Approved tuition shall be
computed from expenditures for which no revenue has been received from
the following sources:
 a. Receipts from the federal government;
 b. Any cash receipts which reduce the cost of an item applied against
the item therefor, except gifts, donations and earned interest; and
 c. Any refunds made or any apportionment or payment received from the
state for experimental or special programs as approved by the
commissioner.
 10. "School district of origin" shall mean the public school district
of which a child was or is a resident at the time of such child's
placement in the care and custody of a public agency.
 11. "School district of residence" shall mean the public school
district in which the child was or is living at the time a public agency
is considering placement of the child in a child care institution, or at
the time a child is placed with the division for youth.
 12. "Written recommendation" shall mean the information required to be
provided by a school district to a public agency pursuant to section
forty hundred five of this article, which shall be developed as
specified by the regulations of the commissioner.
 § 4002. Educational services. 1. Each child between the ages of five
and twenty-one who resides in a child care institution and who has not
yet graduated from high school shall be entitled to receive a free and
appropriate education in the least restrictive environment for that
child.
 2. Each child shall be provided suitable educational services in the
least restrictive environment which can be provided by one of the day
programs listed below. The need of the individual child shall determine
the program that shall be offered. Such programs are as follows:
 a. The program of the public schools, as defined by section forty-four
hundred one of this chapter, where such child care institution is
located or a neighboring public school program.
 b. The program of the board of cooperative educational services
serving the area in which the institution is located. Boards of
cooperative educational services are hereby authorized to provide such
services on the same basis as such services are provided to children
residing in component districts of such boards.
 c. A special act school district.
 d. An approved private school operated by such institution, or a
private non-residential school approved by the state education
department. Children who receive care in a residential treatment
facility for children and youth which is operated by an authorized
agency may be placed in a private school operated by such residential
treatment facility or in a private school operated by the authorized
agency.
 e. Appointment by the commissioner to a state or state-supported
school in accordance with article eighty-five, eighty-seven or
eighty-eight of this chapter.
 f. Contracts with the state university at Binghamton for
non-residential special services or programs at the children's unit for
treatment and evaluation which have been approved by the commissioner.
 * g. Related services which shall in appropriate cases be provided or
assured to students with disabilities and which shall include audiology,
counseling including rehabilitation counseling services, occupational
therapy, parent counseling and training, school health services, school
nurse services, school social work, physical therapy, speech pathology,
medical services as defined in regulations, psychological services,
orientation and mobility services, assistive technology service as
defined under federal law, interpreting services, other appropriate
developmental, corrective or other support services, and appropriate
access to recreation, as such terms are defined by regulations of the
commissioner and approved by the director of the budget. Such term does
not include a medical device that is surgically implanted, the
optimization of that device's functioning (e.g., mapping), maintenance
of that device, or the replacement of such device.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2027
 * g. Related services which shall in appropriate cases be provided or
assured to students with disabilities and which shall include audiology,
counseling including rehabilitation counseling services, occupational
therapy, parent counseling and training, school health services, school
social work, physical therapy, speech pathology, medical services as
defined in regulations, psychological services, orientation and mobility
services, assistive technology service as defined under federal law,
other appropriate developmental, corrective or other support services,
and appropriate access to recreation, as such terms are defined by
regulations of the commissioner and approved by the director of the
budget.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2027
 h. Hospital instruction, which shall be provided as specified in the
regulations of the commissioner.
 i. Other programs approved by the commissioner.
 3. Each child care institution maintaining a school shall appoint a
committee on special education of the same composition as required of
public schools by section forty-four hundred two of this chapter. Such
committee shall have responsibility for evaluating each pupil suspected
of having a handicapping condition who has been placed in the care of a
child care institution by a public agency and each child placed in a
residential treatment facility for children and youth, and placing such
children in an appropriate special education program as provided in
section forty hundred five of this article. Such committee shall follow
the procedures contained in section forty-four hundred two of this
chapter. A residential treatment facility for children and youth which
is operated by an authorized agency may share the services of a
committee on special education established pursuant to this subdivision
or other provisions of law.
 § 4003. Annual tuition and maintenance reimbursement procedures. 1.
The commissioner of education, the commissioner of social services, and,
when appropriate, the commissioner of mental health shall develop
reimbursement methodologies for the tuition and maintenance components
of child care institutions and special act school districts. The
commissioner of education, in consultation with the appropriate state
agencies and departments, shall have responsibility for developing a
reimbursement methodology for tuition which shall be based upon
appropriate educational standards promulgated pursuant to regulations of
the commissioner of education. The commissioner of social services,
except for institutions for which the state health department or the
office of mental health establishes maintenance rates, in consultation
with appropriate state agencies and departments, shall have
responsibility for developing a reimbursement methodology for
maintenance, pursuant to section three hundred ninety-eight-a of the
social services law and the regulations promulgated thereunder.
 2. The director of the budget, in consultation with the commissioner
of education, the commissioner of social services, the commissioner of
health, the commissioner of mental health, and any other state agency or
other source he may deem appropriate, shall approve reimbursement
methodologies for tuition and maintenance. Any modification in any such
methodology which has previously been approved shall be subject to the
approval of the director of the budget.
 3. Effective upon final approval by the director of the budget of
reimbursement methodologies for both tuition and maintenance, the
commissioner of education shall annually determine a tuition rate in
conformance with this section for each special act school district or
private school operated by a child care institution.
 4. Effective upon final approval by the director of the budget of the
reimbursement methodologies for both tuition and maintenance, the
commissioner of social services shall annually determine a maintenance
rate and a medical services rate for each child care institution in
accordance with this section and regulations of the commissioner of
social services.
 5. All reimbursement rates determined pursuant to this section shall
be effective for the period July first through June thirtieth. Rates for
the following year shall be submitted no later than April fifteenth to
the director of the budget. The director of the budget shall act upon
such rates within forty-five days of submission. Such rates shall not
become effective until approved by the director of the budget. In the
event that the rates are approved after July first, then such rates
shall be deemed to apply retroactively to such date.
 6. All reimbursements shall be subject to adjustment and final
determination upon field audit conducted by the comptroller, the state
education department, the department of social services or any agent
thereof.
 7. The commissioner of education, the commissioner of social services
and the director of the budget, in consultation with other appropriate
state agencies and departments, shall enter into an interagency
agreement to assure effective implementation of the provisions of this
section. The agreement shall provide for, but not be limited to, the
development of common accounting practices and audit procedures, common
information and budget forms, coordinated financial and other reporting
requirements for child care institutions, mechanisms for resolving
appeals of rates established pursuant to this section and mechanisms to
evaluate and recommend modification to reimbursement methodologies.
 § 4004. Financial responsibility. 1. Tuition expenses for a child
placed by a school district in a special act school district or in a
private school operated by a child care institution pursuant to this
article shall be the responsibility of such school district pursuant to
section forty-four hundred five of this chapter.
 2. a. Any tuition expenses for an educational program approved by the
education department for the purposes of this article, incurred pursuant
to section four thousand two of this article, for a child who is a
resident of this state placed in a child care institution by a social
services district, the division for youth, or family court for a full
year program of instruction pursuant to section four thousand three of
this article, or for a child who is a resident of this state receiving
care in a residential treatment facility for children and youth and who
was placed in such a facility by a social services district, the
division for youth or the family court, shall be borne by the local
social services district financially responsible for such child and
tuition expenses for a child who is a resident of this state receiving
care in a residential treatment facility for children and youth and who
was not placed in such a facility by a school district, social services
district, the division for youth or the family court shall be borne by
the office of mental health, except that no public funding shall be made
available for any child receiving care in a residential treatment
facility for children and youth whose admission did not conform with the
provisions of section 9.51 of the mental hygiene law. Tuition expenses
for children admitted to Blythedale Children's Hospital on an inpatient
basis shall be the responsibility of the social services district in
which the child resided at the time of admission to such hospital. The
school district in which the child resided at the time a social services
district or the division for youth assumed responsibility for the
support and maintenance of the child, or was admitted to Blythedale
Children's Hospital, or the child was admitted to a residential
treatment facility for children and youth shall reimburse the state
towards the state's expenditure on behalf of such child for each child
determined to be handicapped by the committee on special education of
the school district of residence pursuant to section four thousand five
of this article. The amount of such reimbursement shall be equal to the
school district basic contribution as defined in subdivision eight of
section forty-four hundred one of this chapter.
 b. The comptroller shall deduct from any state funds which become due
to a public school district other than a special act school district an
amount equal to the reimbursements required to be made to the state in
accordance with this section upon certification by the commissioner of
education of the monies due.
 c. The state commissioner of social services shall notify the
commissioner of education at least every six months commencing September
first, nineteen hundred eighty-one of the name of each child for whom a
local social services commissioner has paid tuition during the preceding
six month period, the name of the school to which such tuition has been
paid, and the school district in which such child resided at the time of
entrance to care and whether such child has been determined to be
handicapped.
 3. In the event of the failure of the social services district to make
payment for tuition pursuant to the provisions of this section, the
state comptroller shall withhold state reimbursement to any such social
services district in an amount equal to the unpaid obligation for
tuition and pay over such sum to the child care institution or special
act school district upon certification of the state commissioner of
social services. The state commissioner of social services shall
promulgate regulations to implement the provisions of this subdivision.
 4. Nothing in this article shall be construed to deny or limit access
to a free and appropriate education for a handicapped child pursuant to
the federal education of the handicapped act, as amended and the
regulations promulgated thereunder.
 5. The board of education of a special act school district shall be
authorized to establish a fiscal stabilization reserve fund. There may
be paid into such fund an amount as may be provided pursuant to the
requirements of paragraph k of subdivision four of section forty-four
hundred five of this title.
 § 4005. Placement and evaluation of children. 1. a. Children placed by
the family court. When the placement of a child is being considered by
the family court pursuant to section 353.3, seven hundred fifty-six or
one thousand fifty-five of the family court act and such child is
thought to have a handicapping condition and may be placed in a child
care institution, the family court judge or the probation department
shall request the school district of residence to provide that the
committee on special education of such district evaluate such child and
make written recommendations for appropriate educational services and to
forward a written evaluation and recommendation within forty-two days of
such request. Such information shall be used to determine the most
appropriate placement for the child, and if the family court places the
child in the custody of a social services district, it shall transmit
such information to such district. If the committee on special education
determines that the child does not have a handicapping condition, it
shall notify the family court of such determination within forty-two
days. If the committee on special education fails to make a
recommendation pursuant to the provisions of this paragraph, the family
court shall obtain such information from the school district pursuant to
section two hundred fifty-five of the family court act.
 b. Children placed by a local social services district. When a local
social services district is considering the placement of a child thought
to have a handicapping condition in a child care institution, the social
services district shall request the school district of residence to
provide that the committee on special education of such district
evaluate such child and make written recommendations for appropriate
educational services within forty-two days, except where such
information has been obtained by the family court. Such information
shall be used to determine the most appropriate placement for the child.
If the committee on special education determines that the child does not
have a handicapping condition, it shall notify the social services
district of such determination within forty-two days.
 c. Children placed by the division for youth. (i) Any educational
information obtained by the family court pursuant to this section shall
be transmitted to the division for youth pursuant to section five
hundred seven-b of the executive law. The division shall use such
information to determine the most appropriate placement for the child.
 (ii) When the division for youth is considering the placement of a
child thought to have a handicapping condition in a child care
institution, pursuant to article nineteen-G of the executive law, the
division shall request the school district of residence to provide that
the committee on special education of such district evaluate such child
and make written recommendations for appropriate educational services
within forty-two days. Such information shall be used to determine the
most appropriate placement for the child. If the committee on special
education determines that the child does not have a handicapping
condition, it shall notify the division of such determination within
forty-two days.
 d. Children placed in residential treatment facilities for children
and youth. When a pre-admission certification committee established
pursuant to section 9.51 of the mental hygiene law is considering the
placement of a child who has not previously been placed in a child care
institution by a public agency in a residential treatment facility for
children and youth and such child is thought to have a handicapping
condition, the committee shall request the school district of residence
to provide that the committee on special education of such district
evaluate such child and make written recommendations for appropriate
educational services and to forward a written evaluation and
recommendation within forty-two days of such request. Notwithstanding
the definition set forth in subdivision eleven of section forty hundred
one of this article, if a child being considered for initial placement
in a residential treatment facility is a patient in a hospital operated
or licensed by the office of mental health, the school district of
residence shall be the school district of residence at the time he or
she entered the hospital. Such information shall be used to determine
the most appropriate placement for the child. If the committee on
special education determines that the child does not have a handicapping
condition, it shall notify the pre-admission certification committee and
the operator of a residential treatment facility for children and youth
which has admitted the child for care and treatment of such
determination within forty-two days.
 e. Any information obtained from a committee on special education
pursuant to this section shall be considered confidential in accordance
with regulations of the commissioner and shall be forwarded by the local
social services district, the division for youth or the appropriate
pre-admission certification committee established pursuant to section
9.51 of the mental hygiene law to the child care institution or other
facility in which the child is placed.
 f. For the purposes of this section, an emergency placement shall mean
a child who must be placed in a child care institution to protect the
health and welfare of the child or his family within thirty days of the
presentation of the child to the family court or a local social services
district. Children in an emergency placement shall not be exempted from
the requirements of paragraphs a and b of this subdivision, except that
the required educational evaluation shall be performed and
recommendations made subsequent to the emergency placement but in no
case later than forty-two days after such placement.
 2. a. Upon the placement of a child who is at least five years of age
in a child care institution that operates a private school or in a
special act school district, by a public agency, or in a residential
treatment facility for children and youth which, independently or as
part of an authorized agency, operates a private school or a special act
school district, the committee on special education of the private
school or the special act district shall follow the procedures contained
in section forty-four hundred two of this chapter including the
involvement of the parents or guardians of the child and shall:
 (i) consider and review the evaluation performed by the committee on
special education of the school district of residence.
 (ii) prepare an individualized education program for each child who
has been determined to be handicapped which takes into account
recommendations made by the committee on special education of the school
district of residence.
 (iii) place the child in the most appropriate program specified in
subdivision two of section forty hundred two of this article. The
committee shall review at least annually and prepare a written report
concerning the status of each child with a handicapping condition under
its jurisdiction which shall include a determination whether a child's
educational program should be continued, modified or terminated.
 (iv) forward to the social services district or the division for youth
the individualized education program and in each year forward an annual
report for each child, as specified in this paragraph. The social
services district, the division for youth or the operator of a
residential treatment facility for children and youth which is not
operated by an authorized agency, as the case may be, shall transmit a
copy of such documents to the parents or guardians of the child and to
the committee on special education of the school district of origin and
shall forward a copy of the evaluation performed by the committee on
special education of the school district of residence to the parents or
guardians of the child.
 * b. If the individual educational evaluation, individualized
education program, educational placement decision, or the annual report
for the child or any other matter relating to the provision of a free
appropriate public education to the student is not acceptable to the
parents or persons in parental relation to the student, an impartial
hearing may be initiated by such parties pursuant to section forty-four
hundred four of this title and mediation shall be made available
pursuant to section forty-four hundred four-a of this title.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2027
 * b. If the educational evaluation, educational placement decision or
the annual report for the child is not acceptable to the parents or
guardians of the child, the child, or the social services district or
the division for youth, appeals may be made by such parties pursuant to
section forty-four hundred four of this chapter.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2027
 * c. A child care institution or the social services district or the
division for youth may request a review by the board of education of the
school district of residence of the fact that a child has been
determined not to be handicapped by the committee on special education
of such district. An appeal to the commissioner will lie from any
determination of the board of education.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2027
 3. In the event that it has been determined by a private school
operated by a child care institution or a special act school district,
subject to any review or modification provided for in this article, that
a child should receive educational services in a public school, other
than a special act school district, or board of cooperative educational
services program or if a child resides in a child care institution that
does not maintain an approved private school program or special act
school district, then any such child residing in a child care
institution shall be admitted to the school district in which the child
care institution is located pursuant to regulations of the commissioner.
For the purposes of this subdivision a special act school district shall
not be considered to be the school district in which such institution is
located.
 4. During the pendency of any proceeding concerning any individual
child described above, the child care institution or special act school
district shall continue to be reimbursed by the social services district
for the approved cost of the current educational placement of the child,
including the transportation of such child to and from any interview
required by the committee on special education of the child's school
district of residence where an evaluation must be performed subsequent
to the placement of a child pursuant to this section or any costs of an
independent evaluation deemed necessary by such committee.
 5. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect the placement or
removal of a child from a child care institution by a public agency or
the admission or discharge of children to and from Blythedale Children's
Hospital.
 § 4006. Notification procedures for determination of residence. 1.
Within thirty days of the placement of a child, determined to be
handicapped pursuant to subdivision one of section forty hundred five of
this article, in a child care institution, the local social services
commissioner, the division for youth or the operator of a residential
treatment facility for children and youth which is not operated by an
authorized agency shall notify the board of education of the school
district of origin and the state commissioner of social services. Such
notification shall include the name of the child and the residence of
the child at the time of entrance to care. The commissioner shall
promulgate regulations, in consultation with the commissioner of social
services, the commissioner of mental health and the director of the
division for youth, to implement this subdivision.
 2. A board of education of a school district which receives
notification that a child has been placed in a child care institution
for the purposes of this section may deny financial responsibility for
such child by written notice, within twenty days of notification
pursuant to subdivision one of this section, to the commissioner and the
public agency placing the child.
 3. The division for youth or the social services district placing such
child may appeal such denial of responsibility to the commissioner. If
the commissioner finds that the child was not a resident of the school
district that was notified that the child was a resident, the
commissioner shall request the division for youth or social services
commissioner to ascertain the correct school district and notify such
school district pursuant to subdivision one of this section. If the
commissioner finds that a child has no residence in this state, he shall
determine that there is no school district contribution for such child.
 4. Any final determination or order of the commissioner concerning
residence or placement of any child under this section may only be
reviewed in a proceeding brought in the supreme court pursuant to
article seventy-eight of the civil practice law and rules. In any such
proceeding under such article seventy-eight, the court may grant any
relief authorized by the provisions of section seventy-eight hundred six
of such law and rules and may also, in its discretion, remand the
proceedings to the commissioner. A local social services commissioner or
the division for youth is a proper party in any such appeal or
proceeding.
 ARTICLE 83
 INDIAN SCHOOLS
Section 4101. Duties of commissioner regarding Indian children.
 4102. Rights of Indians and of state shall be guarded.
 4103. Indian children not entitled to free tuition in public
 schools.
 4104. Employment of teachers, salaries, et cetera.
 4105. Required attendance upon instruction.
 4106. Duties of persons in parental relation to Indian children.
 4107. Penalty for failure to send children to school.
 4108. Persons employing Indian children unlawfully to be fined.
 4109. Teachers' record of attendance.
 4110. Attendance officers.
 4111. Arrest of truants.
 4112. Commissioner of education to contract for keeping of
 truants.
 4113. Census.
 4114. Payment of services herein required.
 4115. Apportionment.
 4116. Co-operation of Indians shall be sought.
 4117. Payment of cost of education of physically handicapped
 Indian children.
 4118. Attendance at post-secondary institutions by Native
 American students.
 4119. School district may contract to educate Indian children.
 § 4101. Duties of commissioner regarding Indian children. 1. The
commissioner of education shall establish schools in such places and
maintain such courses of instruction therein for the education of the
Indian children of the state as he or she shall deem necessary. He or
she shall have general supervision of such education and shall cause to
be erected where necessary convenient and suitable school buildings for
the accommodation of all the Indian children of the state.
 2. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, rule or regulation to
the contrary, the commissioner in his or her discretion may, instead of
establishing schools and maintaining courses of instruction therein for
the education of the Indian children of the state, contract, for a
period of up to ten years, with any school district for the education of
such Indian children. The consideration for any such contract shall not
exceed the total cost to the school district of the education of Indian
children pursuant to such contract, less any public moneys received by
the school district by reason of the attendance of such Indian children
in regular day school, except any public moneys received by the district
as a building quota pursuant to the provisions of subdivision six-a of
section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter. The commissioner of
taxation and finance shall pay on the warrant of the comptroller bills,
for the costs and expenses attending such contract, approved by the
commissioner of education from the appropriation for the support and
education of Indian children. In carrying out the provisions of this
article the commissioner, notwithstanding any other provision of law,
may lease any school ground, site or building established for a
reservation and owned by the state of New York to any school district
upon such terms and conditions as he or she shall deem necessary,
convenient and proper. Nothing herein contained shall alter the title of
the Indians to their lands.
 3. The commissioner of education shall also enforce this article and
pay from the funds set apart for Indian education any necessary expense
incurred thereby.
 4. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, an
Indian child who is resident of any portion of reservation located
wholly or partly within the borders of the state shall be deemed an
Indian child for the purposes of this article.
 § 4102. Rights of Indians and of state shall be guarded. Any contract
which may be entered into with Indians for the use or occupancy of any
land for school grounds, sites or buildings, shall provide proper
protection for the title of the Indians to their lands, and shall
reserve to the state the right to remove or otherwise dispose of all
improvements made at the expense of the state.
 § 4103. Indian children not entitled to free tuition in public
schools. Indian children residing on a reservation are not entitled to
free tuition in districts outside the reservation but may be received
into the schools of such districts on the approval of the trustees
thereof and the commissioner of education.
 § 4104. Employment of teachers, salaries, et cetera. 1. The
commissioner of education shall employ all necessary teachers,
attendance officers and other assistants and employees, and fix their
salaries within the amount of the appropriations made therefor, as shall
be necessary for the proper enforcement of the statutes relating to
Indian education.
 2. The personnel of the faculty of each state Indian school shall be
classified as follows:
 a. Principal
 b. Vice principal
 c. Teacher
 3. Each member of the faculty shall receive an annual salary to be
paid over a ten month period, except that the principal shall receive an
annual salary to be paid over a twelve month period.
 4. Any contribution of food, lodging or maintenance by the state, or
any commutation in lieu of maintenance, except traveling expenses and
field allowances, shall be considered as part of the salary to be paid.
The fair value of such food, lodging, maintenance or commutation shall
be determined by the director of the budget and may in his discretion be
deducted from the salary to which a member of the faculty would
otherwise be entitled.
 § 4105. Required attendance upon instruction. 1. Every Indian child
between six and sixteen years of age, in proper physical and mental
condition to attend school, shall regularly attend upon instruction at a
school in which at least the common school branches of reading,
spelling, writing, arithmetic, English grammar and geography are taught
in English, or upon equivalent instruction by a competent teacher
elsewhere than at such school as follows: Every Indian child between
fourteen and sixteen years of age not regularly and lawfully engaged in
any useful employment or service, and every such child between six and
fourteen years of age, shall so attend upon instruction as many days
annually during the period between the first days of September and the
following July as a public school of the community or district of the
reservation, in which such child resides, shall be in session during the
same period.
 2. If any such child shall so attend upon instruction elsewhere than
at the public school, such instruction shall be at least equivalent to
the instruction given to Indian children of like age at a school of the
community or district in which such child shall reside; and such
attendance shall be for at least as many hours of each day thereof, as
are required of children of like age at public schools and no greater
total amount of holidays and vacations shall be deducted from such
attendance during the period such attendance is required than is allowed
in public schools for children of like age. Occasional absences from
such attendance not amounting to irregular attendance in a fair meaning
of the term, shall be allowed upon such excuses only as would be allowed
in like cases by the general rules and practices of public schools.
 3. Transportation shall be provided for Indian children who live more
than a mile from the elementary and high schools they attend, and the
commissioner of education is hereby empowered to make provision for the
cost of the same as a part of the care and education of Indian children.
 § 4106. Duties of persons in parental relation to Indian children.
Any person in parental relation to an Indian child between six and
sixteen years of age in proper physical and mental condition to attend
school, shall cause such child to attend upon instruction as provided in
this article.
 § 4107. Penalty for failure to send children to school. A violation
of section forty-one hundred six shall be a misdemeanor, punishable for
the first offense by a fine not exceeding five dollars or by
imprisonment not exceeding ten days, and for each subsequent offense, by
a fine not exceeding twenty-five dollars, or by imprisonment not
exceeding thirty days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Courts of
special sessions shall, subject to removal, as provided in sections
fifty-seven and fifty-eight of the code of criminal procedure, have
exclusive jurisdiction in the first instance to hear, try and determine
charges of violation of section forty-one hundred six within their
respective jurisdictions.
 § 4108. Persons employing Indian children unlawfully to be fined. A
person, firm, association or corporation shall not employ any Indian
child residing on any Indian reservation between six and fourteen years
of age, in any business or service whatever during any part of the term
during which the school in the community or district in which such child
resides or the school where such child should attend is in session, nor
shall employ any Indian child residing on any reservation between
fourteen and sixteen years of age, who does not, at the time of such
employment present a consent in writing signed by the principal teacher
of the reservation or the principal of the district which educates the
children in the community in which such child resides to the effect that
such child may be employed, and specifying the nature of the service and
the duration of such service or employment. Any person, firm,
association or corporation who shall employ any Indian child contrary to
the provisions of this section shall for each offense forfeit and pay to
the principal teacher of the reservation or to the commissioner of
education the sum of twenty-five dollars to be sued for in the name of
the people of the state of New York by the attorney general. Such
penalty, when paid, shall be used for the support and maintenance of the
schools on said reservation or for said reservation.
 § 4109. Teachers' record of attendance. An accurate record of
attendance of all Indian children between six and sixteen years of age
shall be kept by the teacher of every Indian school, showing each day,
by the year, month, day of the month and day of the week, such
attendance, and the number of hours in each day thereof; and each
teacher upon whose instruction such Indian child shall attend elsewhere
than at the school in the community or district of the reservation where
he resides, shall keep a like record of such attendance. Such records
shall at all times be open to the principal teacher of the reservation
and its attendance officers or to such person or persons as shall be
designated by the commissioner of education who may inspect and copy the
same and any teacher shall answer all lawful inquiries made by them. A
wilful neglect or refusal to keep such a record or answer such inquiries
shall be a misdemeanor.
 § 4110. Attendance officers. 1. The principal teacher of the Indian
schools on each reservation shall supervise the enforcement of this
article within said reservation and shall appoint, subject to the
approval of the commissioner of education, and remove at pleasure such
number of attendance officers as the commissioner of education shall
deem necessary, whose jurisdictions shall extend over all school
districts on the reservation for which they shall be appointed. Such
principal teachers are also vested with the same power and authority as
the attendance officers appointed by them.
 2. If the education of Indian children of the reservation shall be
provided pursuant to the provisions of subdivision two of section
forty-one hundred one of this chapter, the attendance officer or
officers of the school district providing such education shall have
jurisdiction over all Indian children on the reservation. Such
attendance officers shall not, however, be entitled to receive from the
commissioner of education the payment for services provided in section
forty-one hundred fourteen of this chapter.
 3. The commissioner of education may appoint and remove at pleasure
such attendance officers as he shall deem necessary, who shall have
jurisdiction over all children other than Indian children on the
reservation for which they shall be appointed. Such attendance officers
shall receive such sum per day or part thereof as shall be fixed by the
commissioner of education for each day or part thereof necessarily
employed as such attendance officers. Compensation of attendance
officers herein provided for shall be audited by the commissioner of
education and paid in the same manner as other expenses incurred
pursuant to this article.
 § 4111. Arrest of truants. Any attendance officer may arrest without
warrant anywhere within the state any Indian child between six and
sixteen years of age, found away from his home and who is then a truant
from instruction upon which he is lawfully required to attend within the
districts of which such attendance officer has jurisdiction. He shall
forthwith deliver a child so arrested either to the person in parental
relation to the child, or to the teacher of the school from which said
child is then a truant, or in case of habitual truants, shall bring them
before a magistrate for commitment to a school for delinquents, as
provided in section forty-one hundred twelve of this article.
 § 4112. Commissioner of education to contract for keeping of truants.
The commissioner of education may contract with any city or district
having a school for delinquents, for the confinement, maintenance and
instruction therein of any child who shall be committed to such school
as a truant by any magistrate before whom such child shall have been
examined upon the charge of truancy. The costs and expenses attending
the support and maintenance of any truant, as herein provided, shall be
audited by the commissioner of education and paid in the same manner as
the expenses of supporting and maintaining the schools on a reservation
are paid.
 § 4113. Census. The commissioner of education shall cause to be taken
a complete annual census of the Indian children between birth and
eighteen years of age on any reservation; such census shall be taken
between the first day of May and the last day of August and shall
include all such facts and information as are required by section
thirty-two hundred forty-one of this chapter. A report of such census
shall be prepared in duplicate and a copy filed with the commissioner on
or before the fifteenth day of October.
 § 4114. Payment of services herein required. Each of the attendance
officers herein provided for shall receive such sum per day as shall be
fixed by the commissioner of education for each day necessarily employed
in enforcing this article; and each person employed in taking and
tabulating the census of the residents of said reservations, shall be
entitled to receive such compensation as the commissioner of education
shall allow. The compensation of attendance officers and the expense in
taking the enumeration herein provided for shall be audited by the
commissioner of education and paid in the same manner as other accounts
for the support and maintenance of the schools on said reservations are
paid.
 § 4115. Apportionment. 1. If the education of Indian children of a
reservation is being provided pursuant to the provisions of subdivision
two of section forty-one hundred one of this article, such Indian
children in attendance on the date construction is commenced shall be
included in the computation of a building quota pursuant to subdivision
six-a of section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter for the school
district providing such education. In the event that a district which
has furnished instruction to Indian children shall cease to furnish such
instruction, any building quota paid such district pursuant to the
provisions of such subdivision six-a shall be recomputed to remove the
Indian children from the computation of such building quota for such
district.
 2. a. Except as otherwise provided in this subdivision, if the
education of Indian children of a reservation shall be provided pursuant
to the provisions of subdivision two of section forty-one hundred one of
this article, such Indian children shall be included in the pupils
deemed in weighted averaged daily attendance, average daily membership,
total aidable pupil units, total aidable foundation pupil units and
total wealth pupil units for the school district providing such
education and such Indian children shall be deemed to be resident pupils
of the district for the purpose of the computation of the apportionment
of public moneys to the school district providing such education.
 b. During the first school year, beginning on or after July first,
nineteen hundred fifty-six, in which Indian children are educated in the
schools of a school district pursuant to the provisions of subdivision
two of section forty-one hundred one of this article, there shall be
apportioned and paid to each such school district the sum of:
 (1) Three hundred thirty dollars for each Indian pupil in grades one
through six in average daily attendance during the month of October,
including kindergarten Indian children who attend for a full day. Where
kindergarten Indian children attend but one-half day the district shall
be entitled to one hundred sixty-five dollars for each such pupil.
 (2) Four hundred twelve dollars and fifty cents for each Indian pupil
in grades seven to twelve inclusive in average daily attendance during
the month of October.
 c. The provisions of paragraph b of this subdivision shall not apply
in respect to an Indian child who was not educated in an Indian school
maintained by the state of New York during a part of the school year
immediately preceding the school year in which such payment is made, but
shall apply to an Indian child who would have been educated in an Indian
school maintained by the state of New York during a part of the school
year in which such payment is made if the education of such Indian child
had not been provided for pursuant to the provisions of subdivision two
of section forty-one hundred one of this article.
 d. In the event that a school district ceases to educate Indian
children pursuant to the provisions of subdivision two of section
forty-one hundred one of this article, any state aid received by such
school district during the ensuing school year by reason of the
attendance of Indian children during the last school year instruction
was furnished such Indian children shall be reduced by the amount of any
payment made such district during the first year Indian children were
educated in the schools of such district pursuant to the provisions of
subdivision two of section forty-one hundred one of this article by
reason of the attendance of such Indian children.
 3. All children at the Thomas Indian school, and all Indian children
residing on any of the reservations of the state who are qualified to
enter a secondary school and whose parents are unable to provide such
education are eligible to appointment by the commissioner of education
as state pupils and as such to receive transportation to and from a high
school or vocational school on each day of attendance. Whenever such
high school or vocational school shall be in a city or district other
than one in which such pupils may have the legal right to attend without
charge, and where a charge is imposed on non-resident pupils, the state
shall also pay the required non-resident fee for tuition. The required
non-resident fee for tuition shall not exceed the total cost to the
school district of the education of such Indian children, less any
public moneys received by the school district by reason of the
attendance of such Indian children in regular day school, except any
public moneys received by the district as a building quota pursuant to
the provisions of subdivision six-a of section thirty-six hundred two of
this chapter. The commissioner of taxation and finance shall pay on the
warrant of the comptroller bills approved by the commissioner of
education from the appropriation for general support for the public
schools, out of such sum as may be appropriated for such support and
education of Indian youth for the amounts necessary for the purposes set
forth in this section.
 § 4116. Co-operation of Indians shall be sought. In the discharge of
the duties imposed by this article, the said commissioner shall endeavor
to secure the co-operation of all the several bands of Indians, and for
this purpose, shall visit, by himself or his authorized representative,
all the reservations where they reside, lay the matter before them in
public assembly, inviting them to assist either by appropriating their
public moneys to this object, or by setting apart lands and erecting
suitable buildings, or by furnishing labor or materials for such
buildings, or in any other way which he or they may suggest as most
effectual for the promotion of this object.
 § 4117. Payment of cost of education of physically handicapped Indian
children. Any claims for providing home-teaching, transportation,
scholarships in non-residence schools, tuition and maintenance for
physically handicapped children which are, ultimately or in the first
instance, made a charge against a county or a city having a special
children's court act, pursuant to the provisions of article eighty-nine
of this chapter, shall, if such home-teaching, transportation,
scholarships, tuition and maintenance shall be provided for physically
handicapped Indian children, be paid by the education department out of
moneys appropriated therefor.
 § 4118. Attendance at post-secondary institutions by Native American
students. 1. The education department shall select students for
attendance at post-secondary institutions from the several Indian tribes
located within this state. In making such selection, due regard shall be
had to a just participation in the privileges of this section by each of
such several tribes. If practicable, reference shall also be had to the
population of each of such tribes in determining such selection.
Eligibility for selection shall not be limited to Native Americans
residing on reservations.
 2. No such student may attend a post-secondary institution outside
this state, nor one that has not been approved by the New York state
board of regents, nor may he be supported or educated at such
institutions for a period exceeding four years unless he is enrolled in
a program normally requiring five years of training.
 3. Such sum as may be appropriated for the support and education of
Native American students in such institutions shall be paid from the
treasury, upon the audit and warrant of the comptroller, on vouchers
approved by the education department.
 § 4119. School district may contract to educate Indian children.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the trustee, trustees or
board of education of any school district shall have power to contract
with the commissioner of education for the instruction of Indian
children for a period of ten years. Notwithstanding any other provision
of law, the trustee, trustees or board of education of any school
district shall have authority to lease a site or school building owned
by the state of New York whether located on or off an Indian reservation
and such trustee, trustees or board of education shall have authority to
maintain school in such building notwithstanding the fact that such
building may not be located within the district boundary lines of such
school district.
 ARTICLE 85
 INSTRUCTION OF THE DEAF AND OF THE BLIND
Section 4201. Duties of commissioner of education.
 4202. Regulations for admission.
 4203. Persons eligible for appointment as pupils to
 institutions for instruction of the deaf.
 4204. Support and term of instruction of deaf state pupils.
 4204-a. Deaf-infant program.
 4204-b. School district contribution and state reimbursement.
 4205. Clothing for deaf state pupils.
 4206. Persons eligible for appointment as pupils to
 institutions for instruction of the blind.
 4207. Support and term of instruction of blind state pupils.
 4208. Clothing for blind state pupils.
 4209. Blind and deaf children and blind and cerebral palsied
 children.
 4210. Aid for blind or deaf students.
 4211. Tuition.
 4212. Protection of pupils.
 4213. Other persons eligible for appointment.
 § 4201. Duties of commissioner of education. 1. The following
institutions for the instruction of the deaf and of the blind shall be
subject to the visitation of the commissioner of education: a. The New
York school for the deaf;
 b. The Lexington school for the deaf;
 c. St. Mary's school for the deaf in the city of Buffalo;
 e. St. Joseph's school for the deaf in the city of New York;
 f. Rochester school for the deaf in the city of Rochester;
 h. The New York Institute for Special Education in the city of New
York;
 i. Lavelle School for the Blind in the city of New York;
 j. Mill Neck Manor school for the deaf in Nassau county;
 k. St. Francis DeSales school for the deaf and hard of hearing in the
county of Kings.
 l. Cleary Deaf Child Center, Inc., in the counties of Suffolk and
Nassau.
 2. It shall be the duty of the commissioner:
 a. To inquire into the organization of the several schools and the
methods of instruction employed therein.
 b. To prescribe courses of study and methods of instruction that will
meet the requirements of the state for the education of state pupils.
 c. To make appointments of pupils to the several schools, to transfer
such pupils from one school to another as circumstances may require; to
cancel appointments for sufficient reason.
 d. To ascertain by a comparison with other similar institutions
whether any improvements in instruction and discipline can be made; and
for that purpose to appoint from time to time, suitable persons to visit
the schools.
 e. To suggest to the directors of such institutions and to the
legislature such improvements as he shall judge expedient.
 f. To make an annual report to the legislature on all of the matters
enumerated in this subdivision and particularly as to the condition of
the schools, the improvement of the pupils, and their treatment in
respect to board and lodging.
 * § 4202. Regulations for admission. The commissioner may make such
regulations and give such directions to parents and persons in parental
relation, in relation to the admission of students into any institution
specified in this article, as will prevent students entering the same at
irregular periods. Such regulations shall include, but not be limited
to, procedures to assure that the due process rights of students and
their parents or persons in parental relation are protected in
accordance with sections forty-four hundred two, forty-four hundred four
and forty-four hundred four-a of this title and applicable federal law
and regulations.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2027
 * § 4202. Regulations for admission. The commissioner of education may
make such regulations and give such directions to parents and guardians,
in relation to the admission of pupils into any institution specified in
this article, as will prevent pupils entering the same at irregular
periods.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2027
 § 4203. Persons eligible for appointment as pupils to institutions for
instruction of the deaf. All deaf children resident in this state, of
the age of three years and upwards and of suitable capacity, and who
shall have been resident in this state for one year immediately
preceding the application, or, if an orphan, whose nearest friend shall
have been resident in this state for one year immediately preceding the
application, shall be eligible to appointment as state pupils in one of
the institutions for the instruction of the deaf of this state,
authorized by law to receive such pupils; provided, however, the
foregoing requirement as to length of residence in this state may be
waived in the discretion of the commissioner of education.
 § 4204. Support and term of instruction of deaf state pupils. 1. Each
deaf pupil so received into any of the institutions aforesaid shall be
provided with board, lodging and tuition; and the directors of the
institution shall receive an appropriation for each pupil so provided
for, in quarterly payments, to be paid by the commissioner of taxation
and finance, on the warrant of the comptroller, to the treasurer of said
institution; provided, however, that an estimated one-half of each such
quarterly payment shall be due on the first day of each quarter, the
estimate to be based on the affidavit of the chief executive officer of
the institution stating the number of pupils for whom board, lodging and
tuition was so provided by the institution during the preceding quarter
and during the comparable quarter of the preceding year, and the
remaining part of each such quarterly payment shall be due thereafter on
the first day of the quarter next ensuing, upon the presentation by the
treasurer of the institution of a bill showing the actual time and
number of pupils attending the institution, which bill shall be signed
by the chief executive officer of the institution, and verified by his
oath. The provisions of this subdivision shall apply to board, lodging
and tuition for the two thousand ten--two thousand eleven and prior
school years.
 2. For expenses incurred in the two thousand eleven--two thousand
twelve school year and thereafter, each deaf pupil so received into any
of the institutions subject to this article shall be provided with
board, lodging and tuition, and such institutions shall be reimbursed
for such expenses in accordance with this subdivision.
 a. For the two thousand eleven--twelve and two thousand
twelve--thirteen school years, costs of tuition as defined in section
forty-two hundred eleven of this article, shall be a charge upon the
school district of which any such child is resident at the time of
admission or readmission to any of the institutions subject to this
article and the directors of the institution shall bill such school
district for such tuition costs on a quarterly basis. The first such
quarterly payment may be based on projected enrollment, provided that
subsequent payments shall be adjusted to reflect actual enrollment. The
amount of tuition paid by such school district shall be eligible for
reimbursement by the state to the extent provided in section forty-two
hundred four-b of this article.
 b. For the two thousand thirteen--two thousand fourteen school year
and thereafter, the costs of tuition as defined in section forty-two
hundred eleven of this article, shall be a charge upon the current
school district of residence of any such child subject to this article
and the directors of the institution shall bill such school district for
such tuition costs on a quarterly basis. The first such quarterly
payment may be based on projected enrollment, provided that subsequent
payments shall be adjusted to reflect actual enrollment. The amount of
tuition paid by such school district shall be eligible for reimbursement
by the state to the extent provided in section forty-two hundred four-b
of this article.
 c. The costs of board and lodging shall be a charge upon the state and
the directors of the institution shall receive an appropriation for each
pupil so provided for, in quarterly payments, to be paid by the
commissioner of taxation and finance, on the warrant of the comptroller,
to the treasurer of said institution; provided, however, that an
estimated one-half of each such quarterly payment shall be due on the
first day of each quarter, the estimate to be based on the affidavit of
the chief executive officer of the institution stating the number of
pupils for whom board and lodging was so provided by the institution
during the preceding quarter and during the comparable quarter of the
preceding year, and the remaining part of each such quarterly payment
shall be due thereafter during the first day of each quarter next
ensuing, upon the presentation by the treasurer of the institution of a
bill showing the actual time and number of pupils attending the
institution who received board and lodging, which bill shall be signed
by the chief executive officer of the institution, and verified by his
oath.
 3. The regular term of instruction of any such deaf pupil shall be
twelve years, or until the pupil shall have attained the age of eighteen
years before the expiration of twelve years from the beginning of such
term. The commissioner may, in his discretion, extend the term of any
pupil until his twenty-first birthday for the purpose of pursuing or
completing academic or vocational courses of study. Such pupils must be
recommended by the trustees of the institution in which they are in
attendance before such extension of time is granted.
 4. Children placed in any such institution for the instruction of the
deaf, pursuant to section forty-two hundred three of this article, shall
be maintained therein for the period of time the school is in session.
 § 4204-a. Deaf-infant program. (1) All deaf children resident in this
state, below the age of three, of suitable age and capacity, who shall
have been resident in this state for one year immediately preceding the
application, or is an orphan whose nearest friend shall have been
resident in this state for one year immediately preceding the
application, shall be eligible to receive approved educational services
in one of the institutions for instruction for the deaf of the state as
enumerated in section forty-two hundred one of this article, as well as
in such educational programs or other like facilities which shall, in
the discretion of the commissioner, be certified as eligible to receive
such pupils on a day basis only; provided, however, the foregoing
requirement as to length of residence in this state may be waived in the
discretion of the commissioner. Such children who are first eligible for
services pursuant to section forty-four hundred ten of this title whose
parents or persons in parental relationship elect to have them continue
to receive services pursuant to this section may do so through August
thirty-first of the calendar year in which such child turns three.
 (2) Each deaf pupil so received into any of the approved institutions
or facilities aforesaid shall be provided with tuition; and the
directors of the institution or facility shall receive an appropriation
for each pupil so provided for, in quarterly payments, to be paid by the
commissioner of taxation and finance on the warrant of the comptroller,
to the treasurer of said institution or facility, on his presenting a
bill showing the actual time and number of pupils in attendance, which
bill shall be signed by the chief executive officer of the institution,
and verified under his oath.
 (3) Children placed in any such approved institution or facility,
pursuant to this section, shall be maintained therein on a day basis
only at the expense of the state for the period of time the school is in
session. Further, the commissioner shall approve such expense only if
the child attends the facility nearest his legal residence; provided,
however, that the foregoing requirement as to the facility the child
shall attend may be waived in the discretion of the commissioner.
 (4) The commissioner shall promulgate such rules and regulations
pertaining to the educational programs for deaf children placed in
facilities under the provisions of this section as he shall deem to be
in the best interests of such children.
 (5) The department shall maintain a register of such approved
institutions or facilities which, after inspection, it deems qualified
to meet the needs of such child for instruction of such child in such
institution or facility. Such inspection shall also determine the
eligibility of such educational facility to receive the funds
hereinbefore specified.
 § 4204-b. School district contribution and state reimbursement. 1. For
the two thousand twelve--two thousand thirteen and prior school years,
the school district of which any such child is resident at the time of
admission or readmission to any of the institutions or facilities
subject to this article shall be required to reimburse the state on
account of any expenditure made by the state for any such child
initially appointed by the commissioner to such institution or facility
after June thirtieth, nineteen hundred seventy-seven in an amount equal
to the school district basic contribution defined in subdivision eight
of section forty-four hundred one of this title, except that for the two
thousand eleven--two thousand twelve and two thousand twelve--two
thousand thirteen school years, such school district shall be
responsible for reimbursing the state in an amount equal to the positive
difference of the school district basic contribution minus the tuition
paid by such school district pursuant to section forty-two hundred four
or forty-two hundred seven of this article.
 2. For the two thousand thirteen--two thousand fourteen school year
and thereafter, the child's current school district of residence shall
be required to reimburse the state on account of any expenditure made by
the state for any such child in an amount equal to the positive
difference of the school district basic contribution minus the tuition
paid by such school district pursuant to section forty-two hundred four
or forty-two hundred seven of this article.
 3. The state comptroller may deduct from any state funds which become
due to a school district for each year in which such child was in
attendance at such institution or facility an amount equal to the
reimbursement required to be made by such school district in accordance
with this section, and the amount so deducted shall not be included in
the operating expense of such district for the purposes of computing the
approved operating expense pursuant to paragraph t of subdivision one of
section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter.
 4. The state shall reimburse the school district of which any such
child is resident at the time of admission or readmission to any of the
institutions subject to this article for tuition paid to the institution
in an amount equal to the positive difference between the amount of such
tuition and the school district basic contribution. Such state
reimbursement to the school district shall not be paid prior to April
first of the school year in which such tuition costs are paid by the
school district. The tuition incurred through December thirty-first of
such school year shall be payable prior to June thirtieth of such school
year, provided that a claim is submitted on or before June first.
 § 4205. Clothing for deaf state pupils. Whenever the parents or
guardians are unable to furnish clothing to state pupils, the
commissioner of education is hereby required to apportion annually to
each institution caring for deaf children legally appointed thereto the
sum of one hundred twenty dollars per pupil or so much thereof as may be
necessary to be applied to the cost of clothing for each of said pupils.
 § 4206. Persons eligible for appointment as pupils to institutions for
instruction of the blind. 1. All blind persons of suitable age and
capacity and who shall have been residents in this state for one year
immediately preceding the application or, if a minor, whose parent or
parents, or, if an orphan, whose nearest friend, shall have been a
resident in this state for one year immediately preceding the
application, shall be eligible for appointment as state pupils to the
New York Institute for Special Education in the city of New York or the
Lavelle School for the Blind in the city of New York.
 2. Blind babies and children of the age of fifteen years and under and
possessing the other qualifications prescribed in this article and
requiring kindergarten training or other special care and instruction,
shall be eligible for appointment as state pupils by the commissioner of
education at his discretion in any incorporated institution furnishing
approved care, training and instruction for blind babies and children,
and any such child may be transferred to the New York Institute for
Special Education in the city of New York or the Lavelle School for the
Blind in the city of New York, to which he or she would otherwise be
eligible for appointment, upon arriving at suitable age, in the
discretion of the commissioner of education.
 3. All such appointments shall be made by the commissioner of
education. The requirement of this section as to length of residence in
this state may be waived in the discretion of the commissioner of
education.
 § 4207. Support and term of instruction of blind state pupils. 1. Each
blind pupil so received into any of the institutions specified in this
article shall be provided with board, lodging and tuition; and the
directors of the institution shall receive an appropriation for each
pupil so provided for, in quarterly payments, to be paid by the
commissioner of taxation and finance, on the warrant of the comptroller,
to the treasurer of said institution; provided, however, that an
estimated one-half of each such quarterly payment shall be due on the
first day of each quarter, the estimate to be based on the affidavit of
the chief executive officer of the institution stating the number of
pupils for whom board, lodging and tuition was so provided by the
institution during the preceding quarter and during the comparable
quarter of the preceding year, and the remaining part of each such
quarterly payment shall be due thereafter on the first day of the
quarter next ensuing, upon the presentation by the treasurer of the
institution of a bill showing the actual time and number of pupils
attending the institution, which bill shall be signed by the chief
executive officer of the institution, and verified by his oath. The
provisions of this subdivision shall apply to board, lodging and tuition
for the two thousand ten--two thousand eleven and prior school years.
 2. For expenses incurred in the two thousand eleven--two thousand
twelve school year and thereafter, each blind pupil so received into any
of the institutions subject to this article shall be provided with
board, lodging and tuition, and such institutions shall be reimbursed
for such expenses in accordance with this subdivision.
 a. For the two thousand eleven--two thousand twelve and two thousand
twelve--two thousand thirteen school years, costs of tuition, as defined
in section forty-two hundred eleven of this article, shall be a charge
upon the school district of which any such child is resident at the time
of admission or readmission to any of the institutions subject to this
article and the directors of the institution shall bill such school
district for such tuition costs on a quarterly basis. The first such
quarterly payment may be based on projected enrollment, provided that
subsequent payments shall be adjusted to reflect actual enrollment. The
amount of tuition paid by such school district shall be eligible for
reimbursement by the state to the extent provided in section forty-two
hundred four-b of this article.
 b. For the two thousand thirteen--two thousand fourteen school year
and thereafter, the costs of tuition as defined in section forty-two
hundred eleven of this article, shall be a charge upon the current
school district of residence of any such child subject to this article
and the directors of the institution shall bill such school district for
such tuition costs on a quarterly basis. The first such quarterly
payment may be based on projected enrollment, provided that subsequent
payments shall be adjusted to reflect actual enrollment. The amount of
tuition paid by such school district shall be eligible for reimbursement
by the state to the extent provided in section forty-two hundred four-b
of this article.
 c. The costs of board and lodging shall be a charge upon the state and
the directors of the institution shall receive an appropriation for each
pupil so provided for, in quarterly payments, to be paid by the
commissioner of taxation and finance, on the warrant of the comptroller,
to the treasurer of said institution; provided, however, that an
estimated one-half of each such quarterly payment shall be due on the
first day of each quarter, the estimate to be based on the affidavit of
the chief executive officer of the institution stating the number of
pupils for whom board and lodging was so provided by the institution
during the preceding quarter and during the comparable quarter of the
preceding year, and the remaining part of each such quarterly payment
shall be due thereafter on the first day of the quarter next ensuing,
upon the presentation by the treasurer of the institution of a bill
showing the actual time and number of pupils attending the institution
who received board and lodging, which bill shall be signed by the chief
executive officer of the institution, and verified by his oath.
 3. The regular term of instruction of any such blind pupil in the New
York Institute for Special Education shall be eight years. The
commissioner may in his discretion extend the term of any pupil for a
period not exceeding three years. It shall also be lawful for the
commissioner to continue such pupils as state pupils for an additional
period of three years for the purpose of pursuing or completing a course
of high school study; such pupils must be recommended by the trustees of
the New York Institute for Special Education before such extension is
granted.
 4. The term of appointment for blind babies and children of the age of
fifteen years and under received into any institution in accordance with
this article shall be at the discretion of the commissioner.
 5. Children placed in any such institutions for the blind pursuant to
section forty-two hundred six shall be maintained therein for the period
of time the school is in session.
 § 4208. Clothing for blind state pupils. Whenever the parents or
guardians are unable to furnish clothing to state pupils, the
commissioner of education is hereby required to apportion annually to
each institution caring for blind children legally appointed thereto the
sum of one hundred twenty dollars per pupil or so much thereof as may be
necessary to be applied to the cost of clothing for each of said pupils.
 § 4209. Blind and deaf children and blind and cerebral palsied
children. 1. All children who are both blind and deaf or both blind and
cerebral palsied shall be admitted as state pupils into one of the
institutions described in this article for the instruction of the deaf
or blind and under the same conditions of eligibility as are provided
for the admission of deaf or blind state pupils.
 2. In the discretion of the commissioner of education a sum not to
exceed a sum equal to double the average annual per capita cost for
pupils attending all of the schools which are subject to the provisions
of section forty-two hundred one of this article shall be available in
the manner provided in section forty-two hundred ten of this article to
aid a blind and deaf pupil in receiving instruction in an institution
for the instruction of the deaf or blind located outside the state in
order to continue the education of such blind and deaf pupil for the
term of instruction provided in section forty-two hundred seven of this
article.
 § 4210. Aid for blind or deaf students. 1. a. Whenever a blind or deaf
person, who is a citizen of this state and a student in actual
attendance at a college, university, technical or professional school,
including agriculture and technical institutes and state institutes of
applied arts and sciences, located in this state and authorized by law
to grant degrees, or licensed private career schools as defined in
article one hundred one of this title and located in this state, other
than an institution established for the regular instruction of the blind
or deaf, shall be designated by the trustees thereof as a fit person to
receive the aid hereinafter provided for, there shall be paid by the
state for the use of such student a sum not to exceed four thousand
dollars per annum, subject to terms and conditions prescribed by the
commissioner in regulations and within the limits of the appropriation
therefor, with which to provide such students with support to read,
including the employment of persons to read to such student and/or the
purchase of technology to assist the student in reading from text-books
and pamphlets in his or her studies at such college, university or
school, or to aid such student, in receiving instruction in such
studies.
 b. The trustees of any institution meeting the requirements of this
section shall submit reports in such form and at such times as
prescribed by the commissioner identifying the number of students
eligible to receive aid pursuant to this subdivision and shall estimate
the funds needed to support such students as provided herein. The
commissioner shall advance twice during the school year to each such
institution such estimated amounts within the limits of the annual
appropriation provided therefore.
 c. At the conclusion of the academic year for which such funds are
provided, each institution receiving funds pursuant to this subdivision
shall submit to the commissioner a final accounting for the use of such
funds and any additional reporting requirements prescribed by the
commissioner in regulations and shall return any unspent funds.
 2. Such moneys shall be paid annually, after the beginning of the
school year of such institution, by the commissioner of taxation and
finance on the warrant of the comptroller, to the treasurer of such
institution, on his presenting an account showing the actual number of
blind or deaf students matriculated and attending the institution, which
account shall be verified by the president of the institution and
accompanied by his certificate that the trustees have recommended the
students named in said account as hereinbefore provided.
 3. The trustees of any of the said institutions shall recommend no
blind or deaf person, who is not regularly matriculated, and who is not
in good and regular standing, and who is not working for a degree from
the institution in which he or she is matriculated; and no blind or deaf
person shall be recommended, who is not doing the work regularly
prescribed by the institution for the degree for which he or she is a
candidate. The moneys so paid to any such institution shall be disbursed
for the purposes aforesaid by and under the direction of its board of
trustees.
 4. Funds appropriated in the two thousand seventeen--two thousand
eighteen academic year and thereafter for the purposes of this
initiative shall be allocated on a first-come, first serve basis based
on the order of applications received by the commissioner, in a
timeframe and manner prescribed by the commissioner in regulations.
 5. Funds allocated pursuant to this section shall supplement not
supplant any aid provided and/or devices currently used by the college,
university, technical or professional school, including agriculture and
technical institutes and state institutes of applied arts and sciences
or licensed private career schools as defined in article one hundred one
of this title, for the purposes of this section.
 § 4211. Tuition. The term "tuition" as used in this article and in
the provisions of chapter ten hundred sixty of the laws of nineteen
hundred seventy-four shall mean the per pupil cost of all instructional
services, supplies, equipment and the operation of instructional
facilities as determined by the commissioner. Approved tuition shall be
computed from expenditures for which no revenue has been received from
the following sources:
 a. receipts from the federal government;
 b. any cash receipts, except gifts, bequests, donations and earned
interest dedicated by the directors of the institution in accordance
with the regulations of the commissioner; and
 c. any refund made or any apportionment or payment received from the
state for experimental or special programs as approved by the
commissioner.
 § 4212. Protection of pupils. The department shall:
 (a) Promulgate regulations concerning standards for the protection of
children in residential care from reportable incidents in accordance
with this section and article eleven of the social services law,
including procedures for:
 (i) consistent with appropriate collective bargaining agreements and
applicable provisions of the civil service law, the review and
evaluation of the backgrounds of and the information supplied by any
person applying to be an employee, a volunteer or consultant, which
shall include but not be limited to the following requirements: that the
applicant set forth his or her employment history, provide personal and
employment references, and relevant experiential and educational
information, and sign a sworn statement indicating whether the
applicant, to the best of his or her knowledge, has ever been convicted
of a crime in this state or any other jurisdiction;
 (ii) establishing, for employees, relevant minimal experiential and
educational qualifications, consistent with appropriate collective
bargaining agreements and applicable provisions of the civil service
law;
 (iii) assuring adequate and appropriate supervision of employees,
volunteers and consultants;
 (iv) demonstrating by a residential facility or program that
appropriate action is taken to assure the safety of the child who is
alleged to have been subjected to a reportable incident in a report to
the vulnerable persons' central register in accordance with section four
hundred ninety-two of the social services law as well as other children
in care, immediately upon notification that such a report of an
allegation of a reportable incident has been made with respect to a
child in such residential facility or program;
 (v) removing a child when it is determined that there is risk to such
child if he or she continues to remain within a residential facility or
program; and
 (vi) appropriate preventive and remedial action to be taken including
legal actions, consistent with appropriate collective bargaining
agreements and applicable provisions of the civil service law.
 (vii) consistent with applicable collective bargaining agreements,
assuring that an individual who has committed a category one offense, as
defined in paragraph (a) of subdivision four of section four hundred
ninety-three of the social services law, that is included on the
vulnerable persons' central register is not hired or otherwise used in
any position in which such individual would have regular and substantial
contact with a service recipient in any program described in paragraph
(e) of subdivision four of section four hundred eighty-eight of the
social services law.
 Such standards shall also establish as a priority requirements that:
 (A) subject to the amounts appropriated therefor, administrators,
employees, volunteers and consultants receive training in at least the
following: child abuse prevention and identification, safety and
security procedures, the principles of child development, the
characteristics of children in care and techniques of group and child
management including crisis intervention, the laws, regulations and
procedures governing the protection of children from reportable
incidents, and other appropriate topics, provided, however, that the
department may exempt administrators and consultants from such
requirements upon demonstration of substantially equivalent knowledge or
experience; and
 (B) subject to the amounts appropriated therefor, children receive
instruction, consistent with their age, needs and circumstances as well
as the needs and circumstances within the program, in techniques and
procedures which will enable such children to protect themselves from
reportable incidents.
 The department shall take all reasonable and necessary actions to
assure that employees, volunteers and consultants in residential
facilities and programs are kept apprised on a current basis of all
department policies and procedures relating to the protection of
children from reportable incidents, and shall monitor and supervise the
provision of training to such employees, volunteers and consultants.
Regulations and standards developed pursuant to this subdivision shall,
to the extent possible, be consistent with those promulgated by other
state agencies for such purposes.
 (b) Provide for the development and implementation of a plan of
prevention and remediation with respect to a substantiated report of
abuse or neglect. Such action shall include: (i) within ten days of
receipt of such a substantiated report, development and implementation
of a plan of prevention and remediation to be taken with respect to a
custodian or the residential facility in order to assure the continued
health and safety of children and to provide for the prevention of
future acts constituting reportable incidents; and (ii) development and
implementation of a plan of prevention and remediation, in the event an
investigation of a report of an allegation of abuse or neglect
determines that a preponderance of the evidence of such allegation
exists and such substantiated allegation may be attributed in whole or
in part to noncompliance by the residential facility or program with
provisions of this chapter or regulations of the department applicable
to the operation of a residential facility or program. Any plan of
prevention and remediation required to be developed by a facility
supervised by the department shall be submitted to and approved by the
department in accordance with time limits established by regulations of
the department. Implementation of the plan shall be monitored by the
department. In reviewing the continued qualifications of a residential
facility or program for an operating certificate, the department shall
evaluate such facility's compliance with plans of prevention and
remediation developed and implemented pursuant to this subdivision.
 § 4213. Other persons eligible for appointment. In accordance with
the provisions of the charter of the New York Institute for Special
Education, and amendments thereto, as issued by the board of regents,
children with handicapping conditions, other than handicapping
conditions which would establish eligibility for appointment to the
schools enumerated in this article, shall be eligible for appointment to
the New York Institute for Special Education as state pupils. The
provisions of this article shall apply but not necessarily be limited to
the appointment, education, maintenance and support of such pupils. Such
pupils eligible for appointment, pursuant to this section, shall be
persons over five and under twenty-one years of age who have not
received a high school diploma.
 ARTICLE 89
 CHILDREN WITH DISABILITIES
Section 4401. Definitions.
 4401-a. Referral and evaluation for special education services
 or programs.
 4402. Duties of school districts.
 4403. Duties of education department.
 4404. Appeal procedures for children with disabilities.
 4404-a. Meditation program for students with disabilities.
 4405. Computing financial responsibility for special
 educational services for certain children with
 disabilities.
 4406. Procedures through the family court; cost of certain
 educational services.
 4407. Special provisions relating to instruction of certain
 children with disabilities.
 4408. Payment for July and August programs for students with
 disabilities.
 4410. Special education services and programs for preschool
 children with disabilities.
 4410-a. Responsibility for certain temporary-resident preschool
 children with disabilities.
 4410-b. Use of certain federal funds.
 4410-c. Audits of special education services program providers
 for preschool children with disabilities.
 § 4401. Definitions. As referred to in this article. * 1. A "child
with a disability" or "student with a disability" means a person under
the age of twenty-one who is entitled to attend public schools pursuant
to section thirty-two hundred two of this chapter and who, because of
mental, physical or emotional reasons can only receive appropriate
educational opportunities from a program of special education. Such term
does not include a child whose educational needs are due primarily to
unfamiliarity with the English language, environmental, cultural or
economic factors. Lack of appropriate instruction in reading, including
in the essential components of reading instruction as defined in
subsection three of section twelve hundred eight of the elementary and
secondary education act of nineteen hundred sixty-five, or lack of
appropriate instruction in mathematics or limited English proficiency
shall not be the determinant factor in identifying a student as a
student with a disability. "Special education" means specially designed
instruction which includes special services or programs as delineated in
subdivision two of this section, and transportation, provided at no cost
to the parents to meet the unique needs of a child with a disability. A
"child with a handicapping condition" means a child with a disability.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2027
 * 1. A "child with a disability" or "student with a disability" means
a person under the age of twenty-one who is entitled to attend public
schools pursuant to section thirty-two hundred two of this chapter and
who, because of mental, physical or emotional reasons can only receive
appropriate educational opportunities from a program of special
education. Such term does not include a child whose educational needs
are due primarily to unfamiliarity with the English language,
environmental, cultural or economic factors. Lack of instruction in
reading or mathematics or limited English proficiency shall not be the
determinant factor in identifying a student as a student with a
disability. "Special education" means specially designed instruction
which includes special services or programs as delineated in subdivision
two of this section, and transportation, provided at no cost to the
parents to meet the unique needs of a child with a disability. A "child
with a handicapping condition" means a child with a disability.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2027
 2. "Special services or programs". For purposes of this article,
special services or programs shall mean the following:
 a. Special classes, transitional support services, resource rooms,
direct and indirect consultant teacher services, transition services as
defined in subdivision nine of this section, assistive technology
devices as defined under federal law, travel training, home instruction,
and special teachers to include itinerant teachers as provided by the
schools of the district of residence with such terms and services to be
defined by regulations of the commissioner.
 b. Contracts with other districts for special services or programs.
 c. Contracts with or special services or programs provided by boards
of cooperative educational services.
 d. Appointment by the commissioner to a state school in accordance
with article eighty-seven or eighty-eight of this chapter or a
state-supported school in accordance with article eighty-five of this
chapter.
 e. Contracts with private non-residential schools which have been
approved by the commissioner and which are within the state for special
services or programs.
 f. Contracts with private non-residential schools which have been
approved by the commissioner and which are outside of the state for
special services or programs.
 g. Contracts with private residential schools which have been approved
by the commissioner and which are within the state for special services
or programs.
 h. Contracts with private residential schools which have been approved
by the commissioner and which are outside the state for special services
or programs.
 i. Contracts with the state university at Binghamton for
non-residential special services or programs at the children's unit for
treatment and evaluation which have been approved by the commissioner.
 j. Provision of educational services in a residential facility for the
care and treatment of students with disabilities under the jurisdiction
of a state agency other than the department.
 * k. Related services which shall in appropriate cases be furnished to
students with disabilities shall include audiology, counseling including
rehabilitation counseling services, occupational therapy, physical
therapy, speech pathology, medical services as defined by regulations of
the commissioner, psychological services, school health services, school
nurse services, school social work, assistive technology services as
defined under federal law, interpreting services, orientation and
mobility services, parent counseling and training and other appropriate
developmental, corrective or other support services and appropriate
access to recreation. Such term does not include a medical device that
is surgically implanted, the optimization of that device's functioning
(e.g., mapping), maintenance of that device, or the replacement of such
device.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2027
 * k. Related services which shall in appropriate cases be furnished to
students with disabilities shall include audiology, counseling including
rehabilitation counseling services, occupational therapy, physical
therapy, speech pathology, medical services as defined by regulations of
the commissioner, psychological services, school health services, school
social work, assistive technology services as defined under federal law,
orientation and mobility services, parent counseling and training and
other appropriate developmental, corrective or other support services
and appropriate access to recreation.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2027
 l. Contracts for residential or nonresidential placements with a
special act school district listed in chapter five hundred sixty-six of
the laws of nineteen hundred sixty-seven.
 m. Provision of nonresidential education services in Fairmount
children's center, which facility has been approved by the commissioner
for the education of students with disabilities. Students placed under
the provisions of this paragraph shall not be eligible for state aid
under the provisions of sections thirty-six hundred two and thirty-six
hundred two-c of this chapter.
 n. Formalized agreements for the provision of transition services as
defined in subdivision nine of this section in programs such as
vocational training programs approved by the department or by another
state agency. Nothing in this article shall be construed to relieve
another agency of responsibility to provide or pay for any transition
service that the agency would otherwise provide to students with
disabilities who meet the eligibility criteria of that agency.
 3. "Maintenance". For purposes of this article "maintenance" shall
mean the amount charged for room and board and allocable debt service as
determined by the commissioner for the living unit of the residential
facility by a residential school and such reasonable medical expenses
actually and necessarily incurred by a child with disabilities while
actually in attendance at a residential school, provided that such
medical expenses shall be for diagnostic, evaluative, educationally
related, and emergency care services as defined by regulations of the
commissioner. Such amount, which shall not include expenses which are
otherwise reimbursable to a residential facility by a federal, state or
local agency, shall be approved by the commissioner of social services
and the director of the division of the budget and shall not be
otherwise payable or reimbursable.
 4. "Transportation expense." For the purposes of determining
transportation aid pursuant to this article, "transportation expense"
shall mean any cost incurred by the school district for the
transportation of a child with disabilities pursuant to the provisions
of subdivision four of section forty-four hundred two of this article,
notwithstanding any minimum or maximum aidable limits established by
other provisions of the education law or pursuant to regulations of the
commissioner or school district, allowed pursuant to the applicable
provisions of parts two and three of article seventy-three of this
chapter, provided, however, that such transportation shall not be in
excess of fifty miles from the home of such pupil to the appropriate
special service or program unless the commissioner shall certify that no
appropriate non-residential special service or program is available
within such fifty miles, and that the commissioner may establish by
regulation a maximum number of trips between a pupil's home and the
private residential school which provides special services or programs
to such pupil. Such cost shall include the cost of joint or regional
transportation provided by school districts or boards of cooperative
educational services for such purposes and subject to the same limits.
 5. "Tuition" shall mean the per pupil cost of all instructional
services, supplies and equipment, the operation of instructional
facilities and allocable debt service for the instructional facilities,
as determined by the commissioner. Approved tuition shall be computed
from expenditures from which no revenue has been received from the
following sources:
 (a) receipts from the federal government;
 (b) any cash receipts which reduce the cost of an item applied against
the item therefor, except gifts, donations and earned interest, and
 (c) any refunds made or any apportionment or payment received from the
state for experimental or special programs as approved by the
commissioner.
 6. "Excess cost" shall mean the difference between the tuition and the
sum of the following:
 a. the school district basic contribution as defined in subdivision
eight of this section; and
 b. the amount of federal funds received by the school district and
expended for such pupil which in the judgment of the commissioner shall
be deemed duplicative.
 7. "Excess cost aid ratio" for a school district shall be computed by
subtracting from one the product obtained by multiplying fifteen per
centum by the combined wealth ratio as defined in section thirty-six
hundred two of this chapter. This aid ratio shall be expressed as a
decimal carried to three places without rounding, but shall not be less
than fifty hundredths, nor more than one.
 8. "School district basic contribution" shall mean an amount equal to
the total school district local property and non-property tax levy for
the base year divided by the base year public school district enrollment
of resident pupils of the school district as defined in paragraph n of
subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter,
except that for the two thousand thirteen--two thousand fourteen and two
thousand fourteen--two thousand fifteen school year and thereafter, for
school districts other than central high school districts and their
components, such tax levy for the base year shall be divided by the year
prior to the base year pupil count as determined by the commissioner
pursuant to paragraph f of subdivision two of section thirty-six hundred
two of this chapter for any school district in which such year prior to
the base year pupil count exceeds one hundred fifty percent of such base
year public school district enrollment of resident pupils.
 * 9. "Transition services" shall mean a coordinated set of activities
for a student with a disability, designed to be within a
results-oriented process, that is focused on improving the academic and
functional achievement of the student with a disability to facilitate
movement from school to post-school activities, including post-secondary
education, vocational education, integrated employment (including
supported employment), continuing and adult education, adult services,
independent living, or community participation. The coordinated set of
activities shall be based upon the student's strengths, preferences and
interests, and shall include instruction, related services, community
experiences, the development of employment and other post-school adult
living objectives, and, if appropriate, acquisition of daily living
skills and provision of a functional vocational evaluation.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2027
 * 9. "Transition services" shall mean a coordinated set of activities
for a student with a disability, designed within an outcome-oriented
process, which promotes movement from school to post-school activities,
including post-secondary education, vocational training, integrated
competitive employment (including supported employment), continuing and
adult education, adult services, independent living, or community
participation. The coordinated set of activities shall be based upon the
individual student's needs, taking into account the student's
preferences and interests, and shall include instruction, related
services, community experiences, the development of employment and other
post-school adult living objectives, and, if appropriate, acquisition of
daily living skills and functional vocational evaluation.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2027
 10. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provisions of this article, where
a private not-for-profit school enters into a lease, sublease or other
agreement with the dormitory authority pursuant to section sixteen
hundred eighty of the public authorities law, the tuition rates
established by the commissioner pursuant to this section shall be
established in two parts, one part of which shall be the cost per child
of the annual rental payment pursuant to such lease, sublease or other
agreement to be paid by the school district or the social services
district, as the case may be, to the fund established by this chapter;
the remaining part shall be the tuition amount to be paid to the private
not-for-profit school.
 11. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provisions of this article, where
the special act school district enters into a lease, sublease or other
agreement with the dormitory authority pursuant to section four hundred
seven-a of this chapter, the tuition rates established by the
commissioner pursuant to this section shall be established in two parts,
one part of which shall be the cost per child of the annual rental
payment pursuant to such section four hundred seven-a of this chapter to
be paid by the school district or the social services district, as the
case may be, to the fund established in such section; the remaining part
shall be the tuition amount to be paid to the special act school
district.
 * § 4401-a. Referral and evaluation for special education services or
programs. 1. Any student suspected of having a disability may be
referred for initial evaluation to determine if the student is a student
with a disability by the parent or person in parental relation, the
commissioner or a designee of a public agency responsible for providing
education to students with disabilities, including but not limited to
the school district in which the student resides. In addition, a
professional staff member of the school which the student attends or
professional staff member of the school district in which the student
resides, physician, judicial officer, professional staff member of a
public agency, or the pupil himself or herself if such pupil is eighteen
years of age or older or is an emancipated minor may request that the
school district in which the student resides refer the student for
initial evaluation.
 2. A request for referral submitted by an individual other than the
student student or a judicial officer shall:
 a. state the reasons in writing for the referral and include any test
results, records or reports upon which the referral is based unless such
test results, records or reports are unavailable;
 b. describe in writing, intervention services programs or
instructional methodologies to remediate the student's performance prior
to referral including any supplementary aids or support services
provided for this purpose or state the reason why no such attempts were
made; and
 c. describe the extent of contact or involvement prior to the referral
with the parent or person in parental relationship.
 3. A referral submitted by a parent or person in parental relation
shall be submitted in writing to the chairperson of the committee on
special education or the building administrator of the school which the
student attends or is eligible to attend. If such referral is submitted
to the building administrator, the building administrator shall forward
a copy to the chairperson of the committee on special education. If such
referral is submitted to the chairperson of the committee such
chairperson shall forward a copy of such referral to the building
administrator of the school which the student attends or is eligible to
attend. A referral submitted by any other individual shall be submitted
in writing to the chairperson of the committee on special education or
the building administrator of the school which the student attends or is
eligible to attend. The building administrator may request a meeting
with the parent or person in parental relation to the student for the
purpose of discussing educational alternatives to special education.
Such alternatives may include the provision of services designed to
address the learning needs of the student and maintain a child's
placement in general education with the provision of appropriate
educational and support services. Nothing contained in this section
shall in any way impede a committee on special education from continuing
its duties and functions under this article with regard to a student
referred for special education or a parent's access to the committee,
except that, if the parent concurs in writing with the building
administrator to the provision of educational alternatives to special
education, the referral shall be deemed withdrawn.
 4. The individual evaluation of the educational needs of a student
referred to the committee on special education shall be conducted by
qualified individuals, in accordance with regulations of the
commissioner, with the results of such evaluation forwarded to the
committee on special education and the student's parent or person in
parental relation.
 5. Special education services and programs shall be provided after the
appropriateness of the resources of the regular education program,
including, but not limited to, support services, speech and language
services, additional educational services and remedial instruction, have
been considered. Each school district shall develop a plan and policies
for implementing school wide approaches and pre-referral interventions
in order to implement the provisions of this subdivision.
 6. If the committee on special education has determined that placement
in special education services or programs is not appropriate for the
child under consideration, a copy of the committee's recommendation and
pertinent information supporting such recommendation shall be forwarded
to the building administrator of the school which the child attends and
to the parent or person in parental relation to the child. The building
administrator shall determine which support services, speech and
language services and additional educational services should be provided
to the child in order to assist the child to benefit from a program of
regular education and, to the extent available, shall assure that those
services are provided. Nothing contained in this subdivision shall be
construed to limit the right of the parent or a person in parental
relation to the student to make a referral or to appeal the
recommendation of the committee on special education in accordance with
the provisions contained in section forty-four hundred four of this
chapter.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2027
 * § 4401-a. Referral and evaluation for special education services or
programs. 1. Any pupil suspected of having a handicapping condition may
be referred for special education services or programs by the parent or
person in parental relationship, professional staff member of the school
which the pupil attends or professional staff member of the school
district in which the pupil resides, physician, judicial officer, the
commissioner or designee of a public agency, the pupil himself or
herself if such pupil is eighteen years of age or older or is an
emancipated minor.
 2. A referral submitted by an individual other than the pupil, the
pupil's parent or person in parental relationship or a judicial officer
shall:
 a. state the reasons in writing for the referral and include any test
results, records or reports upon which the referral is based unless such
test results, records or reports are unavailable;
 b. describe in writing, intervention services programs or
instructional methodologies to remediate the pupil's performance prior
to referral including any supplementary aids or support services
provided for this purpose or state the reason why no such attempts were
made; and
 c. describe the extent of contact or involvement prior to the referral
with the parent or person in parental relationship.
 3. A referral submitted by a parent, a person in parental relationship
or the pupil, shall be submitted in writing to the chairperson of the
committee on special education or the building administrator of the
school which the pupil attends or is eligible to attend. If such
referral is submitted to the building administrator, the building
administrator shall forward a copy to the chairperson of the committee
on special education. If such referral is submitted to the chairperson
of the committee such chairperson shall forward a copy of such referral
to the building administrator of the school which the pupil attends or
is eligible to attend. A referral submitted by any other individual
shall be submitted in writing to the chairperson of the committee on
special education or the building administrator of the school which the
pupil attends or is eligible to attend. The building administrator may
request a meeting with the parent, person in parental relationship to
the pupil and/or the pupil for the purpose of discussing educational
alternatives to special education. Such alternatives may include the
provision of educationally related support services or any other
services designed to address the learning needs of the student and
maintain a child's placement in general education with the provision of
appropriate educational and support services. Nothing contained in this
section shall in any way impede a committee on special education from
continuing its duties and functions under this article with regard to a
pupil referred for special education or a parent's access to the
committee, except that, if the parent concurs in writing with the
building administrator to the provision of educational alternatives to
special education, the referral shall be deemed withdrawn.
 4. The individual evaluation of the educational needs of a pupil
referred to the committee on special education shall be conducted by
qualified individuals, in accordance with regulations of the
commissioner, with the results of such evaluation forwarded to the
committee on special education and the pupil's parent or person in
parental relationship.
 5. Special education services and programs shall be provided after the
appropriateness of the resources of the regular education program,
including educationally related support service, speech and language
improvement services and remedial instruction, have been considered.
Each school district shall develop a plan and policies for implementing
school wide approaches and prereferral interventions in order to
implement the provisions of this subdivision.
 6. If the committee on special education has determined that placement
in special education services or programs is not appropriate for the
child under consideration, a copy of the committee's recommendation and
pertinent information supporting such recommendation shall be forwarded
to the building administrator of the school which the child attends and
to the parent or person in parental relationship to the child. The
building administrator shall determine which educationally related
support services, speech and language improvement services and
additional educational services should be provided to the child in order
to assist the child to benefit from a program of regular education and,
to the extent available, shall assure that those services are provided.
Nothing contained in this subdivision shall be construed to limit the
right of the parent, a person in parental relationship to the pupil or
the pupil to make a referral or to appeal the recommendation of the
committee on special education in accordance with the provisions
contained in section forty-four hundred four of this chapter.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2027
 § 4402. Duties of school districts. 1. * a. The board of education or
trustees of each school district and the city school district of the
city of New York shall, under regulations prescribed by the commissioner
and approved by the regents of the university, identify, locate and
evaluate in accordance with this section all students with disabilities
in such district who are in need of special education, including
children with disabilities who are homeless children or are wards of the
state as defined in the regulations of the commissioner and, consistent
with section thirty-six hundred two-c of this chapter, students who
attend nonpublic schools within such school district, and shall maintain
a register containing the name of each child with a disability who
resides in the district, the nature of such child's disability, the
educational placement and setting, if any, of such child, and any other
student-specific data required to comply with federal law or
regulations.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2027
 * a. The board of education or trustees of each school district and
the city school district of the city of New York shall ascertain under
regulations prescribed by the commissioner and approved by the regents
of the university, the number of children with handicapping conditions
in such district under the age of twenty-one years and the nature of the
handicapping condition of each such child in accordance with the
provisions of this section, and shall maintain a register containing the
name of each child with a handicapping condition who resides in the
district, the nature of such child's handicapping condition, the
educational placement and setting, if any, of such child.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2027
 b. (1) The board of education or trustees of each school district
shall establish committees and/or subcommittees on special education as
necessary to ensure timely evaluation and placement of pupils. The board
of education of the city school district of the city of New York, shall
establish at least one committee on special education in each of its
community school districts, provided that appointments to the community
school district committees shall be made upon the approval of the
community school board except that the board of education of the city
school district of the city of New York, may establish one committee to
serve more than one community school district, in which case,
appointments thereto shall be made upon the joint approval of the
affected community school boards; provided, however, that prior to such
consolidation, the board shall consider the relative caseload of the
committee on special education in each affected community school
district, including but not limited to the following factors: the number
of students evaluated by such committee; the number of referrals to
special education in such community school district; the ability to
comply with mandated paperwork and timelines; and other issues which the
board deems pertinent.
 (a) Such committees shall be composed of at least the following
members: (i) the parents or persons in parental relationship to the
student; (ii) one regular education teacher of the student whenever the
student is or may be participating in the regular education environment;
(iii) one special education teacher of the student, or, if appropriate,
a special education provider of the student; (iv) a school psychologist;
(v) a representative of such school district who is qualified to provide
or administer or supervise special education and is knowledgeable about
the general curriculum and the availability of resources of the school
district; (vi) an individual who can interpret the instructional
implications of evaluation results; (vii) a school physician; (viii) an
additional parent, residing in the school district or a neighboring
school district, of a student with a disability, of a student who has
been declassified and is no longer eligible for an individualized
education program (IEP), or a parent of a disabled child who has
graduated, for a period of five years beyond the student's
declassification or graduation, provided such parent shall not be
employed by or under contract with the school district, and provided
further that such additional parent shall not be a required member if
the parents request that such additional parent member not participate;
(ix) such other persons having knowledge or special expertise regarding
the student as the school district or the parents or persons in parental
relationship to the student shall designate, to the extent required
under federal law; and (x) if appropriate, the student.
 * (b) In determining the composition of such committee pursuant to
clause (a) of this subparagraph, a school district may determine that a
member appointed pursuant to one of subclause (ii), (iii), (iv), (v) or
(ix) of clause (a) of this subparagraph also fulfills the requirement of
subclause (vi) of clause (a) of this subparagraph of a member who is an
individual who can interpret the instructional implications of
evaluation results where such individuals are determined by the school
district to have the knowledge and expertise to do so and/or that a
member appointed pursuant to subclause (iii) or (iv) of clause (a) of
this subparagraph also fulfills the requirement of subclause (v) of
clause (a) of this subparagraph of a member who is a representative of
the school district. The regular education teacher of the student shall
participate in the development, review and revision of the
individualized education program for the student, to the extent required
under federal law. The school physician need not be in attendance at any
meeting of the committee on special education unless specifically
requested in writing, at least seventy-two hours prior to such meeting
by the parents or other person in parental relation to the student in
question, the student, or a member of the committee on special
education. The parents or persons in parental relation of the student in
question shall receive proper written notice of their right to have the
school physician attend the meetings of the committee on special
education upon referral of said student to the committee on special
education or whenever such committee plans to modify or change the
identification, evaluation or educational placement of the student. The
additional parent need not be in attendance at any meeting of the
committee on special education unless specifically requested in writing,
at least seventy-two hours prior to such meeting by the parents or other
person in parental relation to the student in question, the student, or
a member of the committee on special education. The parents or persons
in parental relation of the student in question shall receive proper
written notice of their right to have an additional parent attend any
meeting of the committee regarding the student along with a statement,
prepared by the department, explaining the role of having the additional
parent attend the meeting. The committee shall invite the appropriate
professionals most familiar with a student's disability or disabilities
to attend any meeting concerning the educational program for such
student. Except as otherwise provided in this clause or clause (b-1) or
(b-2) of this subparagraph, all members of such committee shall attend
meetings of the committee on special education.
 Members of such committee shall serve at the pleasure of such board
and members who are neither employees of nor under contract with such
district shall serve without compensation except that such members shall
be entitled to a per diem to defray expenses incurred in such service,
provided, however, that any expense incurred shall be deemed an aidable
operating expense for purposes of state aid.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2027
 * (b) In determining the composition of such committee pursuant to
clause (a) of this subparagraph, a school district may determine that a
member appointed pursuant to one of subclause (ii), (iii), (iv), (v) or
(ix) of clause (a) of this subparagraph also fulfills the requirement of
subclause (vi) of clause (a) of this subparagraph of a member who is an
individual who can interpret the instructional implications of
evaluation results where such individuals are determined by the school
district to have the knowledge and expertise to do so and/or that a
member appointed pursuant to subclause (iii) or (iv) of clause (a) of
this subparagraph also fulfills the requirement of subclause (v) of
clause (a) of this subparagraph of a member who is a representative of
the school district. The regular education teacher of the student shall
participate in the development, review and revision of the
individualized education program for the student, to the extent required
under federal law. The school physician need not be in attendance at any
meeting of the committee on special education unless specifically
requested in writing, at least seventy-two hours prior to such meeting
by the parents or other person in parental relationship to the student
in question, the student, or a member of the committee on special
education. The parents or persons in parental relationship of the
student in question shall receive proper written notice of their right
to have the school physician attend the meetings of the committee on
special education upon referral of said student to the committee on
special education or whenever such committee plans to modify or change
the identification, evaluation or educational placement of the student.
The additional parent need not be in attendance at any meeting of the
committee on special education unless specifically requested in writing,
at least seventy-two hours prior to such meeting by the parents or other
person in parental relation to the student in question, the student, or
a member of the committee on special education. The parents or persons
in parental relation of the student in question shall receive proper
written notice of their right to have an additional parent attend any
meeting of the committee regarding the student along with a statement,
prepared by the department, explaining the role of having the additional
parent attend the meeting. The committee shall invite the appropriate
professionals most familiar with a student's disability or disabilities
to attend any meeting concerning the educational program for such
student.
 Members of such committee shall serve at the pleasure of such board
and members who are neither employees of nor under contract with such
district shall serve without compensation except that such members shall
be entitled to a per diem to defray expenses incurred in such service,
provided, however, that any expense incurred shall be deemed an aidable
operating expense for purposes of state aid.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2027
 * (b-1) Notwithstanding any provision of law, rule or regulation to
the contrary, a member of the committee on special education, other than
the parents or persons in parental relation to the student is not
required to attend a meeting of the team, in whole or in part, if the
parent or person in parental relation to the student and the school
district agree, in writing, that the attendance of the member is not
necessary because the member's area of the curriculum or related
services is not being modified or discussed at the meeting.
 * NB Repealed June 30, 2027
 * (b-2) Notwithstanding any provision of law, rule or regulation to
the contrary, a member of the committee on special education, other than
the parents or persons in parental relation to the student, may be
excused from attending a meeting of the committee, in whole or in part,
when the meeting involves a modification to or discussion of the
member's area of the curriculum or related services if the parent or
person in parental relation to the student and the school district
consent, in writing, to the excusal and the excused member submits to
the parent or person in parental relation to the student and such
committee, written input into the development of the individualized
education program, and in particular written input with respect to their
area of curriculum or related services prior to the meeting.
 * NB Repealed June 30, 2027
 * (b-3) Requests for excusal of a member of the committee as provided
for in clauses (b-1) and (b-2) of this subparagraph, and the written
input as provided for in clause (b-2) of this subparagraph, shall be
provided not less than five calendar days prior to the meeting date, in
order to afford the parent or person in parental relation a reasonable
time to review and consider the request. Provided however, that a parent
or person in parental relation shall retain the right to request and/or
agree with the school district to excuse a member of the special
education committee at any time including where the member is unable to
attend the meeting because of an emergency or unavoidable scheduling
conflict and the school district submits the written input for review
and consideration by the parent or person in parental relation within a
reasonable time prior to the meeting and prior to obtaining written
consent of the parent or person in parental relation to such excusal.
 * NB Repealed June 30, 2027
 (c) Districts not having available personnel may share the services of
a local committee on special education with another school district or
contract with a board of cooperative educational services for such
personnel pursuant to regulations of the commissioner. A district having
a subcommittee on special education may share the services of a local
committee on special education with another school district, provided
that a representative of such school district who is qualified to
provide or administer or supervise special education and is
knowledgeable about the general curriculum and the availability of
resources of the school district shall be a member of such committee
when it convenes on behalf of a student who is a resident of such
district.
 * (d) Boards of education in city school districts in cities having in
excess of one hundred twenty-five thousand inhabitants shall appoint
subcommittees on special education, to the extent necessary to ensure
timely evaluation and placement of students with disabilities. Boards of
education or trustees of any school district outside of a city having a
population in excess of one hundred twenty-five thousand inhabitants may
appoint subcommittees on special education to assist the board of
education in accordance with this clause and the regulations of the
commissioner. The membership of each subcommittee shall include, but not
be limited to, the committee members required by subclauses (i), (ii),
(iii), (v), (vi), (ix) and (x) of clause (a) of this subparagraph, and a
school psychologist whenever a new psychological evaluation is reviewed
or a change to a more restrictive program option, as defined in
regulations of the commissioner, is considered. Except when (i) a
student is considered for initial placement in a special class, or (ii)
a student is considered for initial placement in a special class outside
of the student's school of attendance, or (iii) whenever a student is
considered for placement in a school primarily serving students with
disabilities or a school outside of the student's district, each
subcommittee may perform the functions for which the committee on
special education is responsible pursuant to the provisions of this
subdivision. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this clause to the
contrary, attendance of members of a subcommittee may be excused from
attendance in the same manner as members of a committee on special
education pursuant to clauses (b-1), (b-2) or (b-3) of this
subparagraph. Each subcommittee shall report annually the status of each
student with a disability within its jurisdiction to the committee on
special education, and the subcommittee shall refer to the committee,
upon receipt of a written request from the parent or person in parental
relation to a student, any matter in which the parent disagrees with the
subcommittee's recommendation concerning a modification or change in the
identification, evaluation, educational placement or provision of a free
appropriate public education to such student. The committee on special
education shall be responsible for oversight and monitoring of the
activities of each subcommittee to assure compliance with the
requirements of applicable and federal law and regulations.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2027
 * (d) Boards of education in city school districts in cities having in
excess of one hundred twenty-five thousand inhabitants shall appoint
subcommittees on special education, to the extent necessary to ensure
timely evaluation and placement of students with disabilities. Boards of
education or trustees of any school district outside of a city having a
population in excess of one hundred twenty-five thousand inhabitants may
appoint subcommittees on special education to assist the board of
education in accordance with this clause and the regulations of the
commissioner. The membership of each subcommittee shall include, but not
be limited to, the committee members required by subclauses (i), (ii),
(iii), (v), (vi), (ix) and (x) of clause (a) of this subparagraph, and a
school psychologist whenever a new psychological evaluation is reviewed
or a change to a more restrictive program option, as defined in
regulations of the commissioner, is considered. Except when (i) a
student is considered for initial placement in a special class, or (ii)
a student is considered for initial placement in a special class outside
of the student's school of attendance, or (iii) whenever a student is
considered for placement in a school primarily serving students with
disabilities or a school outside of the student's district, each
subcommittee may perform the functions for which the committee on
special education is responsible pursuant to the provisions of this
subdivision. Each subcommittee shall report annually the status of each
student with a disability within its jurisdiction to the committee on
special education, and the subcommittee shall refer to the committee,
upon receipt of a written request from the parent or person in parental
relationship to a student, any matter in which the parent disagrees with
the subcommittee's recommendation concerning a modification or change in
the identification, evaluation, educational placement or provision of a
free appropriate public education to such student. The committee on
special education shall be responsible for oversight and monitoring of
the activities of each subcommittee to assure compliance with the
requirements of applicable and federal law and regulations.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2027
 * (2) Such committees or subcommittees shall review at least annually,
the status of each student with a disability and each student thought to
be disabled who is identified pursuant to paragraph a of this
subdivision. Such review shall consider the educational progress and
achievement of the student with a disability and the student's ability
to participate in instructional programs in regular education.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2027
 * (2) Such committees or subcommittees shall identify, review and
evaluate at least annually, the status of each child with a handicapping
condition and each child thought to be handicapped who resides within
the school district. Such review shall consider the educational progress
and achievement of the child with a handicapping condition and the
child's ability to participate in instructional programs in regular
education.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2027
 (3) The committee or when applicable the subcommittee shall:
 (a) Obtain, review and evaluate all relevant information, including
but not limited to that presented by the parent, person in parental
relationship and teacher, pertinent to each child suspected of or
identified as having a disability, including the results of a physical
examination performed in accordance with sections nine hundred three,
nine hundred four and nine hundred five of this chapter and, where
determined to be necessary by a school psychologist, an appropriate
psychological evaluation performed by a qualified private or school
psychologist, and other appropriate assessments as necessary to
ascertain the physical, mental, emotional and cultural-educational
factors which may contribute to the suspected or identified disability,
and all other school data which bear on the child's progress, including,
where appropriate, observation of classroom performance.
 * (b) (i) Make recommendations based upon a written evaluation setting
forth the reasons for the recommendations, to the child's parent or
person in parental relation and board of education or trustees as to
appropriate educational programs and placement in accordance with the
provisions of subdivision six of section forty-four hundred one-a of
this article, and as to the advisability of continuation, modification,
or termination of special class or program placements which evaluation
shall be furnished to the child's parent or person in parental relation
together with the recommendations provided, however that the committee
may recommend a placement in a school which uses psychotropic drugs only
if such school has a written policy pertaining to such use that is
consistent with subdivision four-a of section thirty-two hundred eight
of this chapter and that the parent or person in parental relation is
given such written policy at the time such recommendation is made. If
such recommendation is not acceptable to the parent or person in
parental relation, such parent or person in parental relation may appeal
such recommendation as provided for in section forty-four hundred four
of this chapter.
 (ii) Notwithstanding any provisions of this clause or clause (a) of
this subparagraph to the contrary, in making changes to a student's
individualized education program after the annual review has been
conducted, the parent or person in parental relation to the student and
the school district may agree not to convene a meeting of the committee
on special education for the purpose of making those changes, and
instead may develop a written document to amend or modify the student's
current individualized education program under the following
circumstances:
 (A) The parent or person in parental relation makes a request to the
school district for an amendment to the individualized education program
and the school district and such parent or person in parental relation
agree in writing; or
 (B) The school district provides the parent or person in parental
relation with a written proposal to amend a provision or provisions of
the individualized education program that is conveyed in language
understandable to the parent or person in parental relation in such
parent's or such person's native language or other dominate mode of
communication, informs and allows the parent or person in parental
relation the opportunity to consult with the appropriate personnel or
related service providers concerning the proposed changes and the parent
or person in parental relation agrees in writing to such amendments.
 (C) If the parent or person in parental relation agrees to amend the
individualized education program without a meeting, the parent or person
in parental relation shall be provided prior written notice of the
changes to the individualized education program resulting from such
written document and the special education committee shall be notified
of such changes. If the school district makes such changes by rewriting
the entire individualized education program, it shall provide the parent
or person in parental relation with a copy of the rewritten
individualized education program. If the school district amends the
individualized education program without rewriting the entire document,
the school district shall provide the parent or person in parental
relation with a copy of the document that amends or modifies the
individualized education program or, upon request of the parent or
person in parental relation, a revised copy of the individualized
education program with the amendments incorporated.
 Amendments to an individualized education program pursuant to this
subitem shall not affect the requirement that the special education
committee review the individualized education program at the annual
meeting, or more often if necessary.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2027
 * (b) Make recommendations based upon a written evaluation setting
forth the reasons for the recommendations, to the child's parent or
person in parental relationship and board of education or trustees as to
appropriate educational programs and placement in accordance with the
provisions of subdivision six of section forty-four hundred one-a of
this article, and as to the advisability of continuation, modification,
or termination of special class or program placements which evaluation
shall be furnished to the child's parent or person in parental
relationship together with the recommendations provided, however that
the committee may recommend a placement in a school which uses
psychotropic drugs only if such school has a written policy pertaining
to such use and that the parent or person in parental relationship is
given such written policy at the time such recommendation is made. If
such recommendation is not acceptable to the parent or person in
parental relationship, such parent or person in parental relationship
may appeal such recommendation as provided for in section forty-four
hundred four of this chapter.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2027
 (c) Provide written prior notice to the parents or person in parental
relationship of the child upon receipt of referral for evaluation or
whenever such committee plans to continue, modify or change the
identification, evaluation, or educational placement of the child or the
provision of a free appropriate public education to the child and advise
the parent of or person in parental relationship to the child of his or
her opportunity to address the committee, either in person or in
writing, on the appropriateness of the committee's recommendations on
program placements to be made to the board of education or trustees.
Such notice shall, where a child has been placed in a residential
program by a committee on special education, or has been determined to
be at risk of such a placement pursuant to subparagraph four of
paragraph b of subdivision one of section forty-four hundred two of this
article, also notify the parent or other person in parental relationship
that the child is not entitled to receive free educational services or
to remain in a residential educational program after the age of
twenty-one, the receipt of a high school diploma or the time described
in subdivision five of this section.
 * (d) Advise the board of education or trustees concerning the
frequency and nature of periodic reevaluations of students with
disabilities by appropriate specialists, provided, however, that each
student in a special program or a special class shall be reevaluated by
qualified appropriate school personnel at least once every three years,
except where the school district and the parent or person in parental
relation to the student agree in writing that such a reevaluation is
unnecessary. A reevaluation of a student with a disability shall be
conducted by qualified individuals, in accordance with regulations of
the commissioner consistent with the requirements of a reevaluation as
defined by the applicable federal regulation. A reevaluation may not be
conducted more than once a year unless the parent or person in parental
relation to the student and the school district otherwise agree.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2027
 * (d) Advise the board of education or trustees concerning the
frequency and nature of periodic reevaluations of students with
disabilities by appropriate specialists, provided, however, that each
student in a special program or a special class shall be reevaluated by
qualified appropriate school personnel at least once every three years.
A reevaluation of a student with a disability shall be conducted by
qualified individuals, in accordance with regulations of the
commissioner consistent with the requirements of a reevaluation as
defined by the applicable federal regulation.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2027
 (d-1) Each school district shall develop policies, pursuant to
regulations of the commissioner, to provide special services or
programs, to the extent appropriate to the needs of the child, to enable
the child to be involved in and progress in the general education
curriculum.
 (e) Make, or have made, periodic evaluations of the adequacy of
programs, services and facilities for children with disabilities.
 (f) Report periodically, but at least annually, to the board of
education or trustees on the status of programs, services, and
facilities made available by the school district in accordance with the
provisions of subdivision eight of section thirty-six hundred two of
this chapter. Such reports shall be kept on file for inspection by the
commissioner.
 (g) Provide for the transmittal of information by the board of
education, including such test results and evaluations as the committee
may have collected, to the home district of the child with a disability
in cases where the home school district has contracted for the child's
education with another school district or board of cooperative
educational services.
 (h) Provide the form developed pursuant to subdivision twenty-two of
section four of the veterans' services law to the parent or person in
parental relation of a child designated by the committee as either
disabled or emotionally disturbed.
 (i) Provide, to the extent appropriate to the individual needs of the
student with a disability that such student is educated in a setting
with students who are nondisabled.
 * (i) In accordance with the regulations of the commissioner and
subsection (k) of section fourteen hundred fifteen of title twenty of
the United States code and the implementing federal regulations, to
develop a functional behavioral assessment plan, to review, or revise,
as appropriate, a behavioral intervention plan, to develop appropriate
behavioral interventions and to review and revise, as appropriate, the
implementation of a behavioral intervention plan, to address the
behavior of a student with a disability who is alleged to have engaged
in misconduct, to the extent required by federal law and regulations.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2027
 * (j) In accordance with the regulations of the commissioner and
subsection (k) of section fourteen hundred fifteen of title twenty of
the United States code and the implementing federal regulations, to
conduct a functional behavioral assessment, to review, or revise, as
appropriate or necessary, and implement a behavioral intervention plan,
to develop appropriate behavioral interventions and to review and
revise, as appropriate or necessary, the implementation of a behavioral
intervention plan, to address the behavior of a student with a
disability who is alleged to have engaged in misconduct, to the extent
required by federal law and regulations.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2027
 * (j) In accordance with the regulations of the commissioner and
subsection (k) of section fourteen hundred fifteen of title twenty of
the United States code and the implementing federal regulations, to
conduct a review to determine whether behavior of a student with a
disability which violates the applicable school rules or code of conduct
and results in a change in placement under federal law, including but
not limited to placement in an interim alternative educational setting
pursuant to clause (iv) or (vii) of subparagraph three of paragraph g of
subdivision three of section thirty-two hundred fourteen of this
chapter, was a manifestation of the student's disability, provided that
other qualified school district personnel may participate in such
review.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2027
 * (k) In accordance with the regulations of the commissioner and
subsection (k) of section fourteen hundred fifteen of title twenty of
the United States code and the implementing federal regulations, to
determine the setting and services to be provided in the interim
alternative educational setting for a student with a disability who
carries or possesses a weapon to or at school, on school premises, or to
or at a school function or knowingly possesses or uses illegal drugs or
sells or solicits the sale of a controlled substance while at school or
a school function or who has inflicted serious bodily injury upon
another person as defined in federal law and the setting and services to
be provided to a student with a disability in an interim alternative
educational setting or other setting who is removed because of behavior
that has been determined not to be a manifestation of the student's
disability.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2027
 * (k) In accordance with the regulations of the commissioner and
subsection (k) of section fourteen hundred fifteen of title twenty of
the United States code and the implementing federal regulations, to
determine the services to be provided in the interim alternative
educational placement for a student with a disability who carries or
possesses a weapon to or at school, on school premises, or to or at
school function or knowingly possesses or uses illegal drugs or sells or
solicits the sale of a controlled substance while at school or a school
function and the services to be provided to a student with a disability
who is removed because of behavior that has been determined not to be a
manifestation of the student's disability.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2027
 (l) In accordance with the regulations of the commissioner and the
provisions of subsection (k) of section fourteen hundred fifteen of
title twenty of the United States code, and the implementing federal
regulations, to conduct expedited evaluations under the circumstances
specified in such federal law and regulations and to conduct such
reviews and make such determinations regarding students presumed to have
a disability for discipline purposes as defined in subdivision three of
section thirty-two hundred fourteen of this chapter as are required
under the federal individuals with disabilities education act and
implementing regulations.
 (3-a) The members of the committee or subcommittee may compile a list
of appropriate and/or helpful services that may be available outside of
the school setting to provide the parents or person in parental relation
of a child with a disability with such information. Such list shall
clearly state that these services are in addition to services supplied
by the school district and will not be paid for by the school district.
Any member of a committee or subcommittee or his or her respective
school district who, acting reasonably and in good faith, provides such
information shall not be liable for such action.
 (4) (a) When the committee on special education of a local school
district determines that a child who is living in his or her own home is
at risk of a future placement in a residential school, as determined in
accordance with guidelines established by the department pursuant to
subdivision nineteen of section forty-four hundred three of this
article, the committee shall provide the parent or other person in
parental relationship with information, where such information has been
made available to the committee, about the community support services
that may be available to the family, including an assessment of the
family's community support services needs in accordance with such
guidelines and, where such an assessment is available, the name and
address of the agency which can perform the assessment.
 * (b) When the committee on special education of a local school
district determines that a child who is receiving foster care is at risk
of a future placement in a residential school, the committee, with the
consent of the parent or person in parental relation or the student, if
he or she is over the age of eighteen, shall notify the social services
district responsible for the child of its determination that the child
is at risk of placement.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2027
 * (b) When the committee on special education of a local school
district determines that a child who is receiving foster care is at risk
of a future placement in a residential school, the committee shall
notify the social services district responsible for the child of its
determination that the child is at risk of placement.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2027
 * (c) The committee on special education, with the consent of the
parent or person in parental relation or the student, if he or she is
over the age of eighteen, shall request in writing a designee of the
appropriate county or state agency to participate, in accordance with
guidelines established by the department, in any proceeding of the
committee where a child is at risk of residential placement. The
committee shall forward a copy of any such request to the office for
people with developmental disabilities and the office of mental health.
A designee or designees of the agency may participate in any such
proceeding for the purpose of making recommendations concerning the
appropriateness of residential placement and other programs and
placement alternatives, including, but not limited to, community support
services that may be available to the family. Such designee or designees
shall not be considered members of the committee. Such designee or
designees shall include, but not be limited to, representatives of any
agency receiving coordinated children's services initiative funding as
referenced in the aid to localities budget, of a local interagency
coordinating body, of the social services district, the local mental
health agency, or health department, or of the developmental
disabilities service office, as appropriate. The name of such designee
or designees, if any, shall be made available to each committee on
special education in the county. In addition, with the consent of the
parent or other person in parental relation, the committee may confer
with other appropriate providers of services to identify any services
that may be of benefit to the family based on the family's
identification of or the committee's observation of family services
needs. As used in this chapter, the term "county" means county as
defined in section four thousand one of this title, and the term
"appropriate agency" means one of the following agencies:
 (i) a local interagency body capable of performing a multidisciplinary
assessment of the family's community support services needs; or
 (ii) if no such agency exists in the locality, any county agency which
is receiving state coordinated children's services initiative funding as
referenced in the aid to localities budget; or
 (iii) where neither such agency exists in the locality, either the
area developmental disabilities services office, where the primary
reason the child is at risk of placement relates to a developmental
disability, or the local mental health agency, where the primary reason
the child is at risk of placement relates to any other mental
disability.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2027
 * (c) The committee on special education shall request in writing a
designee of the appropriate county or state agency to participate, in
accordance with guidelines established by the department, in any
proceeding of the committee where a child is at risk of residential
placement. The committee shall forward a copy of any such request to the
office for people with developmental disabilities and the office of
mental health. A designee or designees of the agency may participate in
any such proceeding for the purpose of making recommendations concerning
the appropriateness of residential placement and other programs and
placement alternatives, including, but not limited to, community support
services that may be available to the family. Such designee or designees
shall not be considered members of the committee. Such designee or
designees shall include, but not be limited to, representatives of any
agency receiving coordinated children's services initiative funding as
referenced in the aid to localities budget, of a local interagency
coordinating body, of the social services district, the local mental
health agency, or health department, or of the developmental
disabilities service office, as appropriate. The name of such designee
or designees, if any, shall be made available to each committee on
special education in the county. In addition, with the consent of the
parent or other person in parental relationship, the committee may
confer with other appropriate providers of services to identify any
services that may be of benefit to the family based on the family's
identification of or the committee's observation of family services
needs. As used in this chapter, the term "county" means county as
defined in section four thousand one of this title, and the term
"appropriate agency" means one of the following agencies:
 (i) a local interagency body capable of performing a multidisciplinary
assessment of the family's community support services needs; or
 (ii) if no such agency exists in the locality, any county agency which
is receiving state coordinated children's services initiative funding as
referenced in the aid to localities budget; or
 (iii) where neither such agency exists in the locality, either the
area developmental disabilities services office, where the primary
reason the child is at risk of placement relates to a developmental
disability, or the local mental health agency, where the primary reason
the child is at risk of placement relates to any other mental
disability.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2027
 (d) Nothing in this subparagraph shall be construed to establish an
entitlement to or constitute a determination of eligibility for any such
assessment or services, or to require the school district to pay the
costs of such assessment or services or to require that such services be
reflected in the plan of educational services and programs recommended
or approved for the child, or to limit educational services to be made
available to the child or to justify the denial, reduction, or delay of
such services to the child. No cause of action for damages shall arise
in favor of any person by reason of any failure to comply with the
provisions of this section except upon a showing of gross negligence or
willful misconduct.
 (e) Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of law, residential
schools are authorized to provide temporary care for persons over age
twenty-one who are receiving transitional care as described in section
7.37-a or 13.37-a of the mental hygiene law, or on whose behalf
temporary payments are being made pursuant to sections 7.38 or 13.38 of
the mental hygiene law, where such persons were in the care of the
residential school at the time of their twenty-first birthday and such
persons have remained continuously in the care of the residential school
since their twenty-first birthday.
 (f) Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of law, in any case
where an individual receiving transitional care is about to be
transferred from a residential school to an adult placement, a transfer
plan shall be prepared by the sending facility and forwarded to the
receiving facility, the individual and, unless the individual objects,
the parents, guardian or other family members prior to the transfer. The
transfer plan shall include any information necessary to facilitate a
safe transfer, such as specific problems, a schedule for administering
medications and behavior unique to the individual.
 (5) The committee on special education or, in the case of a state
operated school, the multidisciplinary team shall not later than the
annual review prior to the eighteenth birthday of a student with a
disability who is placed in a residential program by the committee or
multidisciplinary team, or a student with a disability who is placed in
a day program but the committee or multidisciplinary team has determined
that the student is likely to require adult residential services, with
the consent of the parents, notify and invite a representative of the
office of mental health, office for people with developmental
disabilities, or the state education department, as appropriate, to
participate in the committee on special education meeting for the
development of a recommendation for adult services pursuant to section
7.37 or 13.37 of the mental hygiene law, section three hundred
ninety-eight-c of the social services law or section forty-four hundred
three of this article. The committee or multidisciplinary team shall
give the parent or guardian of the child, the opportunity to consent in
writing to the release of relevant information to such other public
agency or agencies, upon request of such agency or agencies, for
purposes of determining appropriateness of an adult program for such
student.
 (a) For the purposes of this subparagraph "relevant information" shall
be defined as that information in the possession of and used by the
committee or the multidisciplinary team to ascertain the physical,
mental, emotional and cultural-educational factors which contribute to
the student's disability, including but not limited to: (i) results of
physical and psychological examinations performed by private and school
district physicians and psychologists; (ii) relevant information
presented by the parent, guardian and teacher; (iii) school data which
bear on the student's progress including the student's most recent
individualized education program; (iv) results of the most recent
examinations and evaluations performed pursuant to clause (d) of
subparagraph three of this paragraph; and (v) results of other suitable
evaluations and examinations possessed by the committee or
multidisciplinary team. Nothing in this subparagraph shall be construed
to require any committee or multidisciplinary team to perform any
examination or evaluation not otherwise required by law.
 (b) Upon consent obtained pursuant to this subparagraph, the committee
or multidisciplinary team shall forward the student's name and other
relevant information in a report to the appropriate public agency as
determined by the committee or multidisciplinary team, based upon the
student's disability and physical, mental, emotional and social needs.
The committee shall forward additional and updated relevant information
to the appropriate public agency upon the request for such information
by such agency, with the consent of the parents, or the student, if such
student is eighteen years or older.
 (c) When the committee or multidisciplinary team is notified by the
public agency which received the report that such state agency is not
responsible for determining and recommending adult services for the
child, the committee or multidisciplinary team shall forward the report
to another public agency; or, if the committee or multidisciplinary team
determines that there exists a dispute as to which state agency has the
responsibility for determining and recommending adult services, the
committee or multidisciplinary team may forward the report to the
council on children and families for a resolution of such dispute.
 (6) The committee on special education shall provide a copy of the
handbook for parents of children with disabilities established under
subdivision eight of section four thousand four hundred three of this
article or a locally approved booklet for parents of children with
disabilities to the parents or person in parental relationship to a
child as soon as practicable after such child has been referred for
evaluation to the committee on special education.
 2. a. The board of education or trustees of each school district shall
be required to furnish suitable educational opportunities for students
with disabilities by one of the special services or programs listed in
subdivision two of section forty-four hundred one of this article. The
need of the individual child shall determine which of such services
shall be rendered. Each district shall provide to the maximum extent
appropriate such services in a manner which enables students with
disabilities to participate in regular education services when
appropriate. Such services or programs shall be furnished between the
months of September and June of each year, except that for the nineteen
hundred eighty-seven--eighty-eight school year and thereafter, with
respect to the students whose disabilities are severe enough to exhibit
the need for a structured learning environment of twelve months duration
to maintain developmental levels, the board of education or trustees of
each school district upon the recommendation of the committee on special
education shall also provide, either directly or by contract, for the
provision of special services and programs as defined in section
forty-four hundred one of this article during the months of July and
August as contained in the individualized education program for each
eligible student, and with prior approval by the commissioner if
required; provided that a student with a disability who is eligible for
services, including services during the months of July and August,
pursuant to section forty-four hundred ten of this article shall not be
eligible to receive services pursuant to this paragraph during the
months of July and August.
 b. (1) Provided, however, that in each school district the board of
education or trustees of such district are hereby authorized and
empowered to contract for such special services or programs as such
board shall deem reasonable and appropriate for such children with
disabilities after consideration of the recommendations of the local
committee on special education and the hearing officer if a hearing is
held pursuant to section forty-four hundred four of this chapter and,
where specified in subparagraph two of this paragraph, with the approval
of the commissioner after a finding by him that no appropriate special
services or programs specified in paragraphs a through d and k of
subdivision two of section forty-four hundred one are available.
 (2) The board shall select the most reasonable and appropriate special
service or program for such children from those programs specified in
paragraphs a, b, c, e, f, g, h, i, k, l and m of subdivision two of
section forty-four hundred one of this article upon receipt of the
recommendation of the committee on special education. All contracts with
schools pursuant to the provisions of paragraphs d, e, f, g, h, l and m
of subdivision two of section forty-four hundred one of this article
shall be subject to the approval of the commissioner. All contracts
under paragraph c of subdivision two of section forty-four hundred one
shall be made in accordance with the provisions of subdivision four of
section nineteen hundred fifty of this chapter. No child shall be placed
in a residential school nor shall a board recommend placement in a
residential facility specified in paragraph j of subdivision two of
section forty-four hundred one unless there is no appropriate
nonresidential school available consistent with the needs of the child.
The board shall provide written notice of its determination to the
parent or legal guardian of such child. If the determination of the
board of education is not consistent with the recommendations of the
committee on special education, such notice shall include the statement
of the reasons for such determination which shall identify the factors
considered by the committee on special education in its evaluation.
 (3) If the board cannot secure an appropriate special service within
the state or non-residential program to meet the needs of the child, it
shall notify the commissioner.
 c. Nothing in this section shall be deemed or construed to prohibit a
committee on special education from recommending a special service or
program specified in paragraph d of subdivision two of section
forty-four hundred one of this chapter or to diminish the power of the
commissioner to make appointments pursuant to such paragraph.
 * d. 1. Notwithstanding any provision of law, rule or regulation to
the contrary, the board of education or trustees of a school district,
except a city school district in a city with a population of one million
or more inhabitants may, upon written notice to the commissioner in
compliance with subparagraph two of this paragraph and parental
notification, for the remainder of the school year exceed the standards
established in regulation for special education class sizes for middle
and secondary school students as defined by the commissioner for
purposes of this section by no more than a twenty percent increase above
such standards, provided that the district is in compliance with such
standards at the start of classes in September of the school year, and
further provided that a city school district in a city with a population
of one hundred twenty-five thousand or more and less than one million
inhabitants shall have the option of either increasing maximum class
sizes in any school year pursuant to this section or establishing class
sizes for special classes for certain students with disabilities in
accordance with the provisions of subdivision six of this section.
 2. The notice shall be on a form prescribed by the commissioner, and
shall sufficiently demonstrate educational justification and consistency
with continuing an appropriate education for all children affected. The
commissioner may revoke or preempt any increase in class size upon a
finding that increasing class size as proposed would fail to be
consistent with appropriate special education.
 * NB Repealed July 1, 2026
 3. Each school district shall make available a register of public or
private agencies and other professional resources within the county from
which a parent or person in parental relationship may obtain an
independent evaluation of the child.
 4. a. The board of education or the board of trustees of each school
district shall provide suitable transportation to and from special
classes or programs, with the exception of residential facilities for
the care and treatment of children with disabilities under the
jurisdiction of an agency of the state other than the state department
of education, as specified in subdivisions two and four of section
forty-four hundred one of this article.
 b. Such board may permit any adult, willing to serve without
compensation, to act as an attendant for such children.
 c. Such board shall be empowered to contract for transportation
services provided pursuant to this subdivision with any municipality,
Board of Cooperative Educational Services, public authority or private
contractor meeting the school bus provisions outlined in section
thirty-six hundred twenty-three of this chapter and the standards and
specifications relating thereto.
 d. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, such board shall
provide suitable transportation up to a distance of fifty miles to and
from a nonpublic school which a child with a disability attends if such
child has been so identified by the local committee on special education
and such child attends such school for the purpose of receiving services
or programs similar to special educational programs recommended for such
child by the local committee on special education.
 5. Notwithstanding any provisions of this article to the contrary or
the provisions of section thirty-two hundred two of this chapter, a
child with a disability who reaches the age of twenty-one during (a) the
period commencing with the first day of July and ending on the
thirty-first day of August shall if otherwise eligible, be entitled to
continue in a July and August program until the thirty-first day of
August or until the termination of the summer program, whichever shall
first occur; or (b) the period commencing on the first day of September
and ending on the thirtieth day of June shall be entitled to continue in
such program until the thirtieth day of June or until the termination of
the school year, whichever shall first occur.
 6. Notwithstanding any other law, rule or regulation to the contrary,
the board of education of a city school district with a population of
one hundred twenty-five thousand or more inhabitants shall be permitted
to establish maximum class sizes for special classes for certain
students with disabilities in accordance with the provisions of this
subdivision. For the purpose of obtaining relief from any adverse fiscal
impact from under-utilization of special education resources due to low
student attendance in special education classes at the middle and
secondary level as determined by the commissioner, such boards of
education shall, during the school years nineteen hundred
ninety-five--ninety-six through June thirtieth, two thousand twenty-six,
be authorized to increase class sizes in special classes containing
students with disabilities whose age ranges are equivalent to those of
students in middle and secondary schools as defined by the commissioner
for purposes of this section by up to but not to exceed one and two
tenths times the applicable maximum class size specified in regulations
of the commissioner rounded up to the nearest whole number, provided
that in a city school district having a population of one million or
more, classes that have a maximum class size of fifteen may be increased
by no more than one student and provided that the projected average
class size shall not exceed the maximum specified in the applicable
regulation, provided that such authorization shall terminate on June
thirtieth, two thousand. Such authorization shall be granted upon filing
of a notice by such a board of education with the commissioner stating
the board's intention to increase such class sizes and a certification
that the board will conduct a study of attendance problems at the
secondary level and will implement a corrective action plan to increase
the rate of attendance of students in such classes to at least the rate
for students attending regular education classes in secondary schools of
the district. Such corrective action plan shall be submitted for
approval by the commissioner by a date during the school year in which
such board increases class sizes as provided pursuant to this
subdivision to be prescribed by the commissioner. Upon at least thirty
days notice to the board of education, after conclusion of the school
year in which such board increases class sizes as provided pursuant to
this subdivision, the commissioner shall be authorized to terminate such
authorization upon a finding that the board has failed to develop or
implement an approved corrective action plan.
 7. a. The board of education or trustees of each school district and
the board of trustees of each charter school shall adopt a policy to
ensure that each regular education teacher, special education teacher,
related service provider, and other service provider who is responsible
for the implementation of a student's individualized education program
shall be given a copy of such student's individualized education program
prior to the implementation of such program or shall be able to access
such student's individualized education program electronically;
provided, however, if the policy provides that the student's
individualized education program is to be accessed electronically, then
such policy shall also ensure that the individuals responsible for the
implementation of a student's individualized education program shall be
notified and trained on how to access such individualized education
programs electronically.
 b. Such policy shall require that any copy of a student's
individualized education program provided pursuant to this subdivision
shall remain confidential and shall not be redisclosed to any other
person, in compliance with federal and state laws and regulations,
including the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act and the Family
Educational Rights and Privacy Act.
 c. Such policy shall require the chair of the committee on special
education to designate a professional employee of the school district
with knowledge of the student's disability and education program to,
prior to the implementation of the individualized education program,
inform each teacher, assistant and support staff person of his or her
responsibility relating to the implementation of the individualized
education program and the specific accommodations, modifications, and
supports that must be provided for the student in accordance with the
individualized education program.
 8. Upon their child's enrollment or attendance in a public school,
such school shall notify every parent or person in parental relation of
their rights regarding referral and evaluation of their child for the
purposes of special education services or programs pursuant to
applicable federal and state laws. Such notification may be provided by
directing parents or persons in parental relation to obtain information
located on the department's website relating to a parent's guide to
special education in New York state for children ages three through
twenty-one provided the notification shall also contain the name and
contact information for the chairperson of the school district's
committee on special education or other individual who is charged with
processing referrals to the committee in the district.
 9. The board of education or trustees of each school district shall
develop a procedure to notify the parent or person in parental relation
of a student with a disability on the same day a physical or mechanical
restraint is applied on such student or such student is placed in a time
out room. When the student's parent or person in parental relation
cannot be contacted after reasonable attempts are made, the principal
shall record and report such attempts to the committee on special
education.
 § 4403. Duties of education department. The state education department
shall have power and it shall be its duty: 1. To maintain a statistical
summary of the number of children with disabilities who reside within
the state and the nature of their disabilities and to use all means and
measures necessary to adequately meet the physical and educational needs
of such children, as provided by law.
 2. To stimulate all private and public efforts designed to relieve,
care for or educate children with disabilities and to coordinate such
efforts with the work and function of governmental agencies.
 3. To formulate such rules and regulations pertaining to the physical
and educational needs of such children as the commissioner of education
shall deem to be in their best interests. In the city school district of
the city of New York in complying with any rules or regulations
promulgated under this section relating to maximum group size, other
than regulations prescribing the maximum class size in self-contained
special education classes, the commissioner shall allow school districts
a variance of up to fifty percent rounded up to the nearest whole number
from the maximum number of students as specified in regulation in an
instructional group in a resource room program, a related service group,
and the total number of students assigned to a resource room teacher.
 4. To periodically inspect, report on the adequacy of and make
recommendations concerning instructional programs or special services
for all children with disabilities who reside in or attend any state
operated or state financed social service facilities, youth facilities,
health facilities, mental health, and developmental disabilities
facilities or state correctional facilities.
 5. To require such financial information as may be necessary from and
to audit any public or non-public school receiving any public moneys
pursuant to any provision of the education law as the commissioner deems
appropriate.
 * 6. To provide for an advisory panel, appointed by the commissioner
composed of individuals involved in or concerned with the education of
children with disabilities, including individuals with disabilities,
teachers of children with disabilities, parents or persons in parental
relation of children or individuals with disabilities from birth to age
twenty-six, state and local educational officials, including officials
who carry out activities under subtitle B of title seven of the
McKinney-Vento homeless assistance act (section eleven thousand four
hundred thirty-one of title forty-two of the United States code, et
seq.), representatives of state or regional associations concerned with
the education of children with disabilities, representatives of
institutions of higher education that prepare special education teachers
or administrators and/or related services personnel, administrators of
programs for students with disabilities, a representative of the office
of children and family services with responsibility for foster care,
representatives of other state agencies involved in the financing or
delivery of related services to children with disabilities,
representatives of nonpublic schools and, upon establishment of such
schools, representatives of public charter schools, not less than one
representative of a vocational, community or business organization
concerned with the provision of transition services to students with
disabilities, and representatives of state juvenile and adult
corrections agencies, to advise the governor, legislature and
commissioner of unmet needs within the state in the education of
children with disabilities, in developing procedures for evaluation of
the special education system and the reporting of data as required by
federal law, in developing corrective action plans to address findings
identified in federal monitoring reports, in developing and implementing
policies relating to coordination of services, and on the education of
students with disabilities who have been convicted as adults and
incarcerated in adult prisons and to comment publicly on any rules or
regulations proposed for issuance by the commissioner regarding the
education of children with disabilities and the procedures for
distribution of funds under this article. A majority of the members of
the advisory panel shall be individuals with disabilities or parents of
children with disabilities. Such panel members shall serve without
compensation except that such members shall be entitled to reimbursement
for actual and necessary expenses incurred in such service.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2027
 * 6. To provide for an advisory panel, appointed by the commissioner
composed of individuals involved in or concerned with the education of
children with disabilities, including individuals with disabilities,
teachers of children with disabilities, parents or persons in parental
relationship of children with disabilities, state and local educational
officials, representatives of state or regional associations concerned
with the education of children with disabilities, representatives of
institutions of higher education that prepare special education teachers
or administrators and/or related services personnel, administrators of
programs for students with disabilities, representatives of other state
agencies involved in the financing or delivery of related services to
children with disabilities, representatives of nonpublic schools and,
upon establishment of such schools, representatives of public charter
schools, at least one representative of a vocational, community or
business organization concerned with the provision of transition
services to students with disabilities, and representatives of state
juvenile and adult corrections agencies, to advise the governor,
legislature and commissioner of unmet needs within the state in the
education of children with disabilities, in developing procedures for
evaluation of the special education system and the reporting of data as
required by federal law, in developing corrective action plans to
address findings identified in federal monitoring reports, in developing
and implementing policies relating to coordination of services, and on
the education of students with disabilities who have been convicted as
adults and incarcerated in adult prisons and to comment publicly on any
rules or regulations proposed for issuance by the commissioner regarding
the education of children with disabilities and the procedures for
distribution of funds under this article. A majority of the members of
the advisory panel shall be individuals with disabilities or parents of
children with disabilities. Such panel members shall serve without
compensation except that such members shall be entitled to reimbursement
for actual and necessary expenses incurred in such service.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2027
 7. To define, no later than July first, nineteen hundred
seventy-seven, in a report to the legislature and the governor, specific
criteria for determining whether a particular disorder or condition may
be considered a specific learning disability and to describe in such
report diagnostic procedures which can be used in determining whether a
particular child has such a disorder or condition, and to recommend in
such report, in consultation with the division of the budget, a cost
effective program proposal and finance recommendations.
 8. To develop and distribute a handbook for parents of children with
disabilities and the members of committees and subcommittees on special
education, which handbook shall explain, in layman terms, the financial
and educational obligations of the state, the county or city, the home
school district, the committee on special education, and the parent or
legal guardian of a child with disabilities, the special services or
programs available pursuant to this article, and the legal procedures
available to an aggrieved parent or legal guardian of a child with
disabilities.
 9. To make provision by regulation of the commissioner to assure the
confidentiality of any personally identifiable data, information, and
records collected or maintained by the state department of education or
any school district, including a committee or subcommittee on special
education, and the officers, employees or members thereof, pursuant to
or in furtherance of the purposes of this article, and shall establish
procedures upon which any such personally identifiable data,
information, or records may be disclosed.
 10. a. The commissioner shall determine whether a child, whose report
is submitted to the department pursuant to clause (b) or (d) of
subparagraph five of paragraph b of subdivision one of section
forty-four hundred two of this article or subdivision thirteen of
section three hundred ninety-eight of the social services law, will
likely need adult services and, if such need will likely exist, develop
a recommendation of all appropriate adult programs operated or approved
by the department which may be available. If necessary and appropriate,
the commissioner may conduct an evaluation of the child to determine if
adult services will be needed. Such recommendation of all programs shall
be made available to the parent or guardian of such child as soon as
practicable but no later than six months before such child attains the
age of twenty-one.
 b. If the commissioner determines, pursuant to paragraph a of this
subdivision, that such child will not require adult services, the
commissioner shall notify the child's parent or guardian in writing of
such determination. Such notice shall be given as soon as practicable
but no later than six months before the child attains the age of
twenty-one.
 c. Notwithstanding paragraphs a and b of this subdivision, the
commissioner may determine that the education department is not
responsible for determining and recommending adult services for such
child. When such a determination is made it shall be made as soon as
practicable after receiving the report and the commissioner shall
promptly notify in writing the committee on special education,
multidisciplinary team or social services official who sent the report
that such determination has been made. Such notice shall state the
reasons for the determination and may recommend a state agency which may
be responsible for determining and recommending adult services.
 d. Nothing in this subdivision shall be construed to create an
entitlement to adult services.
 e. A designee of the commissioner may carry out the functions of the
commissioner described in this subdivision.
 11. To promulgate regulations concerning standards for the protection
of children in residential care from reportable incidents in accordance
with this section and article eleven of the social services law,
including procedures for:
 (a) consistent with appropriate collective bargaining agreements and
applicable provisions of the civil service law, the review and
evaluation of the backgrounds of and the information supplied by any
person applying to be an employee, a volunteer or consultant, which
shall include but not be limited to the following requirements: that the
applicant set forth his or her employment history, provide personal and
employment references, and relevant experiential and educational
qualifications and, sign a sworn statement indicating whether the
applicant, to the best of his or her knowledge has ever been convicted
of a crime in this state or any other jurisdiction;
 (b) establishing, for employees, relevant minimal experiential and
educational qualifications, consistent with appropriate collective
bargaining agreements and applicable provisions of the civil service
law;
 (c) assuring adequate and appropriate supervision of employees,
volunteers and consultants;
 (d) demonstrating by a residential facility or program that
appropriate action is taken to assure the safety of the child who is
alleged to have been subjected to a reportable incident in a report to
the vulnerable persons' central register in accordance with section four
hundred ninety-two of the social services law as well as other children
in care, immediately upon notification that such a report of an
allegation of a reportable incident has been made with respect to a
child in such residential facility or program;
 (e) removing a child when it is determined that there is risk to such
child if he or she continues to remain within a residential facility or
program; and
 (f) appropriate preventive and remedial action to be taken including
legal actions, consistent with appropriate collective bargaining
agreements and applicable provisions of the civil service law.
 Such standards shall also establish as a priority requirements that:
 (A) subject to amounts appropriated therefor, administrators,
employees, volunteers and consultants receive training in at least the
following: child abuse prevention and identification, safety and
security procedures, the principles of child development, the
characteristics of children in care, and techniques of group and child
management including crisis intervention, the laws, regulations and
procedures governing the protection of children from reportable
incidents, and other appropriate topics, provided however, that the
department may exempt administrators and consultants from such
requirements upon demonstration of substantially equivalent knowledge or
experience; and
 (B) subject to the amounts appropriated therefor, children receive
instruction, consistent with their age, needs and circumstances as well
as the needs and circumstances within the program, in techniques and
procedures which will enable such children to advocate for and protect
themselves from reportable incidents.
 The department shall take all reasonable and necessary actions to
assure that employees, volunteers and consultants in residential
facilities and programs are kept apprised on a current basis of all
department policies and procedures relating to the protection of
children from reportable incidents and shall monitor and supervise the
provision of training to such administrators, employees, volunteers,
children and consultants. Regulations and standards developed pursuant
to this subdivision shall, to the extent possible, be consistent with
those promulgated by other state agencies for such purposes.
 (g) consistent with applicable collective bargaining agreements,
assuring that an individual who has committed a category one offense, as
defined in paragraph (a) of subdivision four of section four hundred
ninety-three of the social services law, that is included on the
vulnerable persons' central register is not hired or otherwise used in
any position in which such individual would have regular and substantial
contact with a service recipient in any program described in paragraph
(e) of subdivision four of section four hundred eighty-eight of the
social services law.
 12. To provide for the development and implementation of a plan of
prevention and remediation with respect to a substantiated report of
abuse or neglect. Such action shall include: (a) within ten days of
receipt of such a substantiated report, development and implementation
of a plan of prevention and remediation to be taken with respect to a
custodian or the residential facility in order to assure the continued
health and safety of children and to provide for the prevention of
future acts constituting reportable incidents; and (b) development and
implementation of a plan of prevention and remediation, in the event an
investigation of an allegation of abuse or neglect determines that a
preponderance of the evidence of such allegation exists and such
substantiated allegation may be attributed in whole or in part to
noncompliance by the residential facility or program with provisions of
this chapter or regulations of the department applicable to the
operation of such residential facility or program. Any plan of
prevention and remediation required to be developed pursuant to this
subdivision by a facility supervised by the department shall be
submitted to and approved by the department in accordance with time
limits established by regulations of the department. Implementation of
the plan shall be monitored by the department. In reviewing the
continued qualifications of a residential facility or program for an
operating certificate, the department shall evaluate such facility's
compliance with plans of prevention and remediation developed and
implemented pursuant to this subdivision.
 13. To provide technical assistance to school districts for
appropriate evaluation and assessment.
 14. To provide technical assistance to school districts to assist in
the adaptation of curriculum for the instruction of children with
disabilities.
 15. To provide technical assistance to school districts to assist in
developing criteria for placement in special education and criteria for
reviewing the ability of a pupil to participate in regular education.
 16. Commencing with the nineteen hundred eighty-seven--eighty-eight
school year, to provide for instruction during the months of July and
August of students with disabilities who have received state
appointments pursuant to article eighty-five, eighty-seven or
eighty-eight of this chapter and whose disabilities, in the judgment of
the commissioner, are severe enough to exhibit the need for a structured
learning environment of twelve months duration to maintain developmental
levels, by making such appointments for twelve months; provided that the
initial term of appointment of a student with a disability who is the
minimum age eligible for such a state appointment shall not commence
during the months of July or August.
 18. To establish guidelines for determining when a child is at risk of
a future placement in a residential school, and for the provision by
committees on special education of information to parents and other
persons in parental relationship concerning the availability of
community support services to meet the needs of the family. The
guidelines shall be developed by the department after consultation with
the office of mental health, the office for people with developmental
disabilities, the office of alcoholism and substance abuse services, the
department of health, the department of social services and the division
for youth.
 * 19. To adopt regulations prescribing the state complaint procedures
pursuant to sections 300.151 through 300.153 of title thirty-four of the
code of federal regulations, where an individual or organization files a
written complaint alleging that a public agency has violated part B of
the individuals with disabilities education act. Such regulations shall
include, but not be limited to, remedies for denial of appropriate
services, including, as appropriate, the awarding of monetary
reimbursement, compensatory services or other corrective action
appropriate to the needs of the child.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2027
 * 20. To adopt regulations prescribing the state complaint procedures
pursuant to sections 300.660 through 300.662 of title thirty-four of the
code of federal regulations, where an individual or organization files a
written complaint alleging that a public agency has violated part B of
the individuals with disabilities education act. Such regulations shall
include, but not be limited to, remedies for denial of appropriate
services, including, as appropriate, the awarding of monetary
reimbursement or other corrective action appropriate to the needs of the
child.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2027
 21. (a) To require special act school districts listed in chapter five
hundred sixty-six of the laws of nineteen hundred sixty-seven, as
amended, to provide, on an annual basis or more frequently, as needed,
enrollment reports, including current and projected enrollments,
proposed budgets and any financial information the commissioner deems
appropriate, which shall include, but not be limited to, outstanding
revenue anticipation notes as defined in paragraph (a) of subdivision
one of section fifty-five of the state finance law, balance owed to
employee benefit systems, outstanding bonds, lease costs, and any other
debts to monitor the fiscal stability of special act school districts.
 (b) Upon receiving the information identified in paragraph (a) of this
subdivision, the department shall determine if any special act district
is in need of financial guidance and assistance upon a comprehensive
review of such information provided. Upon a determination that a special
act district is in need of financial guidance and assistance, the
department shall, as soon as practicable, provide the district with
specific recommendations to improve the special act district's financial
standing in the short and long-term.
 § 4404. Appeal procedures for children with disabilities. * 1. a. If
the parent or person in parental relation of a student, the board of
education or trustees of a school district or a state agency responsible
for providing education to students with disabilities presents a
complaint with respect to any matter relating to the identification,
evaluation or educational placement of the student or the provision of a
free appropriate public education to the student or a manifestation
determination or other matter relating to placement upon discipline of a
student with a disability that may be the subject of an impartial
hearing pursuant to subsection (k) of section fourteen hundred fifteen
of title twenty of the United States code and the implementing federal
regulations, and the party presenting the complaint or their attorney
provides a due process complaint notice in accordance with federal law
and regulations and such complaint sets forth an alleged violation that
occurred not more than two years before the date the parent or public
agency knew or should have known about the alleged action that forms the
basis for the complaint, the board or agency shall appoint an impartial
hearing officer to review the due process complaint notice when
challenged and, if the matter is not resolved in a resolution session
that has been convened as required by federal law, to preside over an
impartial due process hearing and make a determination within such
period of time as the commissioner by regulation shall determine,
provided that the board of education or trustees shall offer the parent
or person in parental relation the option of mediation pursuant to
section forty-four hundred four-a of this article as an alternative to
an impartial hearing. Where the parent or person in parental relation or
a school district or public agency presents a complaint, the school
district or public agency responsible for appointing the impartial
hearing officer shall provide the parent or person in parental relation
with a procedural safeguards notice as required pursuant to subsection
(d) of section fourteen hundred fifteen of title twenty of the United
States code and the implementing federal regulations. Notwithstanding
any provision of this subdivision to the contrary, the time limitation
on presenting a complaint shall not apply to a parent or person in
parental relation to the student if the parent or person in parental
relation was prevented from requesting the impartial hearing due to
specific misrepresentations by the school district or other public
agency that it had resolved the problem forming the basis of the
complaint or due to the school district's or other public agency's
withholding of information from the parent or person in parental
relation that was required under federal law to be provided. Nothing in
this subdivision shall be construed to authorize the board of education
or trustees to bring an impartial hearing to override the refusal of a
parent or person in parental relation to consent where a local
educational agency is prohibited by federal law from initiating such a
hearing.
 b. If a resolution session resolves the complaint, the parties shall
execute a legally binding agreement that is signed by both the parent or
person in parental relation and a representative of the school district
or public agency who has the authority to bind such district or agency
and shall be enforceable in any state court of competent jurisdiction or
a United States district court. A party may void such agreement within
three business days of the agreement's execution.
 c. Individuals so appointed by a board of education or a state agency
shall be selected from a list of available impartial hearing officers
who have successfully completed an impartial hearing officer training
program conducted by the department according to a rotation selection
process prescribed in regulations of the commissioner; except that a
city school district of a city having a population of more than one
million inhabitants shall be exempt from such regulations to the extent
it maintains its rotational selection process in effect prior to July
first, nineteen hundred ninety-three. A record of proceedings before the
impartial hearing officer shall be maintained and made available to the
parties, and the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the
regulations of the commissioner. The board of education or trustees of
the school district or the state agency responsible for providing
education to students with disabilities shall have the burden of proof,
including the burden of persuasion and burden of production, in any such
impartial hearing, except that a parent or person in parental relation
seeking tuition reimbursement for a unilateral parental placement shall
have the burden of persuasion and burden of production on the
appropriateness of such placement. The decision of the impartial hearing
officer shall be binding upon both parties unless appealed to the state
review officer. The commissioner shall establish a department training
program which shall be completed to the satisfaction of the commissioner
as a condition of certification. Impartial hearing officers shall have
the qualifications specified in subsection (f) of section fourteen
hundred fifteen of title twenty of the United States code, the
implementing federal regulations and the regulations of the
commissioner. The commissioner shall promulgate regulations to ensure
that no individual employed by a school district, school or program
serving students with disabilities placed by a school district committee
on special education acts as an impartial hearing officer and that no
individual employed by such schools or programs serves as an impartial
hearing officer for two years following the termination of such
employment. The commissioner shall promulgate regulations establishing
procedures for the suspension or revocation of impartial hearing officer
certification for good cause. The commissioner shall establish maximum
rates for the compensation of impartial hearing officers subject to the
approval of the director of the division of the budget.
 d. The commissioner shall promulgate regulations establishing
procedures and timelines for expedited hearings in cases involving: (1)
review of a decision that a student with a disability's behavior was not
a manifestation of such student's disability, or (2) review of an
interim alternative educational setting or other placement to the extent
required under federal law, or (3) a request by the school district for
a determination that maintaining the current educational placement of
the student is substantially likely to result in injury to the student
or to others.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2027
 * 1. If the recommendation of the committee on special education is
not acceptable to the parent or person in parental relationship of a
student, or if the committee or board of education or trustees fails to
make or effectuate such a recommendation within such periods of time as
may be required by regulations of the commissioner, such parents or
persons in parental relationship shall notify the board of education of
this situation and the board shall appoint an impartial hearing officer
to hear the appeal and make a determination within such period of time
as the commissioner by regulation shall determine, provided that the
board of education or trustees shall offer the parent or person in
parental relationship the option of mediation pursuant to section
forty-four hundred four-a of this article as an alternative to an
impartial hearing. Individuals so appointed by a board of education
shall be selected from a list of available hearing officers who have
successfully completed a hearing officer training program conducted by
the department according to a rotation selection process prescribed in
regulations of the commissioner; except that a city school district of a
city having a population of more than one million inhabitants shall be
exempt from such regulations to the extent it maintains its rotational
selection process in effect prior to July first, nineteen hundred
ninety-three. A record of proceedings before the hearing officer shall
be maintained and made available to the parties. The board of education
or trustees of the school district or the state agency responsible for
providing education to students with disabilities shall have the burden
of proof, including the burden of persuasion and burden of production,
in any such impartial hearing, except that a parent or person in
parental relation seeking tuition reimbursement for a unilateral
parental placement shall have the burden of persuasion and burden of
production on the appropriateness of such placement. The decision of the
hearing officer shall be binding upon both parties unless appealed to
the state review officer. The commissioner shall establish a department
training program which shall be completed to the satisfaction of the
commissioner as a condition of certification. The commissioner shall
develop and implement a plan to ensure that no individual employed by a
school district, school or program serving students with disabilities
placed by a school district committee on special education acts as an
impartial hearing officer and that no individual employed by such
schools or programs serves as an impartial hearing officer for two years
following the termination of such employment. Such plan shall be fully
implemented no later than July first, nineteen hundred ninety-six. The
commissioner shall promulgate regulations establishing procedures for
the suspension or revocation of impartial hearing officer certification
for good cause. The commissioner shall establish maximum rates for the
compensation of impartial hearing officers subject to the approval of
the director of the division of the budget. The commissioner shall
promulgate regulations establishing procedures and timelines for
expedited hearings in cases involving: (a) review of a decision that a
student with a disability's behavior was not a manifestation of such
student's disability, or (b) review of an interim alternative
educational setting or other placement to the extent required under
federal law, or (c) a request by the school district for a determination
that maintaining the current educational placement of the student is
substantially likely to result in injury to the student or to others.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2027
 1-a. If the parent or person in parental relation of a student files a
due process complaint notice seeking an impartial due process hearing
with respect to the evaluation, educational placement, provision of a
free appropriate public education to the student or in accordance with
section thirty-six hundred two-c of this chapter and an impartial
hearing officer is not appointed within one hundred ninety-six days
after filing such due process complaint notice with the local school
district, in accordance with regulations promulgated pursuant to this
section by the commissioner, an impartial hearing officer may then be
immediately appointed to issue an order based upon a proposed order of
relief submitted by the parent or person in parental relation of the
student identifying appropriate and individualized programs and services
for the student. School districts subject to this subdivision shall
annually report, on a form prescribed by the commissioner, on the number
of complaints that seek this relief, the relief sought, and the
resolution of such complaints to the governor, the commissioner, the
temporary president of the senate, the speaker of the assembly, the
chair of the senate education committee, the chair of the senate city of
New York education committee and the chair of the assembly education
committee.
 2. Review by state review officer. A state review officer of the
education department shall review and may modify, in such cases and to
the extent that the review officer deems necessary, in order to properly
effectuate the purposes of this article, any determination of the
impartial hearing officer relating to the determination of the nature of
a child's disability, selection of an appropriate special education
program or service and the failure to provide such program and require
such board to comply with the provisions of such modification. The
commissioner shall adopt regulations governing the practice and
procedure in such appeals to the state review officer; provided,
however, that in no event shall any fee or charge whatsoever be imposed
for any appeal taken pursuant to this subdivision. The state review
officer is empowered to make all orders which are proper or necessary to
give effect to the decision of the review officer.
 3. Review of the determination of a state review officer regarding
children with disabilities.
 * a. Any final determination or order of a state review officer
rendered pursuant to subdivision two of this section may only be
reviewed in a proceeding brought in the supreme court pursuant to
article four of the civil practice law and rules, and paragraph b of
this subdivision, or in United States district court. Any such
proceeding shall be commenced within four months after the determination
to be reviewed becomes final and binding on the parties.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2027
 * a. Any final determination or order of a state review officer
rendered pursuant to subdivision two of this section may only be
reviewed in a proceeding brought in the supreme court pursuant to
article four of the civil practice law and rules, and paragraph b of
this subdivision, or in United States district court.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2027
 * b. In any such proceeding under article four of the civil practice
law and rules, the court may grant any relief authorized by the
provisions of rule four hundred eleven of such law and rules, which
shall include any relief available in a civil action under section six
hundred fifteen of the individuals with disabilities education act (20
U.S.C. section 1415) and also may, in its discretion remand the
proceedings to the state review officer for further consideration upon a
finding that any relevant and material evidence is then available which
was not previously considered by the state review officer. Such
proceeding shall be deemed a proceeding against a body or officer for
purposes of section five hundred six of the civil practice law and
rules. The court shall receive the records of the administrative
proceedings, shall hear additional evidence at the request of a party,
and basing its decision on the preponderance of the evidence, shall
grant the relief that the court determines to be appropriate.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2027
 * b. In any such proceeding under article four of the civil practice
law and rules, the court may grant any relief authorized by the
provisions of rule four hundred eleven of such law and rules, which
shall include any relief available in a civil action under section six
hundred fifteen of the individuals with disabilities education act (20
U.S.C. section 1415) and also may, in its discretion remand the
proceedings to the state review officer for further consideration upon a
finding that any relevant and material evidence is then available which
was not previously considered by the state review officer. Such
proceeding shall be deemed a proceeding against a body or officer for
purposes of sections two hundred seventeen and five hundred six of the
civil practice law and rules. The court shall receive the records of the
administrative proceedings, shall hear additional evidence at the
request of a party, and basing its decision on the preponderance of the
evidence, shall grant the relief that the court determines to be
appropriate.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2027
 4. a. During the pendency of any proceedings conducted pursuant to
this section, other than a proceeding subject to paragraph b of this
subdivision, and during the initial identification, evaluation and
placement procedure pursuant to this section and during the initial
identification, evaluation and placement procedure pursuant to section
forty-four hundred two of this article, unless the local school district
and the parents or persons in parental relationship otherwise agree, the
student shall remain in the then current educational placement of such
student, or, if applying for initial admission to a public school, shall
be placed in the public school program until all such proceedings have
been completed.
 * b. For students with disabilities placed in an interim alternative
educational setting pursuant to clause (iv) or (vii) of subparagraph
three of paragraph g of subdivision three of section thirty-two hundred
fourteen of this chapter, during the pendency of proceedings conducted
pursuant to this section in which the parents or persons in parental
relation challenge the interim alternative educational setting or a
manifestation determination, the student shall remain in the interim
alternative educational setting pending the decision of the impartial
hearing officer or until expiration of the time period of the student's
placement in an interim alternative educational setting, whichever comes
first, unless the local school district and the parents or persons in
parental relation otherwise agree. After the expiration of such
placement in an interim alternative educational setting, if the school
district proposes to change the student's placement, during the pendency
of any proceedings to challenge the proposed change in placement, the
student shall return to and remain in the current educational placement,
which shall be the student's placement prior to the interim alternative
educational setting, unless the local school district and the parents or
persons in parental relation otherwise agree or unless as a result of a
decision by an impartial hearing officer in an expedited hearing, the
interim alternative educational setting is extended for a period not to
exceed forty-five school days based on a determination that maintaining
the current educational placement of the student is substantially likely
to result in injury to the student or to others. Such procedure for
extension of an interim alternative educational setting may be repeated
as necessary.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2027
 * b. For students with disabilities placed in an interim alternative
educational setting pursuant to clause (iv) or (vii) of subparagraph
three of paragraph g of subdivision three of section thirty-two hundred
fourteen of this chapter, during the pendency of proceedings conducted
pursuant to this section in which the parents or persons in parental
relationship challenge the interim alternative educational setting or a
manifestation determination, the student shall remain in the interim
alternative educational setting pending the decision of the hearing
officer or until expiration of the time period of the student's interim
alternative placement, whichever comes first, unless the local school
district and the parents or persons in parental relationship otherwise
agree. After the expiration of such interim alternative educational
placement, if the school district proposes to change the student's
placement, during the pendency of any proceedings to challenge the
proposed change in placement, the student shall return to and remain in
the current educational placement, which shall be the student's
placement prior to the interim alternative educational setting, unless
the local school district and the parents or persons in parental
relationship otherwise agree or unless as a result of a decision by an
impartial hearing officer in an expedited hearing, the interim
alternative educational setting is extended or another appropriate
placement is ordered for a period not to exceed forty-five days based on
a determination that maintaining the current educational placement of
the student is substantially likely to result in injury to the student
or to others. Such procedure for extension of an interim alternative
educational setting may be repeated as necessary.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2027
 5. For purposes of this section, to the extent required by federal
law, a student presumed to have a disability for discipline purposes
shall be deemed to be a student with a disability and the parents or
persons in parental relationship of a student presumed to have a
disability for discipline purposes shall be afforded the procedural
rights of the parents or persons in parental relationship of a student
with a disability. Nothing in this section shall be construed to confer
upon a student presumed to have a disability for disciplinary purposes
greater procedural rights than such student would have under the
provisions of section six hundred fifteen of the individuals with
disabilities education act.
 § 4404-a. Mediation program for students with disabilities. * 1. The
commissioner, in consultation with the office of court administration,
shall establish a special education mediation program. For all school
districts and state agencies responsible for the provision of special
education, mediation of disputes regarding the provision of a free,
appropriate public education, including matters arising prior to the
filing of a complaint pursuant to subdivision one of section forty-four
hundred four of this article, shall be conducted by mediators furnished
by a community dispute resolution center under article twenty-one-A of
the judiciary law.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2027
 * 1. The commissioner, in consultation with the office of court
administration, shall establish a special education mediation program.
In all school districts, mediation of disputes regarding the provision
of a free, appropriate public education shall be conducted by mediators
furnished by a community dispute resolution center under article
twenty-one-A of the judiciary law.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2027
 2. The board of education or trustees of each school district shall
inform parents or persons in parental relationship of students with
disabilities of the availability of the mediation program to resolve
complaints regarding the education of a student with a disability at the
same time notice of the availability of the impartial hearing procedures
is provided to such parents or persons in parental relationship.
 3. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the
commissioner, in consultation with the office of court administration,
shall assure that a list of qualified mediators who are knowledgeable in
the laws and regulations relating to the provision of special education
and related services is maintained. For purposes of this section, if not
selected through a rotational selection process, mediators shall be
selected by mutual agreement of both parties to the mediation.
 * 4. A school district may establish procedures to offer parents or
persons in parental relation and schools that elect not to use the
mediation process the opportunity to meet, at a time and place
convenient to such parents or persons in parental relation, with a
disinterested party who is under contract with a community dispute
resolution center, to encourage the use of the mediation process by such
parents and explain its benefits.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2027
 * 4. A school district may establish procedures to require parents or
persons in parental relationship who elect not to use the mediation
process to meet, at a time and place convenient to such parents or
persons in parental relationship, with a disinterested party who is
under contract with a community dispute resolution center, to encourage
the use of the mediation process by such parents and explain its
benefits.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2027
 * 5. Each session in the mediation process shall be scheduled in a
timely manner, and shall be held in a location that is convenient to the
parties to the dispute. An agreement reached by the parties to the
dispute in the mediation process shall be set forth in a written
mediation agreement. Such agreement shall be a legally binding agreement
that sets forth the resolution of the dispute and: (i) states that all
discussions that occurred during the mediation process shall be
confidential and may not be used as evidence in any subsequent due
process hearing or civil action or proceeding; (ii) is signed by both
the parent or person in parental relation and a representative of the
school district or agency who has the authority to bind such school
district or agency; and (iii) is enforceable in any state court of
competent jurisdiction or in a United States district court. The
committee on special education or committee on preschool special
education shall immediately amend the student's individualized education
program to be consistent with such mediation agreement. Discussions that
occur in the mediation process shall be confidential, and may not be
used as evidence in any subsequent proceedings pursuant to section
forty-four hundred four of this article or in any subsequent civil
actions or proceedings.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2027
 * 5. Each session in the mediation process shall be scheduled in a
timely manner, and shall be held in a location that is convenient to the
parties to the dispute. An agreement reached by the parties to the
dispute in the mediation process shall be set forth in a written
mediation agreement. The committee on special education or committee on
preschool special education shall immediately amend the student's
individualized education program to be consistent with such mediation
agreement. Discussions that occur in the mediation process shall be
confidential, and may not be used as evidence in any subsequent
proceedings pursuant to section forty-four hundred four of this article
or in any subsequent civil actions or proceedings. The parties to the
mediation process may be required to sign a confidentiality pledge prior
to the commencement of the process.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2027
 6. The provisions of this section shall not operate to diminish, deny,
delay, or limit any rights provided for by this article or any other
provisions of law, including the right of a parent or person in parental
relationship to request an impartial hearing.
 7. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit a parent or
person in parental relationship from requesting an impartial hearing,
pursuant to the provisions of section forty-four hundred four of this
article without utilizing the procedures set forth in this section. No
such person shall be deemed to have failed to exhaust administrative
remedies by requesting such an impartial hearing in the absence of or
prior to mediation, as provided for by this section.
 § 4405. Computing financial responsibility for special educational
services for certain children with disabilities. 1. Maintenance for
children with disabilities in residential schools under the provisions
of this article or state schools under the provisions of articles
eighty-seven and eighty-eight of this chapter.
 a. Maintenance for a student with a disability placed in a residential
school under the provisions of this article shall be a charge upon the
social services district wherein such child resides at the time of the
commencement of the school year for which aid is to be paid. Financial
responsibility for the maintenance of a student with a disability placed
in a state school under the provisions of articles eighty-seven and
eighty-eight of this chapter shall be in accordance with the provisions
of such articles.
 c. Expenditures made by a social services district for the maintenance
of a child with a disability placed in a residential school under the
provisions of this article, including a child with a disability placed
by a school district committee on special education pursuant to this
article in a special act school district, or a state school subject to
the provisions of articles eighty-seven and eighty-eight of this
chapter, shall be subject to reimbursement by the child's school
district of residence pursuant to the provisions of subdivision ten of
section one hundred fifty-three of the social services law. The amount
of such reimbursement shall be a charge upon such school district of
residence.
 2. Transportation expense. The transportation expense of each child
with a disability shall be aidable in accordance with subdivision seven
of section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter; provided, however,
that for the school year commencing July first, nineteen hundred
seventy-six, school districts shall be apportioned ninety per centum of
the estimated amount of its approved costs of such year for the
transportation of children with disabilities whose transportation was
formerly provided under a family court order and is now a charge upon
the school district, subject to the adjustment of any errors after the
actual costs are ascertained.
 3. Computing state financial responsibility for operating expenses for
certain children with disabilities.
 a. In addition to any other apportionments under the provisions of
this chapter, there shall be apportioned to each applicable school
district for each child with a disability in attendance in a state
school under the provisions of paragraph d of subdivision two of section
forty-four hundred one of this article or an approved program under the
provisions of paragraphs e, f, g, h, i and l of such subdivision two,
the product of such attendance, computed in accordance with regulations
of the commissioner, and the excess cost aid: an amount computed by
multiplying the excess cost, as defined in subdivision six of section
forty-four hundred one of this article by the excess cost aid ratio
defined in subdivision seven of this section.
 b. In addition to the apportionment provided to a school district
pursuant to paragraph a of this subdivision for the attendance of a
child with a disability in a state school under the provisions of
paragraph d of subdivision two of section forty-four hundred one of this
article, for each such child in attendance in such school prior to July
first, nineteen hundred ninety, there shall be apportioned an additional
amount. Such amount shall equal the product of the taper aidable cost
multiplied by the taper aid ratio. The taper aidable cost shall equal
the positive remainder resulting when (i) the apportionment attributable
to such child pursuant to paragraph a of this subdivision is subtracted
from (ii) the product of such child's attendance and the tuition for the
state school such child attends. The taper aid ratio shall equal the
quotient, computed to three decimals without rounding, resulting when
the positive remainder of one minus the combined wealth ratio, as
defined in subdivision three of section thirty-six hundred two of this
chapter is divided by seventy-five one-hundredths. Such aid ratio shall
not be less than zero nor more than one.
 c. The apportionments to each school district pursuant to this
subdivision shall be based on excess cost paid and attendance during the
base year.
 d. Notwithstanding sections thirty-six hundred seven and thirty-six
hundred nine-a of this chapter, apportionments pursuant to this
subdivision shall be paid to school districts upon submission of reports
of attendance and approved tuition expenditures filed in a format
prescribed by the commissioner and shall be paid from the annual
apportionment of public moneys for the support of public schools in
accordance with section thirty-six hundred nine-b of this chapter.
 4. a. The commissioner of education and the commissioner of social
services shall develop reimbursement methodologies for the tuition and
maintenance components of approved private schools and special act
school districts. The commissioner of education, in consultation with
the appropriate state agencies and departments, shall have
responsibility for developing a reimbursement methodology for tuition
which shall be based upon appropriate educational standards promulgated
pursuant to regulations of the commissioner of education. The
commissioner of social services, in consultation with appropriate state
agencies and departments, shall have responsibility for developing a
reimbursement methodology for maintenance, pursuant to section three
hundred ninety-eight-a of the social services law and the regulations
promulgated thereunder.
 b. The commissioner of education shall develop reimbursement
methodologies for the tuition components and, in consultation with the
commissioner of social services, the maintenance components of the New
York state school for the blind and the New York state school for the
deaf based upon appropriate standards promulgated pursuant to
regulations of the commissioner of education.
 c. The director of the budget, in consultation with the commissioner
of education, the commissioner of social services, and any other state
agency or other source the director may deem appropriate, shall approve
reimbursement methodologies for tuition and for maintenance. Any
modification in the approved reimbursement methodologies shall be
subject to the approval of the director of the budget. Notwithstanding
any other provision of law, rule or regulation to the contrary, tuition
rates established for the nineteen hundred ninety-five--ninety-six
school year shall exclude the two percent cost of living adjustment
authorized in rates established for the nineteen hundred
ninety-four--ninety-five school year.
 d. Effective upon final approval by the director of the budget of the
reimbursement methodologies for both tuition and maintenance, the
commissioner of education shall annually determine a tuition rate in
conformance with this paragraph for each private school and special act
school district.
 e. Effective upon final approval by the director of the budget of the
reimbursement methodologies for both tuition and maintenance, the
commissioner of social services shall annually determine a maintenance
rate and a medical services rate, in accordance with this paragraph, for
each private school and special act school district where applicable.
 f. Effective upon final approval by the director of the budget of the
reimbursement methodologies for both tuition and maintenance, the
commissioner of education shall annually determine a tuition rate and,
in consultation with the commissioner of social services, a maintenance
rate and a medical services rate, if applicable, in conformance with
this subdivision for the New York state school for the blind and the New
York state school for the deaf.
 g. All reimbursement rates determined pursuant to this subdivision
shall be effective for the period July first through June thirtieth.
Rates for the following year shall be submitted no later than April
fifteenth to the director of the budget. The director shall act upon
such rates within forty-five days of submission. Such rates shall not
become effective until approved by the director of the budget. In the
event that the rates are approved after July first, then such rates
shall be deemed to apply retroactively to such date.
 h. All reimbursements shall be subject to adjustment and final
determination upon field audit conducted by the education department,
the department of social services, the state comptroller or any agent
thereof.
 i. The commissioner of education, the commissioner of social services
and the director of the budget, in consultation with other appropriate
state agencies and departments, shall enter into an interagency
agreement to assure effective implementation of the provisions of this
paragraph. The agreement shall provide for, but not be limited to, the
development of common accounting practices and audit procedures, common
information and budget forms, coordinated financial and other reporting
requirements for private schools and special act school districts,
mechanisms for resolving appeals of rates established pursuant to this
section, and mechanisms to evaluate and recommend modification to
reimbursement methodologies.
 j. (i) If the board of education of a special act school district
listed in chapter five hundred sixty-six of the laws of nineteen hundred
sixty-seven, as amended, seeks to close a special act school district,
the board of education of the special act school district shall provide
written notice to the commissioner with a plan for closure of the school
at least ninety days prior to the closing date. Such plan shall include
provision for the safe and orderly transfer of each student with a
disability who was publicly placed in the program and a detailed and
itemized list of estimated expenses necessary to close down the school
and a detailed and itemized list of any estimated revenues to be
received.
 (ii) During the close-down period and until all necessary financial
obligations of the school district have been met pursuant to this
paragraph, the commissioner shall require the board of education of the
school district to periodically submit, as required by the commissioner,
financial reports and financial statements, detailing any tuition,
and/or close-down costs and any revenues generated. In applying the
reimbursement methodology to any remaining tuition costs and any other
reasonable and appropriate expenses needed to close-down the special act
school district, the commissioner shall reject any close-down costs that
are unnecessary or unreasonable to close-down the school, whether or not
the board of education submits a close-down plan.
 k. (i) The tuition methodology established pursuant to this
subdivision for the two thousand twenty-one--two thousand twenty-two
school year shall authorize approved private residential or
non-residential schools for the education of students with disabilities
that are located within the state, and special act school districts to
retain funds in excess of their allowable and reimbursable costs
incurred for services and programs provided to school-age students. The
amount of funds that may be annually retained shall not exceed one
percent of the school's or school district's total allowable and
reimbursable costs for services and programs provided to school-age
students for the school year from which the funds are to be retained;
provided that the total accumulated balance that may be retained shall
not exceed four percent of such total costs for such school year; and
provided further that such funds shall not be recoverable on
reconciliation of tuition rates, and shall be separate from and in
addition to any other authorization to retain surplus funds on
reconciliation.
 (ii) The tuition methodology established pursuant to this subdivision
for the two thousand twenty-two--two thousand twenty-three school year
and annually thereafter shall authorize approved providers to retain
funds in excess of their allowable and reimbursable costs incurred for
services and programs provided to school-age and preschool students. The
amount of funds that may be annually retained shall not exceed the
allowable surplus percentage of the approved provider's total allowable
and reimbursable costs for services and programs provided to school-age
and preschool students for the school year from which the funds are to
be retained, as defined in subparagraph (iii) of this paragraph;
provided that such funds shall not be recoverable on reconciliation of
tuition rates and provided further that any interest earned or
investments realized on such funds shall supplement and not supplant any
funds provided by the tuition methodology once retained. For purposes of
this subparagraph, "approved providers" shall mean private residential
or non-residential schools for the education of students with
disabilities that are located within the state, special act school
districts, and programs approved pursuant to section forty-four hundred
ten of this article that are subject to tuition rate reconciliation.
 (iii) The approved surplus percentage shall be as follows: eleven
percent for the two thousand twenty-two--two thousand twenty-three
through two thousand twenty-four--two thousand twenty-five school years,
eight percent for the two thousand twenty-five--two thousand twenty-six
school year, five percent for the two thousand twenty-six--two thousand
twenty-seven school year, and two percent for the two thousand
twenty-seven--two thousand twenty-eight school year and annually
thereafter.
 (iv) Funds authorized to be retained under this paragraph may be
expended only pursuant to an authorization of the governing board of the
school, school district or program approved pursuant to section
forty-four hundred ten of this article, for a purpose expressly
authorized as part of the approved tuition methodology for the year in
which the funds are to be expended, provided that funds may be expended
to pay prior year outstanding debts. Any school, school district, or
program approved pursuant to section forty-four hundred ten of this
article that retains funds pursuant to this paragraph shall be required
to annually report a statement of the total balance of any such retained
funds, the amount, if any, retained in the prior school year, the
amount, if any, dispersed in the prior school year, and any additional
information requested by the department as part of the financial reports
that are required to be annually submitted to the department.
 5. The commissioner shall annually determine the tuition rate and the
commissioner of social services shall annually determine the maintenance
rate for special services or programs provided during the months of July
and August for children with disabilities entitled to attend public
schools without the payment of tuition pursuant to section thirty-two
hundred two of this chapter. The commissioner of education shall
annually determine the tuition rate, maintenance rate and the medical
services rate, if applicable, for such children attending the New York
state school for the blind or the New York state school for the deaf
during the months of July and August. Such rates shall be determined in
conformance with the reimbursement methodologies established pursuant to
subdivision four of this section and shall be subject to the approval of
the division of the budget. Rates shall be determined for all special
services or programs as defined in section forty-four hundred one of
this chapter and offered during July and August.
 6. Tuition and maintenance rates established pursuant to this section,
once certified by the director of the budget, shall be used in all
contracts for the provision of programs and services for which such
rates were established, provided, however, that the commissioner shall
prorate the amount to be paid for an individual pupil enrolled for a
period of time which is less than the full period of time approved for
such program or services.
 § 4406. Procedures through the family court; cost of certain
educational services. 1. When the family court pursuant to section two
hundred thirty-six of the family court act shall issue an order to
provide for educational services, including transportation, tuition or
maintenance of such children with disabilities, the commissioner, if he
approves such order, shall issue a certificate to such effect in
duplicate, one of which shall be filed with the clerk of the board of
supervisors or other governing elective body of the county or chief
fiscal officer of the city of New York and one in the office of the
commissioner. Refusal of the commissioner to approve such order may be
reviewed only in accordance with the provisions of article seventy-eight
of the civil practice law and rules.
 2. One-half of the cost of providing such services, as provided in
subdivision one of this section, as certified by the commissioner, is
hereby made a charge against the county or the city of New York in which
any such child with disabilities resides, and the remaining one-half of
the cost thereof shall be paid by the state out of moneys appropriated
therefor. All claims for services rendered and for supplies furnished
and for other expenses incurred in providing such services, shall be
paid in the first instance by the board of supervisors or other
governing elective body of the county or chief fiscal officer of the
city of New York in which such child with disabilities resides, upon
vouchers presented and audited in the same manner as in the case of
other claims against the county or the city of New York.
 3. The legislature shall appropriate an amount sufficient to pay
one-half of the claims paid by a county or the city of New York for the
purposes and in the manner herein specified. The clerk of the board of
supervisors or other governing elective body of each county or chief
fiscal officer of the city of New York which has paid claims as provided
herein shall, not more than once in each month, transmit to the
commissioner of education a certified statement in the form prescribed
by him, stating the amount expended for the purposes specified herein,
the date of each expenditure, and the purpose for which it was made.
Upon the receipt of such certified statement the commissioner of
education shall examine the same, and if such expenditures were made as
required by law he shall approve it and transmit it to the comptroller
for audit. The comptroller shall thereupon issue his warrant in the
amount specified in such approved statement for the payment thereof out
of moneys appropriated therefor to the county treasurer of the county or
chief fiscal officer of the city of New York by which such payments were
made.
 4. The commissioner is hereby authorized after consultation with an
advisory task force to be appointed by the commissioner, appropriately
representative of consumers and providers of such services, to establish
program and expenditure guidelines and standards for the provision of
special services or programs as defined in section forty-four hundred
one of this article for children with disabilities who are under the age
of five and are not entitled to attend public schools without the
payment of tuition pursuant to section thirty-two hundred two of this
chapter.
 5. a. Each county and the city of New York may perform a fiscal audit
of such services or programs within their respective county or city
ordered by the family court pursuant to section two hundred thirty-six
of the family court act for preschool age children with disabilities.
 b. Payments made pursuant to this section by the county or the city of
New York shall, upon the conclusion of the July first to June thirtieth
school year for which such payment was made, be subject to audit against
the actual difference between such audited expenditures and revenues.
Any overpayments made shall be refunded to such county or city or such
county or city shall withhold the amount of such overpayment from any
other payments due to the claimant and shall report such overpayments to
the commissioner.
 6. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no
payments shall be made by the commissioner pursuant to this section on
or after July first, two thousand based on a claim for services
rendered, provided however, that no payment shall be barred or reduced
where such payment is required as a result of a court order or judgment
issued on or after July first, two thousand or a final audit.
 § 4407. Special provisions relating to instruction of certain children
with disabilities. 1. When it shall appear to the satisfaction of the
department that a child with a disability is not receiving instruction
because there are no appropriate public or private facilities for
instruction of such a child within this state because of the unusual
type of the disability or combination of disabilities as certified by
the commissioner, the school district of which each such pupil is a
resident is authorized to contract with an educational facility located
outside the state, which, in the judgment of the department, can meet
the needs of such child for instruction. Contracts, rates, payments and
reimbursements pursuant to this section shall be in accordance with
section forty-four hundred five of this article.
 2. The state education department shall maintain a register of such
educational facilities which are outside of the state which, after
inspection, it deems qualified to meet the needs of certain children for
instruction pursuant to subdivision one of this section.
 3. Notwithstanding the location of the educational facility, if a
child meets the eligibility requirements of subdivision one of this
section and has, prior to July first, nineteen hundred seventy-six
received support under this section of law by attending an educational
facility within the state, such child shall be allowed to continue such
attendance. The provisions of subdivision one of this section shall
apply to such child as though such child was in attendance at an
out-of-state educational facility.
 4. The school district of which such a child is a resident at the time
of admission to such an educational facility shall be required to
reimburse the state on account of any expenditure made by the state for
such child pursuant to subdivision one or three of this section. For the
school year commencing July first, nineteen hundred seventy-seven and
continuing through the nineteen hundred eighty-eight -- eighty-nine
school year, such reimbursement shall be an amount equal to the school
district basic contribution defined in subdivision eight of section
forty-four hundred one of this article. After the close of the school
year for which such reimbursement is due, the comptroller may deduct
from any state funds which become due to a school district an amount
equal to the reimbursement required to be made by such school district
in accordance with this subdivision, and the amount so deducted shall
not be included in the operating expense of such district for the
purposes of computing the apportionment for operating expense pursuant
to subdivision eleven of section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter.
 5. The commissioner shall prescribe the form for the contracts between
the school districts and the educational facilities which contracts
shall include a unified statewide payment schedule. For the nineteen
hundred eighty-nine--ninety school year, such contracts shall be deemed
to be in effect as of July first, nineteen hundred eighty-nine.
 § 4408. Payment for July and August programs for students with
disabilities. 1. State aid. The commissioner shall make payments for
approved July and August programs for students with disabilities in
accordance with this section in an amount equal to eighty percent of the
sum of the approved tuition and maintenance rates and the transportation
expense for the current year enrollment of students with disabilities
ages five through twenty-one or students eligible for services during
July and August pursuant to article eighty-five, eighty-seven or
eighty-eight of this chapter, where such costs are determined pursuant
to section forty-four hundred five of this article, provided that the
placement of such students was approved by the commissioner, if
required. Such programs shall operate for six weeks and shall be funded
for thirty days of service, provided, however, that the observance of
the legal holiday for Independence day may constitute a day of service.
Upon certification by the school district in which the student resides,
that such services were provided, such payment shall be made to the
provider of such services, in accordance with the provisions of
subdivision three of this section.
 2. Chargeback to a municipality. Ten percent of the approved cost of
July and August services provided pursuant to this section for each
student shall be a charge against the municipality in which the parent,
or person in parental relationship to such student, resided on July
first of the school year in which such services were provided. The
comptroller shall deduct from any state funds which become due to a
municipality an amount equal to such ten percent required in accordance
with this subdivision which amount shall be credited to the local
assistance account of the state education department as designated by
the division of the budget.
 3. Payment schedule. For aid payable in the two thousand six--two
thousand seven school year, moneys appropriated annually to the
department from the general fund - local assistance account under the
office of prekindergarten through grade twelve education program for
July and August programs for students with disabilities, shall be used
as follows: (i) for remaining base year and prior school years
obligations, (ii) for the purposes of subdivision four of this section
for schools operated under articles eighty-seven and eighty-eight of
this chapter, and (iii) notwithstanding any inconsistent provisions of
this chapter, for payments made pursuant to this section for current
school year obligations, provided, however, that such payments shall not
exceed seventy percent of the state aid due for the sum of the approved
tuition and maintenance rates and transportation expense provided for
herein; provided, however, that payment of eligible claims shall be
payable in the order that such claims have been approved for payment by
the commissioner, but in no case shall a single payee draw down more
than forty-five percent of the appropriation provided for the purposes
of this section, and provided further that no claim shall be set aside
for insufficiency of funds to make a complete payment, but shall be
eligible for a partial payment in one year and shall retain its priority
date status for appropriations provided for this section in future
years.
 4. Of the amount so appropriated to the department for the July and
August programs for schools operated under articles eighty-seven and
eighty-eight of this chapter, an amount shall be transferred to the
special revenue funds - other, Batavia school for the blind and Rome
school for the deaf accounts, pursuant to a plan to be developed by the
commissioner and approved by the director of the budget for students
with disabilities attending July and August programs pursuant to this
section at such schools pursuant to such articles. Such amount shall be
determined by the tuition and maintenance rates and the total number of
students with disabilities approved by the commissioner for placement
for the July and August program. The commissioner shall establish the
methodology for computation of such tuition and maintenance rates for
each school which shall take into account all pertinent expenditures
including administration, direct care staff, nondirect care staff and
other than personal service costs.
 5. State share. In accordance with the provisions of subparagraph four
of paragraph b of subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred nine-a
of this chapter for services provided during the two thousand eight--two
thousand nine and prior school years, any moneys due the school district
shall be reduced by an amount equal to fifty percent of any federal
participation, pursuant to title XIX of the social security act, in
special education programs provided pursuant to this section. For
services provided during the two thousand nine--two thousand ten school
year and thereafter, or for services provided in a prior school year
that were not reimbursed by the state on or before April first, two
thousand eleven, such state share shall be designated and transferred
pursuant to section thirty-six hundred nine-b of this chapter.
 6. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no
payments shall be made by the commissioner pursuant to this section on
or after July first, nineteen hundred ninety-six based on a claim
submitted later than three years after the end of the school year in
which services were rendered, provided however that no payment shall be
barred or reduced where such payment is required as a result of a court
order or judgment or a final audit.
 § 4410. Special education services and programs for preschool children
with disabilities. 1. Definitions. As used in this section:
 a. "Approved evaluator" means either:
 (1) a program approved by the commissioner pursuant to paragraph b of
subdivision nine of this section; or
 (2) a school district or group of appropriately licensed and/or
certified professionals associated with a public or private agency
approved by the commissioner pursuant to subdivision nine-a of this
section.
 b. "Approved program" means a program approved by the commissioner
pursuant to paragraph a of subdivision nine of this section.
 c. "Board" means:
 (i) a board of education as defined in section two of this chapter; or
 (ii) trustees of a common school district as defined in section
sixteen hundred one of this chapter.
 d. "City or county official" means the chief executive officer, or, in
any county which does not have a chief executive officer, the county
governing body, or the mayor of the city of New York.
 e. "Committee" means committee on preschool special education.
 f. "First eligible for services" means the earliest date on which a
child becomes age-eligible for services pursuant to this section, and as
defined in regulations of the commissioner in accordance with applicable
federal law and regulations, except that a child who is already
receiving services under section two hundred thirty-six of the family
court act or its successor may, if the parent so chooses, continue to be
eligible to receive such services through August thirty-first of the
calendar year in which the child first becomes age-eligible to receive
services pursuant to this section.
 g. "Municipality" means a county outside the city of New York or the
city of New York in the case of a county contained within the city of
New York.
 h. "Parent" means parent or person in parental relation.
 i. "Preschool child" means a child with a disability as defined in
section forty-four hundred one of this article who is first eligible for
services as defined in paragraph f of this subdivision but who will not
have become five years of age on or before December first of the school
year, or a later date if a board establishes such later date for
eligibility to attend school. A child shall be deemed a preschool child
through the month of August of the school year in which the child first
becomes eligible to attend school pursuant to section thirty-two hundred
two of this chapter.
 j. "Related services" means those services as defined in paragraph k
of subdivision two of section forty-four hundred one of this article
provided to a preschool child at a site determined by the board,
including but not limited to an approved or licensed prekindergarten or
head start program; the work site of the provider; the child's home; a
hospital; a state facility; or a child care location as defined in
paragraph a of subdivision eight of this section. If the board
determines that documented medical or special needs of the preschool
child indicate that the child should not be transported to another site,
the child shall be entitled to receive related services in the preschool
child's home.
 k. "Special education itinerant services" means an approved program
provided by a certified special education teacher on an itinerant basis
in accordance with the regulations of the commissioner, at a site
determined by the board, including but not limited to an approved or
licensed prekindergarten or head start program; the child's home; a
hospital; a state facility; or a child care location as defined in
paragraph a of subdivision eight of this section. If the board
determines that documented medical or special needs of the preschool
child indicate that the child should not be transported to another site,
the child shall be entitled to receive special education itinerant
services in the preschool child's home.
 2. Provision of services. The board of each school district shall be
responsible for the provision of special education services and programs
to preschool children in accordance with the provisions of subdivision
two of section four thousand four hundred one of this article, except as
otherwise limited by regulations of the commissioner; provided, however,
that prior to July first, nineteen hundred ninety-one, a board shall be
responsible for the provision of special education services and programs
to a preschool child only to the extent that there is an approved
program available for such preschool children.
 3. Committee on preschool special education. a. Each such board shall
establish one or more committees to conduct meetings to develop, review
and revise the individualized education program of a preschool child
with a disability.
 * (1) Such board shall ensure that such committee is composed of at
least the following members: (i) the parents of the preschool child;
(ii) a regular education teacher of such child, whenever the child is or
may be participating in a regular education environment; (iii) a special
education teacher of the child or, if appropriate, a special education
provider of the child; (iv) an appropriate professional employed by the
school district who is qualified to provide, or supervise the provision
of, special education, who is knowledgeable about the general curriculum
of the school district and the availability of preschool special
education programs and services and other resources in the school
district and the municipality, and who shall serve as chairperson of the
committee; (v) an additional parent of a child with a disability who
resides in the school district or a neighboring school district and
whose child is enrolled in a preschool or elementary level education
program, provided that such parent shall not be employed by or under
contract with the school district or municipality, and provided further
that such additional parent shall not be a required member unless the
parents, or a member of the committee on preschool special education,
request that such additional parent member participate in accordance
with this subparagraph; (vi) an individual who can interpret the
instructional implications of evaluation results, provided that such
individual may be the member appointed pursuant to clause (ii), (iii),
(iv) or (vii) of this subparagraph where such individuals are determined
by the school district to have the knowledge and expertise to do so;
(vii) such other persons having knowledge or expertise regarding the
child as the board or the parents shall designate, to the extent
required under federal law; and for a child in transition from programs
and services provided pursuant to applicable federal laws relating to
early intervention services, at the request of the parent or person in
parental relation to the child, the appropriate professional designated
by the agency that has been charged with the responsibility for the
preschool child pursuant to said applicable federal laws. In addition,
the chief executive officer of the municipality of the preschool child's
residence shall appoint an appropriately certified or licensed
professional to the committee. Attendance of the appointee of the
municipality shall not be required for a quorum. The additional parent
need not be in attendance at any meeting of the committee on preschool
special education unless specifically requested in writing, at least
seventy-two hours prior to such meeting, by the parents or other person
in parental relation to the student in question or a member of the
committee on preschool special education. The parents or persons in
parental relation of the student in question shall receive proper
written notice of their right to have an additional parent attend any
meeting of the committee regarding the student along with a statement,
prepared by the department, explaining the role of having the additional
parent attend the meeting.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2027
 * (1) Such board shall ensure that such committee is composed of at
least the following members: (i) the parents of the preschool child;
(ii) a regular education teacher of such child, whenever the child is or
may be participating in a regular education environment; (iii) a special
education teacher of the child or, if appropriate, a special education
provider of the child; (iv) an appropriate professional employed by the
school district who is qualified to provide, or supervise the provision
of, special education, who is knowledgeable about the general curriculum
of the school district and the availability of preschool special
education programs and services and other resources in the school
district and the municipality, and who shall serve as chairperson of the
committee; (v) an additional parent of a child with a disability who
resides in the school district or a neighboring school district and
whose child is enrolled in a preschool or elementary level education
program, provided that such parent shall not be employed by or under
contract with the school district or municipality, and provided further
that such additional parent shall not be a required member if the
parents request that such additional parent member not participate; (vi)
an individual who can interpret the instructional implications of
evaluation results, provided that such individual may be the member
appointed pursuant to clause (ii), (iii), (iv) or (vii) of this
subparagraph where such individuals are determined by the school
district to have the knowledge and expertise to do so; (vii) such other
persons having knowledge or expertise regarding the child as the board
or the parents shall designate, to the extent required under federal
law; and for a child in transition from programs and services provided
pursuant to applicable federal laws relating to early intervention
services, the appropriate professional designated by the agency that has
been charged with the responsibility for the preschool child pursuant to
said applicable federal laws. In addition, the chief executive officer
of the municipality of the preschool child's residence shall appoint an
appropriately certified or licensed professional to the committee.
Attendance of the appointee of the municipality shall not be required
for a quorum.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2027
 (2) At least five business days prior to a meeting of the committee on
preschool special education notice of such meeting shall be given to
each committee member, including the appointee of the municipality, and
the parent of the preschool child, in writing by first class mail,
postage prepaid, telefacsimile, or by personal service. The
appropriately licensed or certified professional designated by the
agency that has been charged with the responsibility for the preschool
child pursuant to applicable federal laws relating to early intervention
services shall attend all meetings of the committee conducted prior to
the child's initial receipt of services pursuant to this section. The
regular education teacher of the child shall participate in the
development, review and revision of an individualized education program
for the child to the extent required under federal law. A member of such
committee shall be considered as a member of a committee on special
education for the purposes of section thirty-eight hundred eleven of
this chapter.
 * (3) Notwithstanding any provision of law, rule or regulation to the
contrary, a member of the committee on preschool special education,
other than the parents or persons in parental relation to the student or
the appointee of the municipality, is not required to attend a meeting
of the team, in whole or in part, if the parent or person in parental
relation to the student and the school district agree, in writing, that
the attendance of the member is not necessary because the member's area
of the curriculum or related services is not being modified or discussed
at the meeting.
 * NB Repealed June 30, 2027
 * (4) Notwithstanding any provision of law, rule or regulation to the
contrary, a member of the committee on preschool special education,
other than the parents or persons in parental relation to the student or
the appointee of the municipality, may be excused from attending a
meeting of the committee, in whole or in part, when the meeting involves
a modification to or discussion of the member's area of the curriculum
or related services if the parent or person in parental relation to the
student and the school district consent, in writing, to the excusal and
the excused member submits to the parent or person in parental relation
to the student and such committee, written input into the development of
the individualized education program, and in particular written input
with respect to their area of curriculum or related services prior to
the meeting.
 * NB Repealed June 30, 2027
 * (5) Requests for excusal of a member of the committee on preschool
special education as provided for in subparagraphs three and four of
this paragraph, and the written input as provided for in subparagraph
four of this paragraph, shall be provided not less than five calendar
days prior to the meeting date, in order to afford the parent or person
in parental relation a reasonable time to review and consider the
request. Provided however, that a parent or person in parental relation
shall retain the right to request and/or agree with the school district
to excuse a member of the committee on preschool education at any time
including where the member is unable to attend the meeting because of an
emergency or unavoidable scheduling conflict and the school district
submits the written input for review and consideration by the parent or
person in parental relation within a reasonable time prior to the
meeting and prior to obtaining written consent of the parent or person
in parental relation to such excusal.
 * NB Repealed June 30, 2027
 * (6) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, rule or regulation
to the contrary, in making changes to a student's individualized
education program after the annual review has been conducted, the parent
or person in parental relation to the student and the school district
may agree not to convene a meeting of the committee on preschool special
education for the purpose of making those changes, and instead may
develop a written document to amend or modify the student's current
individualized education program under the following circumstances:
 (i) The parent or person in parental relation makes a request to the
school district for an amendment to the individualized education program
and the school district and such parent or person in parental relation
agree in writing; or
 (ii) The school district provides the parent or person in parental
relation with a written proposal to amend a provision or provisions of
the individualized education program that is conveyed in language
understandable to the parent or person in parental relation in such
parent's or such person's native language or other dominant mode of
communication, informs and allows the parent or person in parental
relation the opportunity to consult with the appropriate personnel or
related service providers concerning the proposed changes and the parent
or person in parental relation agrees in writing to such amendments.
 (iii) If the parent or person in parental relation agrees to amend the
individualized education program without a meeting, the parent or person
in parental relation shall be provided prior written notice of the
changes to the individualized education program resulting from such
written document and the committee on preschool special education shall
be notified of such changes. If the school district makes such changes
by rewriting the entire individualized education program, it shall
provide the parent or person in parental relation with a copy of the
rewritten individualized education program. If the school district
amends the individualized education program without rewriting the entire
document, the school district shall provide the parent or person in
parental relation with a copy of the document that amends or modifies
the individualized education program or, upon request of the parent or
person in parental relation, a revised copy of the individualized
education program with the amendments incorporated.
 Amendments to an individualized education program pursuant to this
clause shall not affect the requirement that the committee on preschool
special education review the individualized education program at the
annual meeting, or more often if necessary.
 * NB Repealed June 30, 2027
 b. Two or more boards may, subject to the approval of the
commissioner, establish a joint committee. Boards seeking to establish
such a joint committee shall apply to the commissioner for approval on a
form prescribed by the commissioner. Such application shall include, but
not be limited to, a plan for holding meetings in a manner and at a
location convenient for parents.
 c. A municipality with one or more boards located within the
municipality may coordinate the scheduling and location of meetings with
the prior consent of such board or boards and the approval of the
commissioner.
 d. The committee shall review, at least annually, the status of each
preschool child.
 e. In any meeting held to review or evaluate a preschool child, the
preschool child's parent shall be given the opportunity to attend and
participate in the meeting. The committee shall permit individuals
invited by the parent to be present. To the extent possible, any meeting
of the committee shall be held at a site mutually convenient to the
members of the committee and the parent of the preschool child,
including but not limited to the work site of the evaluator, the
municipal representative on the committee, or the chairperson of the
committee. In a city having a population of less than two hundred fifty
thousand but more than two hundred thousand and in a city having a
population of less than one hundred seventy-five thousand but more than
one hundred fifty thousand, the chairperson of the committee shall
determine the location of the meeting.
 f. After notification by a service coordinator, as defined in section
twenty-five hundred forty-one of the public health law, that a child
receiving services pursuant to title II-A of article twenty-five of the
public health law potentially will transition to receiving services
under this section and that a conference is to be convened to review the
child's program options and establish a transition plan, which
conference must occur at least ninety days before such child would be
eligible for services under this section, the chairperson of the
committee on preschool special education of the local school district or
his or her designee in which such child resides shall participate in the
conference.
 g. In any meeting of the committee held to review or reevaluate the
status of a preschool child, the professional who participated in the
evaluation shall, upon the request of the parent or committee, attend
and participate at such meeting.
 4. Evaluations. a. The board shall identify each preschool child
suspected of having a disability who resides within the district and,
upon referral to the committee shall, with the consent of the parent,
provide for an evaluation related to the suspected disability of the
child. The board shall make such identification in accordance with
regulations of the commissioner.
 b. Each board shall, within time limits established by the
commissioner, be responsible for providing the parent of a preschool
child suspected of having a disability with a list of approved
evaluators in the geographic area. The parent may select the evaluator
from such list. Each board shall provide for dissemination of the list
and other information to parents at appropriate sites including but not
limited to pre-kindergarten, day care, head start programs and early
childhood direction centers, pursuant to regulations of the
commissioner.
 c. The documentation of the evaluation shall include all assessment
reports and a summary report of the findings of the evaluation on a form
prescribed by the commissioner including a detailed statement of the
preschool child's individual needs. The summary report shall not make
reference to any specific provider of special services or programs. In
addition, with the consent of the parents, approved evaluators and
committees shall be provided with the most recent evaluation report for
a child in transition from programs and services provided pursuant to
title two-a of article twenty-five of the public health law. Nothing
shall prohibit an approved evaluator or the committee from reviewing
other assessments or evaluations to determine if such assessments or
evaluations fulfill the requirements of the regulations of the
commissioner. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provisions of this
section, the committee, in its discretion, may obtain an evaluation of
the child from another approved evaluator prior to making any
recommendation that would place a child in the approved program that
conducted the evaluation of the child. If the committee recommends
placing a child in an approved program that also conducted an evaluation
of such child it shall indicate in writing that such placement is an
appropriate one for the child. In addition, the committee shall provide
notice to the commissioner of such recommendation.
 d. The approved evaluator shall, following completion of the
evaluation, transmit the documentation of the evaluation to all members
of the committee and to a person designated by the municipality in which
the preschool child resides. Each municipality shall notify the approved
evaluators in the geographic area of the person so designated. The
summary report of the evaluation shall be transmitted in English and
when necessary, also in the dominant language or other mode of
communication of the parent; the documentation of the evaluation shall
be transmitted in English and, upon the request of the parent, also in
the dominant language or other mode of communication of the parent,
unless not clearly feasible to do so pursuant to regulations promulgated
by the commissioner. Costs of translating the summary report and
documentation of the evaluation shall be separately reimbursed. If,
based on the evaluation, the committee finds that a child has a
disability, the committee shall use the documentation of the evaluation
to develop an individualized education program for the preschool child.
Nothing herein shall prohibit an approved evaluator from at any time
providing the parent with a copy of the documentation of the evaluation
provided to the committee.
 e. Prior to the committee meeting at which eligibility will be
determined, the committee shall provide the parent with a copy of the
summary report of the findings of the evaluation, and shall provide the
parent with written notice of the opportunity to address the committee
in person or in writing. Upon timely request of the parent, the
committee shall, prior to meeting, provide a copy of all written
documentation to be considered by the committee; provided, however, that
such material shall be provided to the parent at any time upon request.
 f. If the parent disagrees with the evaluation, the parent may obtain
an additional evaluation at public expense to the extent authorized by
federal law or regulation.
 5. Determination of services. a. The committee shall review all
relevant information, including but not limited to:
 (i) information presented by the parent and the child's teacher or
teachers pertinent to each child suspected of having a disability;
 (ii) the results of all evaluations; and
 (iii) information provided by the appropriate licensed or certified
professional designated by the agency that is charged with the
responsibility for the child pursuant to applicable federal laws, if
any.
 b. (i) If the committee determines that the child has a disability,
the committee shall recommend approved appropriate services or special
programs and the frequency, duration and intensity of such services,
including but not limited to the appropriateness of single services or
half-day programs based on the individual needs of the preschool child.
The committee shall first consider the appropriateness of providing: (i)
related services only; (ii) special education itinerant services only;
(iii) related services in combination with special education itinerant
services; (iv) a half-day program, as defined in the regulations of the
commissioner; (v) a full day program; in meeting the child's needs. If
the committee determines that the child demonstrates the need for a
single related service, such service shall be provided as a related
service only or, where appropriate, as a special education itinerant
service. Prior to recommending the provision of special education
services in a setting which includes only preschool children with
disabilities, the committee shall first consider providing special
education services in a setting which includes age-appropriate peers
without disabilities. Provision of special education services in a
setting with no regular contact with such age-appropriate peers shall be
considered only when the nature or severity of the child's disability is
such that education in a less restrictive environment with the use of
supplementary aids and services cannot be achieved satisfactorily. The
committee's recommendation shall include a statement of the reasons why
less restrictive placements were not recommended. The committee may
recommend placement in a program that uses psychotropic drugs only if
the program has a written policy pertaining to such use and the parent
is given a copy of such written policy at the time such recommendation
is made.
 (ii) The committee shall recommend approved appropriate services or
special programs. The recommendation shall be based on the individual
needs of the preschool child. Appropriate services may include one or
more related services selected from a list maintained by a municipality
pursuant to paragraph c of subdivision nine of this section; provided,
however, that if the committee recommends one or more related services
from such list, or itinerant services, the committee shall request that
the parent identify the initial child care location arranged by the
parent, or other site, at which each such service will be provided.
 (iii) The reasons for such recommendation shall be in writing and
shall be furnished to the preschool child's parent, the municipality in
which the preschool child resides and the board. If the committee's
recommendation differs from an expressed preference of a parent with
respect to the frequency, duration or intensity of services, or with
respect to more or less restrictive settings, the committee shall
include in its statement the reasons why the committee recommended a
program or service other than that preferred by the parent. The
committee shall include in its recommendation any statement or
statements provided by the parent, which the board shall consider.
 (iv) The members of the committee or subcommittee may compile a list
of appropriate and/or helpful services that may be available outside of
the school setting to provide the parents or person in parental relation
of a child with a disability with such information. Such list shall
clearly state that these services are in addition to services supplied
by the school district and will not be paid for by the school district.
Any member of a committee or his or her respective school district who,
acting reasonably and in good faith, provides such information shall not
be liable for such action.
 c. After consideration of the recommendation of the committee and its
statement of reasons, including any statement or statements of a parent
setting forth an expressed preference, the board shall arrange for the
provision of the recommended special services or programs from among the
special services and programs approved for such purpose by the
commissioner. In the event the special service or program will be
provided in the child's home or another care setting for which the
parent has made or subsequently makes arrangements, no transportation
shall be indicated.
 d. If the board disagrees with the recommendation of the committee, it
shall set forth in writing a statement of its reasons and send the
recommendation back to the committee, a notice of which shall be
furnished to the preschool child's parent and the municipality in which
the preschool child resides. In the event a board refers the
recommendation back to the committee for reconsideration, the board
shall also notify the parent and the committee in writing of the need to
schedule a meeting to ensure timely placement. If the determination is
for two or more related services, where possible, the board shall select
from the list maintained by the municipality pursuant to paragraph c of
subdivision nine of this section such related service providers that are
employed by a single agency for the provision of such services. The
board shall provide each related service provider with a copy of the
individualized education program and the name and location of each
related service provider. The board shall designate one of the service
providers to coordinate the provision of the related services. If the
determination is for special education itinerant services and one or
more related services, the special education itinerant service provider
shall be responsible for the coordination of such services pursuant to
regulations of the commissioner.
 * e. A preschool child shall receive the services of a program
arranged for by the board commencing with the starting date for such
program, unless such services are recommended by the committee less than
thirty days prior to, or after, the starting date for such program, in
which case, such services shall be provided as soon as possible
following development of the individualized education program, but no
later than thirty days from the recommendation of the committee;
provided, however, that in no case shall a child receive services prior
to the date that such child is first eligible for services pursuant to
paragraph f of subdivision one of this section.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2027
 * e. A preschool child shall receive the services of a program
arranged for by the board commencing with the starting date for such
program, unless such services are recommended by the committee less than
thirty days prior to, or after, the starting date for such program, in
which case, such services shall be provided no later than thirty days
from the recommendation of the committee; provided, however, that in no
case shall a child receive services prior to the date that such child is
first eligible for services pursuant to paragraph f of subdivision one
of this section.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2027
 f. The board shall give written notice of the special services or
programs arranged for to the appropriate municipality, and to the
related service provider or the approved program selected to provide the
services. The municipality shall contract with the approved program in a
timely manner but in no event later than forty days from the receipt of
written notice of the determination of the board. If the municipality is
a city of one million or more persons, the municipality may delegate
contracting authority to the board. The contract shall include but not
be limited to any provisions required by the commissioner, shall adhere
to the rates established pursuant to subdivision ten of this section as
applicable and shall be in a form approved by the commissioner. After
receipt of notification from a municipality of actions taken pursuant to
this paragraph and subdivision eight of this section, the commissioner
shall issue a notice of authorization for reimbursement to the
municipality pursuant to the provisions of subdivisions ten and eleven
of this section. Provided further, any agreement for transportation
services pursuant to subdivision eight of this section shall be a
contract, separate and distinct from the contract for special services
or programs pursuant to this section, between the municipality and the
approved program which shall include but not be limited to any
provisions required by the commissioner on a form prescribed by the
commissioner.
 g. The board shall determine the appropriate municipality based on the
municipality within the school district in which the preschool child
resides at the time such board issues its written notice of
determination. The board shall terminate such determination if the board
arranges for the provision of a new service or program for such child or
if the preschool child moves out of the school district or moves to a
different municipality within the school district. If the board
terminates such determination for a preschool child because such child
moves to a different municipality within the school district, such board
shall issue a new written notice of determination for the same special
education service or program effective the next school day which shall
become the responsibility of the new municipality in which such child
resides. Pursuant to regulations promulgated by the commissioner, if the
preschool child moves to a school district that is within a reasonable
distance of the child's current approved placement such child may
continue in such placement if it is consistent with the individualized
needs of the child and the board of the new school district shall issue
a notice of determination to continue such placement, provided that
nothing shall preclude a parent from requesting and receiving from the
committee of the new school district a reevaluation of the continued
placement of such preschool child prior to the annual review
establishing the placement for the next school year.
 h. Such special services or programs shall be furnished between the
months of September and June of each year, except for those preschool
children whose disabilities are severe enough to exhibit the need for a
structured learning environment of twelve months duration to prevent
substantial regression. The committee shall include in its
recommendation for such services or programs a statement of the reasons
for such recommendation. The board, after consideration of the
recommendation of the committee, shall select an appropriate special
service or program for each preschool child eligible for such special
service or program during the months of July and August from among those
programs approved for such purpose by the commissioner. Nothing
contained herein shall be construed to prevent the committee from
recommending or the board from selecting a special service or program,
or the frequency or duration of a special service or program, which is
different in type or intensity than the service or program that the
child is furnished between the months of September and June.
 6. Professional practice issues. a. Notwithstanding any provisions of
law to the contrary, approved programs operated by private providers
shall be authorized to employ licensed professionals or contract with
licensed professionals or entities legally authorized to provide
professional services in accordance with section sixty-five hundred
three-b of this chapter.
 b. An approved program may be formed as an education corporation, or
with the consent of the commissioner as: (i) a not-for-profit
corporation; (ii) a business corporation that has the operation of an
approved program or another special education school as a primary
purpose; (iii) a limited liability company; (iv) a professional service
limited liability company or a foreign professional service limited
liability company in accordance with the applicable provisions of
article twelve or thirteen of the limited liability company law; (v) a
registered limited liability partnership or registered foreign limited
liability partnership in accordance with article eight-B of the
partnership law. In addition, a group of appropriately licensed or
certified professionals may be formed as a professional services
corporation established pursuant to article fifteen of the business
corporation law or as a professional service limited liability company,
foreign professional service limited liability company or registered
limited liability partnership or registered foreign limited liability
partnership in accordance with article eight-B of the partnership law.
An approved program formed as such a professional service limited
liability company or registered limited liability partnership may be
authorized to provide special education itinerant services or other
educational services not involving the practice of a profession under
title eight of this chapter, and, upon grant of a waiver pursuant to
section sixty-five hundred three-b of this chapter, may employ or
contract with individuals licensed or otherwise authorized to practice,
or with a professional service corporation, partnership or other entity
legally authorized to practice any profession under title eight of this
chapter in which the entity would not be authorized to provide
professional services under the applicable provisions of section twelve
hundred three or subdivision (a) of section thirteen hundred one of the
limited liability company law or sections 121-1500 or 121-1502 of the
partnership law, provided that such contract is within the scope of the
department's approval and is only for the purpose of conducting a
multi-disciplinary evaluation of a preschool child suspected of having a
disability or a preschool child with a disability or providing related
services specified in the individualized education program of a
preschool child with a disability.
 c. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the
exemption in subdivision two of section eighty-two hundred seven of this
chapter shall apply to persons employed by a center-based program
approved pursuant to subdivision nine of this section to perform the
duties of a speech-language pathologist, audiologist, teacher of the
speech and deaf and hard of hearing or teacher of the deaf to students
enrolled in such approved center-based program in the course of their
employment.
 * d. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the
exemption in subdivision one of section seventy-six hundred five of this
chapter shall apply to persons employed on a full-time or part-time
salary basis, which may include on an hourly, weekly, or monthly basis,
or on a fee for evaluation services basis provided that such person is
employed by and under the dominion and control of a center-based program
approved pursuant to subdivision nine of this section as a certified
school psychologist to provide activities, services and use of the title
psychologist to students enrolled in such approved center-based program;
and to certified school psychologists employed on a full-time or
part-time salary basis, which may include on an hourly, weekly, or
monthly basis, or on a fee for evaluation services basis provided that
the school psychologist is employed by and under the dominion and
control of a program that has been approved pursuant to paragraph b of
subdivision nine of this section, or subdivision nine-a of this section,
to conduct a multi-disciplinary evaluation of a preschool child having
or suspected of having a disability where authorized by paragraph a of
subdivision six of section sixty-five hundred three-b of this chapter,
in the course of their employment. Nothing in this section shall be
construed to authorize a certified school psychologist or group of such
school psychologists to engage in independent practice or practice
outside of an employment relationship.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2026
 * d. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the
exemption in subdivision one of section seventy-six hundred five of this
chapter shall apply to persons employed by a center-based program
approved pursuant to subdivision nine of this section as a school
psychologist to provide activities, services and use of the title
psychologist to students enrolled in such approved center-based program
in the course of their employment.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2026
 7. Appeals. * a. The parent may file a written request with the board
for an impartial hearing with respect to any matter relating to the
identification, evaluation or educational placement of, or provision of
a free appropriate public education to, the preschool child or a
manifestation determination or other matter relating to the preschool
child's placement upon discipline, provided, however, that mediation
shall be available to the parent in accordance with the procedures
specified in section forty-four hundred four-a of this article.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2027
 * a. If the determination of the board is not acceptable to the
parent, or if the committee or board fails to make or effectuate such a
recommendation within such periods of time as are required by
subdivision five of this section or by the regulations of the
commissioner, such parent may file a written request with the board for
an impartial hearing, provided, however, that mediation shall be
available to the parent in accordance with the procedures specified in
section forty-four hundred four-a of this article.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2027
 * b. Upon receipt of such request, the board shall provide for a
hearing to be conducted in accordance with the provisions of subdivision
one of section forty-four hundred four of this article. The impartial
hearing officer shall render a decision, and mail a copy of the decision
to the parents and to the board, not later than thirty calendar days
after the receipt by the board of a request for a hearing or after the
initiation of such a hearing by the board. The decision of the impartial
hearing officer shall be based solely upon the record of the proceeding
before the impartial hearing officer, and shall set forth the reasons
and the factual basis for the determination. The decision shall also
include a statement advising the parents and the board of the right to
obtain a review of such a decision by a state review officer. The board
may initiate a hearing to the extent provided in subdivision one of
section forty-four hundred four of this article.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2027
 * b. Upon receipt of such request, the board shall provide for a
hearing to be conducted in accordance with the provisions of subdivision
one of section forty-four hundred four of this article. The impartial
hearing officer shall render a decision, and mail a copy of the decision
to the parents and to the board, not later than thirty calendar days
after the receipt by the board of a request for a hearing or after the
initiation of such a hearing by the board. The decision of the impartial
hearing officer shall be based solely upon the record of the proceeding
before the impartial hearing officer, and shall set forth the reasons
and the factual basis for the determination. The decision shall also
include a statement advising the parents and the board of the right to
obtain a review of such a decision by a state review officer.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2027
 * c. During the pendency of an appeal pursuant to this subdivision,
unless the board and the parent otherwise agree:
 (i) a preschool child who has received services pursuant to
subdivision five of this section, shall remain in the current
educational placement; or
 (ii) a preschool child not previously served pursuant to this section
shall, if the parent agrees, receive services in the program designated
by the board pursuant to such subdivision five, which designation
resulted in such appeal.
 A preschool child who is transitioning from part C of the individuals
with disabilities education act and/or title two-A of article
twenty-five of the public health law and is no longer eligible for
services under part C and title two-A of article twenty-five of the
public health law by reason of age, the school district or other public
agency is not required to provide the services that the child had been
receiving under part C and such title two-A. If the child is found
eligible for special education programs and services pursuant to this
section, and the parent or person in parental relation consents to the
initial provision of services, then the school district or other public
agency shall provide those special education programs and services that
are not in dispute between the parent and the school district or other
public agency.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2027
 * c. During the pendency of an appeal pursuant to this subdivision,
unless the board and the parent otherwise agree:
 (i) a preschool child who has received services pursuant to
subdivision five of this section, shall remain in the current
educational placement; or
 (ii) a preschool child not previously served pursuant to this section
shall, if the parent agrees, receive services in the program designated
by the board pursuant to such subdivision five, which designation
resulted in such appeal; or
 (iii) a preschool child who received services pursuant to section two
hundred thirty-six of the family court act during the previous year may
receive, from the provider of such services, preschool special education
services in an approved program appropriate to the needs of such child.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2027
 d. A state review officer of the education department shall review the
decision of the impartial hearing officer in the manner prescribed in
subdivision two of section forty-four hundred four of this article and
render a decision no later than thirty days after the decision of such
hearing officer.
 e. Review of the final determination or order of the state review
officer may be brought in the manner prescribed in subdivision three of
section forty-four hundred four of this article.
 8. Transportation. The municipality in which a preschool child resides
shall, beginning with the first day of service, provide either directly
or by contract for suitable transportation, as determined by the board,
to and from special services or programs; provided, however, that if the
municipality is a city with a population of one million or more persons
the municipality may delegate the authority to provide such
transportation to the board; and provided further, that prior to
providing such transportation directly or contracting with another
entity to provide such transportation, such municipality or board shall
request and encourage the parents to transport their children at public
expense, where cost-effective, at a rate per mile or a public service
fare established by the municipality and approved by the commissioner.
Except as otherwise provided in this section, the parents' inability or
declination to transport their child shall in no way affect the
municipality's or board's responsibility to provide recommended
services. Such transportation shall be provided once daily from the
child care location to the special service or program and once daily
from the special service or program to the child care location up to
fifty miles from the child care location. If the board determines that a
child must receive special services and programs at a location greater
than fifty miles from the child care location, it shall request approval
of the commissioner. For the purposes of this subdivision, the term
"child care location" shall mean a child's home or a place where care
for less than twenty-four hours a day is provided on a regular basis and
includes, but is not limited to, a variety of child care services such
as day care centers, family day care homes and in-home care by persons
other than parents. All transportation of such children shall be
provided pursuant to the procedures set forth in section two hundred
thirty-six of the family court act using the date called for in the
written notice of determination of the board or the date of the written
notice of determination of the board, whichever comes later, in lieu of
the date the court order was issued. Notwithstanding this subdivision or
any provision of law to the contrary, transportation expenses incurred
by a municipality for operating and maintenance costs pursuant to this
subdivision during the period between the issuance of executive order
202.4 on March sixteenth, two thousand twenty and the issuance of
executive order 202.28 on May seventh, two thousand twenty shall be
reimbursable and considered approved costs in accordance with the
provisions of this section and the regulations of the commissioner.
 9. Program approval. a. Providers of special services or programs
shall apply to the commissioner for program approval on a form
prescribed by the commissioner; such application shall include, but not
be limited to, a listing of the services to be provided, the population
to be served, a plan for providing services in the least restrictive
environment and a description of its evaluation component, if any. The
commissioner shall approve programs in accordance with regulations
adopted for such purpose and shall periodically review such programs at
which time the commissioner shall provide the municipality in which the
program is located or for which the municipality bears fiscal
responsibility an opportunity for comment within thirty days of the
review. In collaboration with municipalities and representatives of
approved programs, the commissioner shall develop procedures for
conducting such reviews. Municipalities shall be allowed to participate
in such departmental review process. Such review shall be conducted by
individuals with appropriate experience as determined by the
commissioner and shall be conducted not more than once every three
years.
 (iii) Commencing July first, nineteen hundred ninety-six and
continuing through June thirtieth, two thousand three, a moratorium on
the approval of any new or expanded programs in settings which include
only preschool children with disabilities is established. Exceptions
shall be made for cases in which school districts document a critical
need for a new or expanded program in a setting which includes only
preschool children with disabilities, to meet the projected demand for
services for preschool children in the least restrictive environment.
Applications for new or expanded programs may be made directly to the
state education department. Nothing herein shall prohibit the
commissioner from approving the modification of a full-day program into
half-day sessions.
 Commencing July 1, 1999 the department shall only approve any new or
expanded programs in settings which include only preschool children with
disabilities, if the applicant can document a critical need for a new or
expanded program in a setting which includes only preschool children
with disabilities to meet the projected demand for services for
preschool children in the least restrictive environment. If the
department determines that approval will not be granted, it must notify
the applicant, in writing, of its reasons for not granting such
approval. The department shall establish guidelines, within 90 days of
the effective date of this section which shall state the criteria used
to determine if the applicant has demonstrated such a critical need. The
department is authorized to consult with the local school district to
verify any data submitted.
 On December 1, 2003 the commissioner shall submit a report to the
board of regents, the majority leader of the senate, the speaker of the
assembly and governor evaluating the impact of such moratorium on the
availability of preschool special education services. The report shall
include: (i) information regarding the number of applications for new
programs and program expansions and the disposition of those
applications by the commissioner; (ii) an assessment of the projected
need for additional classes serving only disabled children and those
serving disabled children with their non-disabled peers and in other
less restrictive settings; (iii) an assessment of the projected need for
additional programs due to program closings in the region, number of
children receiving early intervention services and existing waiting
lists; (iv) an assessment of the distance that children must be
transported to receive preschool special education services; (v) an
evaluation of the programmatic performance and cost-effectiveness of
existing programs; (vi) recommendations regarding ways in which improved
quality and cost-effectiveness could be achieved through the selective
expansion of effective programs and/or the curtailment of less effective
programs; and (vii) an assessment of the availability and effectiveness
of approved programs providing services to preschool children with
autism.
 b. As part of an application submitted pursuant to paragraph a of this
subdivision, a provider of special services or programs shall submit a
description of its multi-disciplinary evaluation component, if any,
which shall be subject to the approval of the commissioner in accordance
with regulations adopted for such purpose after consultation with the
appropriate advisory committee. Such components or program may rely in
part on formal written agreements or affiliations with appropriately
certified or licensed professionals, or agencies employing such
professionals, provided that such professionals or agencies perform
their responsibilities in conformance with regulations of the
commissioner and that providers fully disclose any such arrangements on
all applications for program approval, and provided further that the
provider certifies that it shall apply for and obtain a waiver pursuant
to section sixty-five hundred three-b of this chapter prior to providing
evaluation services pursuant to such written agreements or affiliations.
Nothing herein shall require a provider of special services or programs
to have a multidisciplinary evaluation program.
 c. Municipalities, or in the case of a city of one million or more
persons, the board, shall maintain a list of appropriately certified or
licensed professionals to deliver related services consistent with this
section and the regulations of the commissioner and shall determine
reasonable reimbursement for such services subject to the approval of
the commissioner. Such list shall also include reasonable reimbursement,
as determined by the municipality and approved by the commissioner and
the director of the budget, for the coordination of two or more related
services pursuant to paragraph d of subdivision five of this section.
 d. Providers may make application to conduct a program that relies on
formal written agreements or affiliations with other approved programs
or appropriately certified or licensed professionals, provided that such
arrangements are fully disclosed on all applications to the commissioner
for program approval, and provided further that the provider certifies
it shall apply for and obtain a waiver pursuant to section sixty-five
hundred three-b of this chapter prior to providing related services
pursuant to any such written agreements or affiliations involving
licensed professionals.
 e. Nothing herein shall preclude an approved program from providing
services in the preschool child's home.
 f. As part of an application submitted pursuant to paragraph a of this
subdivision, a provider of special services or programs shall describe
any program in which preschool children will receive services in
conjunction with children placed pursuant to section two hundred
thirty-six of the family court act or title II-A of article twenty-five
of the public health law. If such preschool program otherwise meets the
criteria for approval of preschool programs established by regulations
of the commissioner, the commissioner shall approve such program.
 g. As part of an application submitted pursuant to paragraph a of this
subdivision, a provider of special services or programs shall certify
pursuant to regulations promulgated by the commissioner that it will
take measures to ensure its executive director or person performing the
duties of a chief executive officer: (i) meets the criteria established
by the commissioner to be an executive director; and (ii) if paid as a
full time executive director, he or she is employed in a full time, full
year position and shall not engage in activity that would interfere with
or impair such executive director's ability to carry out and perform his
or her duties, responsibilities and obligations.
 * 9-a. (a) A group of appropriately licensed and/or certified
professionals associated with a public or private agency may apply to
the commissioner for approval as an evaluator on a form prescribed by
the commissioner. The commissioner shall approve evaluators pursuant to
this subdivision consistent with the approval process for the
multi-disciplinary evaluation component of programs approved pursuant to
subdivision nine of this section consistent with regulations adopted
pursuant to such subdivision. All school districts are deemed approved
evaluators of preschool students suspected of having a disability
without the need to submit an application to the commissioner if staff
who provide such evaluation services shall have appropriate licensure
and/or certification.
 Such application shall include, but not be limited to, a description
of the multi-disciplinary evaluation services proposed to be provided
and a demonstration that all agency employees and staff who provide such
evaluation services shall have appropriate licensure and/or
certification and that the individual who shall have direct supervision
responsibilities over such staff shall have an appropriate level of
experience in providing evaluation or services to preschool or
kindergarten-aged children with disabilities. To be eligible for
approval as an evaluator under this subdivision on and after July first,
two thousand eleven, a group of appropriately licensed or certified
professionals shall be formed as a limited liability company or
professional services corporation established pursuant to article
fifteen of the business corporation law, article twelve or thirteen of
the limited liability company law or article eight-B of the partnership
law. The approval of any groups of licensed or certified professionals
that are in existence on July first, two thousand eleven and would not
be eligible for approval thereafter shall terminate on July first, two
thousand thirteen.
 (b) The commissioner shall periodically review such evaluators at
which time the commissioner shall provide the municipality in which the
evaluator is located an opportunity for comment.
 (c) The commissioner shall establish a billing and reimbursement
system for services provided by school districts and evaluators approved
pursuant to the provisions of this subdivision consistent with billing
and reimbursement for evaluation services provided by evaluators
approved pursuant to the provisions of subdivision nine of this section.
 * NB Repealed July 1, 2026
 9-b. Program reapproval process. The commissioner shall periodically
review and reapprove programs, including the provision of evaluation
services, in accordance with regulations adopted for such purpose, which
shall include reapproval criteria designed to assure that quality
services are provided in a necessary and cost efficient manner and in
the least restrictive environment which may include settings in which
age-appropriate peers without disabilities are typically found. In
reviewing programs and the provision of evaluation services, the
commissioner shall consider factors including, but not limited to, the
percentage of children receiving services from the approved program that
conducted the evaluation of the child; and whether there has been
evidence of misleading or erroneous advertising. The division of the
budget shall consider in a timely manner all requests submitted by the
department to hire sufficient staff to conduct such periodic reapproval
of programs, as determined by the commissioner, using available federal
funds.
 Such reapproval process shall provide the municipality in which the
program is located or for which the municipality bears fiscal
responsibility, an opportunity for comment thirty or more days prior to
completion of the reapproval. In collaboration with municipalities and
representatives of approved programs, the commissioner shall develop
procedures for conducting such reapprovals. Municipalities shall be
allowed to participate in such departmental review process. Such
reapprovals shall be conducted by individuals with appropriate
experience as determined by the commissioner and shall be conducted not
more than once every three years, unless the commissioner, on his or her
own initiative or at the request of a municipality, determined that
reapprovals are earlier or more frequently required. The commissioner
shall commence such reapproval process no later than January fifteenth,
nineteen hundred ninety-seven. Program reapprovals may result in
disapproval of the entire program or a component of the program,
including but not limited to the evaluation component. In reapproving a
program component, such approval criteria shall include, but not be
limited to:
 a. the extent to which the program offers services in settings with
regular contact with age-appropriate peers, where appropriate to the
needs of the population served; and
 b. whether there has been evidence of misleading or erroneous
advertising.
 Such reapproval shall assure an appropriate opportunity to be heard on
the findings of the reapproval and the opportunity to address such
findings through corrective or remedial action, where applicable. Such
reapproval process shall also provide for the determination of action on
the part of the department to address the findings of the reapproval
which may include, but not be limited to, the withdrawal of approval to
provide evaluation services.
 9-c. Advertising. The commissioner is authorized to require approved
programs and evaluators to periodically submit copies of advertising for
review, and to commence a proceeding to revoke the approval of an
approved program or evaluator pursuant to this subdivision for false,
misleading, deceptive or fraudulent advertising pursuant to regulations
to be promulgated by the commissioner, which shall be consistent with
article twenty-two-a of the general business law. Such regulations shall
prohibit advertisements from including misleading or erroneous
information with respect to services to be provided to preschool
children and their families. The department shall issue guidelines as to
appropriate advertising content. In a revocation proceeding, such
guidelines shall not be presumptive evidence that particular advertising
is appropriate.
 9-d. Business plans. Approved providers of special services and
programs, including local educational agencies, shall develop and submit
to the commissioner, by January first, nineteen hundred ninety-seven, a
business plan, the contents of which shall be determined by the
commissioner, which redirects fiscal and personnel resources toward
providing special education programs and services in settings with
children who do not have disabilities, and reduces the reliance on
programs and settings which include only preschool children with
disabilities.
 10. Approved costs. a. (i) (A) Commencing with the nineteen hundred
ninety--ninety-one school year, the commissioner shall annually
determine the tuition rate for approved services or programs provided to
preschool children pursuant to this section. Such rates for providers of
such services and programs shall be determined in conformance with a
methodology established pursuant to subdivision four of section
forty-four hundred five of this article after consultation with and a
review of an annual report prepared by the advisory committee
established pursuant to paragraph a of subdivision twelve of this
section and shall be subject to the approval of the director of the
budget. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, rule or regulation
to the contrary, tuition rates established for the nineteen hundred
ninety-five--ninety-six school year shall exclude the two percent cost
of living adjustment authorized in rates established for the nineteen
hundred ninety-four--ninety-five school year.
 (B) Commencing with the two thousand fifteen--two thousand sixteen
school year, such special education itinerant services shall be provided
by approved programs, and such approved programs shall be reimbursed for
such services based on the actual attendance of preschool children
receiving such services.
 (C) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, rule or regulation to
the contrary, on or before the two thousand sixteen--two thousand
seventeen school year and thereafter, to be phased-in over no more than
four years from such starting year, the commissioner, subject to the
approval of the director of the budget, shall establish regional tuition
rates for special education itinerant services based on average actual
costs in accordance with a methodology established pursuant to
subdivision four of section forty-four hundred five of this article.
 (D) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, rule or regulation to
the contrary, commencing with the two thousand eighteen--two thousand
nineteen school year, approved preschool integrated special class
programs shall be reimbursed for such services based on an alternative
methodology for reimbursement to be established by the commissioner. In
developing such methodology the commissioner shall seek input from
stakeholders that would be impacted by such alternative methodology. The
alternative methodology, subject to the approval of the director of the
budget, shall be proposed by the department no later than April first,
two thousand eighteen.
 (ii) Upon request, the commissioner shall, on a timely basis, transmit
to the municipality in which an approved program is located any
information provided by such approved program for the purpose of
establishing a rate for the program.
 (iii) Following determination of tuition rates pursuant to
subparagraph (i) of this paragraph, the commissioner shall submit such
rates to the director of the budget for approval and shall
simultaneously transmit to each municipality the rates for programs
located in the municipality. Within thirty calendar days of the
commissioner's transmittal date, the municipality may submit comments in
writing to the commissioner. The commissioner shall consider such
comments and, if he deems it appropriate, adjust such rate prior to
final action by the director of the budget. If the commissioner does not
adjust the rate, the commissioner shall respond to the comments
presented by the municipality.
 b. Reimbursement for evaluations conducted by approved evaluators
shall be provided pursuant to regulations of the commissioner after
consultation with the advisory committee established pursuant to
paragraph a of subdivision twelve of this section and shall be subject
to approval by the director of the budget.
 c. Approved costs for transportation shall be the costs incurred by
the municipality in accordance with the provisions of subdivision eight
of this section. The commissioner shall establish, in consultation with
the municipalities, and with the approval of the director of the budget,
regional ceilings for each region of the state, as defined by the
commissioner, on the maximum allowable state reimbursement. In
developing such ceilings, the commissioner shall consider the size of
the geographic area to be served, the projected number of children
requiring transportation services and such other factors as the
commissioner shall determine may influence the cost of transportation
services.
 d. (i) At the beginning of the school year, the commissioner shall
allocate funds for reimbursement of allowable administrative costs, as
defined in regulations of the commissioner, incurred by a board pursuant
to this section. Such allocation shall be in an amount equal to a school
district's pro rata share of the statewide base year count of preschool
children as a percent of federal funds available for such reimbursement,
as determined by the commissioner. In January of any school year in
which additional federal funds are determined by the commissioner to be
available for such reimbursement, the commissioner shall equitably
allocate such funds for reimbursement of allowable administrative costs,
in a manner determined by the commissioner which is consistent with
federal statutes and regulations governing the use of federal funds, to
school districts which have demonstrated a need for such additional
funds. At the close of the school year for which such funds were
allocated, each board shall submit, in a form prescribed by the
commissioner, a statement of the allowable administrative costs incurred
pursuant to this section. A board may, subject to approval of the
commissioner, submit any allowable administrative costs for which
federal funds are not allocated to that school district pursuant to this
subdivision to the appropriate municipality or municipalities for
reimbursement pursuant to subdivision eleven of this section.
 (ii) Boards may submit reasonable costs incurred pursuant to
paragraphs a through d of subdivision seven of this section to the
appropriate municipality for reimbursement. Boards may also submit to
the appropriate municipality for reimbursement of reasonable costs
incurred pursuant to paragraph e of subdivision seven of this section:
(A) in an action or proceeding brought by another party or (B) in an
action or proceeding brought by the board, other than an action or
proceeding brought against the state, a department, board or agency of
the state or a state officer, except where such state defendant is
joined as a necessary party to such action or proceeding, if, upon final
disposition of the action or proceeding, the board receives a judgment
in its favor annulling the determination or order of the state review
officer. The municipality shall be reimbursed for payment of such costs
pursuant to subdivision eleven of this section.
 (iii) On or after July first, nineteen hundred ninety, and annually
thereafter until June thirtieth, two thousand one, municipalities shall
be eligible for reimbursement for administrative costs incurred during
the preceding year of fifty dollars for each eligible preschool child
served in such year pursuant to this section. On or after July first,
two thousand one, and annually thereafter, municipalities shall be
eligible for reimbursement for administrative costs incurred during the
preceding year of seventy-five dollars for each eligible preschool child
served in such year pursuant to this section. Each municipality shall
submit a claim in a form prescribed by the commissioner. Upon approval,
reimbursement shall be made by the commissioner from appropriations
available therefor. Such reimbursement shall be made in the first
instance from any federal funds designated under federal law for local
use, as determined by the commissioner, that are available after
satisfying the provisions of subparagraph (i) of this paragraph. To the
extent that such federal funds are not sufficient or available to
reimburse a municipality for such costs, reimbursement shall be made
with state funds.
 e. Public special education funding provided for the purposes of this
section shall not be used to purchase regular preschool educational
services, day care or other child care services, or to purchase any
instructional service other than special services or programs as defined
in subdivision two of section forty-four hundred one of this article or
in this section, and the purchase of such regular preschool educational
services and child care services shall not be approvable pursuant to
this section as a charge upon the municipality or the board.
 11. Financial responsibility for approved costs. a. The approved costs
for a preschool child who receives services pursuant to this section
shall be a charge upon the municipality wherein such child resides. All
approved costs shall be paid in the first instance and at least
quarterly by the appropriate governing body or officer of the
municipality upon vouchers presented and audited in the same manner as
the case of other claims against the municipality. Notwithstanding any
inconsistent provisions of this section, upon notification by the
commissioner, a municipality may withhold payments due any provider for
services rendered to preschool children in a program for which the
commissioner has been unable to establish a tuition rate due to the
failure of the provider to file complete and accurate reports for such
purpose, as required by the commissioner.
 b. (i) Commencing with the reimbursement of municipalities for
services provided pursuant to this section on or after July first,
nineteen hundred ninety-three, the state shall reimburse fifty-nine and
one half percent of the approved costs paid by a municipality for the
purposes of this section. Commencing with the reimbursement of
municipalities for services provided pursuant to this section on or
after July first, nineteen hundred ninety-four, the state shall
reimburse sixty-nine and one-half percent of the approved costs paid by
a municipality for the purposes of this section. The state shall
reimburse fifty percent of the approved costs paid by a municipality for
the purposes of this section for services provided prior to July first,
nineteen hundred ninety-three. Such state reimbursement to the
municipality shall not be paid prior to April first of the school year
in which such approved costs are paid by the municipality.
 (ii) In accordance with a schedule adopted by the commissioner, each
municipality which has been notified by a board of its obligation to
contract for the provision of approved special services or programs for
a preschool child shall be provided with a listing of all such children
by the commissioner. Such list shall include approved services and costs
as prescribed by the commissioner for each such child for whom the
municipality shall certify, on such list, the amount expended for such
purposes and the date of expenditure. Upon the receipt of such certified
statement, the commissioner shall examine the same, and if such
expenditures were made as required by this section, the commissioner
shall approve it and transmit it to the comptroller for audit. The
comptroller shall thereupon issue his warrant, in the amount specified
in such approved statement for the payment thereof out of moneys
appropriated therefor, to the municipal treasurer or chief fiscal
officer as the case may be.
 (iii) (a) Notwithstanding the provisions of this paragraph, any monies
due municipalities pursuant to this paragraph for services provided
during the two thousand eight--two thousand nine and prior school years
shall be reduced by an amount equal to the product of the percentage of
the approved costs reimbursed by the state pursuant to subparagraph (i)
of this paragraph and any federal participation, pursuant to title XIX
of the social security act, in special education programs provided
pursuant to this section. The commissioner shall deduct such amount, as
certified by the commissioner of health as the authorized fiscal agent
of the state education department. Such deductions shall be made in
accordance with a plan developed by the commissioner and approved by the
director of the budget. To the extent that such deductions exceed moneys
owed to the municipality pursuant to this paragraph, such excess shall
be deducted from any other payments due the municipality.
 (b) Any moneys due municipalities pursuant to this paragraph for
services provided during the two thousand nine--two thousand ten school
year and thereafter, or for services provided in a prior school year
that were not reimbursed by the state on or before April first, two
thousand eleven, shall, in the first instance, be designated as the
state share of moneys due a municipality pursuant to title XIX of the
social security act, on account of school supportive health services
provided to preschool students with disabilities pursuant to this
section. Such state share shall be assigned on behalf of municipalities
to the department of health, as provided herein; the amount designated
as such nonfederal share shall be transferred by the commissioner to the
department of health based on the monthly report of the commissioner of
health to the commissioner; and any remaining moneys to be apportioned
to a municipality pursuant to this section shall be paid in accordance
with this section. The amount to be assigned to the department of
health, as determined by the commissioner of health, for any
municipality shall not exceed the federal share of any moneys due such
municipality pursuant to title XIX of the social security act. Moneys
designated as state share moneys shall be paid to such municipality by
the department of health based on the submission and approval of claims
related to such school supportive health services, in the manner
provided by law.
 (iv) Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no
payments shall be made by the commissioner pursuant to this section on
or after July first, nineteen hundred ninety-six based on a claim for
services provided during school years nineteen hundred
eighty-nine--ninety, nineteen hundred ninety--ninety-one, nineteen
hundred ninety-one-ninety-two, nineteen hundred
ninety-two--ninety-three, nineteen hundred ninety-three--ninety-four,
and nineteen hundred ninety-four--ninety-five which is submitted later
than two years after the end of the nineteen hundred
ninety-five--ninety-six school year; provided, however, that no payment
shall be barred or reduced where such payment is required as a result of
a court order or judgment or a final audit, and provided further that
the commissioner may grant a waiver to a municipality excusing the late
filing of such a claim upon a finding that the delay was caused by a
party other than the municipality or a board to which the municipality
delegated authority pursuant to paragraph f of subdivision five or
subdivision eight of this section.
 (v) Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no
payments shall be made by the commissioner pursuant to this section on
or after July first, nineteen hundred ninety-six based on a claim for
services provided in the nineteen hundred ninety-five--ninety-six school
year or thereafter which is submitted later than three years after the
end of the school year in which services were rendered, provided,
however, that no payment shall be barred or reduced where such payment
is required as a result of a court order or judgment or a final audit,
and provided further that the commissioner may grant a waiver to a
municipality excusing the late filing of such a claim upon a finding
that the delay was caused by a party other than the municipality or a
board to which the municipality delegates authority pursuant to
paragraph f of subdivision five or subdivision eight of this section.
 (vi) Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary,
beginning with state reimbursement otherwise payable in the two thousand
six--two thousand seven state fiscal year and in each year thereafter,
payments pursuant to this section, subject to county agreement and in
the amounts specified in such agreement, shall be paid no later than
June thirtieth of the state fiscal year next following the state fiscal
year in which such reimbursement was otherwise eligible for payment and
in which the liability to the county for such state reimbursement
accrued, provided that such payments in a subsequent state fiscal year
shall be recognized by the state and the applicable county as satisfying
the state reimbursement obligation for the prior state fiscal year. Any
unspent amount associated with such county agreements shall not be
available for payments to other counties or municipalities.
 c. (i) Each municipality, or, in addition, in the case of a city of
one million or more persons, the board, may perform a fiscal audit of
such services or programs for which it bears fiscal responsibility in
accordance with audit standards established by the commissioner, which
may include site visitation. The department shall provide guidelines on
standards and procedures to municipalities and boards, for fiscal audits
of services or programs pursuant to this section. Prior to commencing a
fiscal audit pursuant to this subparagraph, a municipality shall
ascertain that neither the state nor any other municipality has
performed a fiscal audit of the same services or programs within the
current fiscal year for such program. If it is determined that no such
audit has been performed, the municipality shall inquire with the
department to determine which other municipalities, if any, bear
financial responsibility for the services or programs to be audited and
shall afford such other municipalities an opportunity to recommend
issues to be examined through the audit. Municipalities completing
audits pursuant to this subparagraph shall provide copies to the
department, the provider of the services and programs and all other
municipalities previously determined to bear financial responsibility
for the audited services and programs. No other municipality may conduct
an additional fiscal audit of the same services or programs during such
current fiscal year for such program.
 (ii) Payments made pursuant to this section by a municipality shall,
upon conclusion of the July first to June thirtieth school year for
which such payment was made, be subject to audit against the actual
difference between such audited expenditures and revenues. The
municipality shall submit the results of any such audit to the
commissioner and the commissioner of social services, if appropriate,
for review and, if warranted, adjustment of the tuition and/or
maintenance rates. The municipality is authorized to recover
overpayments made to a provider of special services or programs pursuant
to this section as determined by the commissioner or the commissioner of
health based upon their adjustment of a tuition and/or maintenance rate,
provided that for purposes of making such adjustment and recovery, the
municipality shall be deemed to have paid one hundred percent of the
disallowed costs. Such recovery may be accomplished by withholding such
amount from any moneys due the provider in the current year, or by
direct reimbursement. The commissioner shall promulgate rules and
regulations necessary to implement the provisions of this paragraph
within sixty days of the effective date of the chapter of the laws of
two thousand thirteen which amended this subparagraph.
 12. Advisory committees. a. The commissioner shall establish an
advisory committee consisting of representatives of municipalities to
advise the commissioner on establishing the rate methodology authorized
by subdivision ten of this section.
 b. The commissioner shall establish such other advisory committees as
he deems necessary to implement the provisions of this section.
 13. a. The commissioner shall adopt regulations to implement the
provisions of this section. Such regulations shall include:
 (i) regional cost ceilings on average per pupil transportation cost
for the reimbursement of transportation expenditures, where regions
shall be as defined by the commissioner;
 (ii) the requirement that committees identify transportation options
for preschool children, consistent with this article, including
encouraging parents to transport their children at public expense where
cost-effective; and
 (iii) the requirement that each program approved pursuant to the
provisions of this section shall make application to the commissioner
for approval to provide special education itinerant services.
 b. The commissioner shall ensure that eligibility criteria are
consistently applied.
 c. The commissioner shall, in consultation with clinicians trained in
early childhood educational services, municipal representatives,
representatives of parents of children requiring preschool and school
age special education services, representatives of statewide and
regional provider organizations, academic experts concerned with the
provision of special education services, and such other early childhood
education professionals as the commissioner shall deem appropriate,
develop clinical practice guidelines for the purpose of assisting
evaluators with respect to appropriate diagnosis and evaluation, and
committees with respect to the type, frequency and duration of services.
The commissioner may at his or her own discretion use existing advisory
committees and may add additional members to develop these guidelines.
Such guidelines shall be designed to assure that appropriate services
are provided in a manner which is necessary and cost efficient, and in
the least restrictive environment, and shall promote the education of
children in integrated settings with children who do not have
disabilities insofar as possible and appropriate, including through the
provision of related services or special education itinerant services.
 * d. The commissioner shall establish procedures for administrative
appeals to resolve interagency disputes between boards and
municipalities over responsibility for provision of, or payment for,
special education programs or services to preschool children with
disabilities. During the pendency of any such appeal, the board or,
where applicable, a state department or agency responsible for
developing the preschool child's individualized education program, shall
provide and pay for the special education programs and services on the
preschool child's individualized education program and may seek
reimbursement in the appeal. The commissioner shall be authorized to
make all orders that in the commissioner's judgment are proper or
necessary to give effect to the decision in the appeal. Upon a
determination that a public agency has failed to provide or pay for such
special education programs and services, the commissioner shall certify
the amount of such costs to the state comptroller and the state
comptroller to deduct such amount from any state funds that become due
to such public agency.
 * NB Repealed June 30, 2027
 § 4410-a. Responsibility for certain temporary-resident preschool
children with disabilities. 1. Definitions. For the purpose of this
section, the following definitions shall apply:
 a. "Foster care child" shall mean a child placed in foster care by a
social services district.
 b. "Homeless child" shall mean a homeless child as defined in
paragraph a of subdivision one of section thirty-two hundred nine of
this chapter.
 c. "Municipality" shall mean a county outside the city of New York or
the city, in the case of a county in the city of New York.
 d. "Municipality of current location" shall mean a municipality in
which a child lives which is different from the municipality in which a
child or such child's family lived at the time a social services
district assumed responsibility for the placement of such child or
family, or at the time such child was admitted for care and/or treatment
in a facility licensed or operated by another state agency.
 e. "Municipality of residence" shall mean the municipality in which a
child or such child's family lived at the time the local social services
district assumed responsibility for the placement of such child or
family, or at the time such child was admitted for care and/or treatment
in a facility licensed or operated by another state agency.
 f. "Preschool child with a disability" shall mean a child eligible for
services pursuant to section forty-four hundred ten of this chapter.
 g. "School district of current location" shall mean a school district
in which a child lives which is different from the school district in
which a child or such child's family lived at the time a social services
district assumed responsibility for the placement of such child or
family, or at the time such child was admitted for care and/or treatment
in a facility licensed or operated by another state agency.
 h. "Child in residential care" shall mean a child residing in a
facility licensed or operated by another state agency as defined by
section 1.03 of the mental hygiene law or by section two of the public
health law.
 2. School district evaluation and placement responsibility. The school
district of current location of a foster care or homeless child or child
in residential care shall be responsible for the evaluation and
placement procedures prescribed for a preschool child suspected of
having a disability pursuant to section forty-four hundred ten of this
chapter. In issuing its written notice of determination of services, the
board of education of such school district shall identify the
municipality of residence of a preschool child with a disability who is
a foster care or homeless child or child in residential care. Such
notice of determination shall be transmitted to both the municipality of
residence and the municipality of current location.
 3. Contract and payment responsibility. The municipality of current
location shall be the municipality of record for a preschool child with
a disability who is a foster care or homeless child or child in
residential care for the purposes of section forty-four hundred ten of
this chapter provided, however, that, notwithstanding the provision of
paragraph b of subdivision eleven of such section, the state shall
reimburse one hundred percent of the approved costs paid by such
municipality which shall be offset by the local contribution due
pursuant to subdivision four of this section.
 4. Local contribution. The municipality of residence shall be
financially responsible for the local contribution which shall equal
that portion of the approved costs of services to a foster care or
homeless child or child in residential care with a disability which
would not be reimbursed pursuant to the schedule set out in paragraph b
of subdivision eleven of section forty-four hundred ten of this chapter.
The commissioner shall certify to the comptroller the amount of the
local contribution owed by each municipality to the state. The
comptroller shall deduct the amount of such local contribution first
from any moneys due the municipality pursuant to such section and then
from any other moneys due or to become due such municipality.
 § 4410-b. Use of certain federal funds. 1. Definitions. For purposes
of this section:
 a. "Approved preschool special education program" shall mean a public
or private agency which has been approved by the commissioner as a
provider of special education programs or services to preschool students
with disabilities pursuant to subdivision nine of section forty-four
hundred ten of this article or pursuant to article eighty-five of this
chapter.
 b. "Base year" shall mean the school year next preceding the school
year in which funds are sub-allocated pursuant to this section.
 c. "IEP team" means a committee on special education, a subcommittee
on special education, a committee on preschool special education or a
subcommittee on preschool special education.
 d. "Public or private agency" shall mean an approved preschool special
education program, or a state-supported school operating pursuant to
article eighty-five of this chapter, or an approved private
non-residential or residential school that provides special services or
programs pursuant to subdivision two of section forty-four hundred one
of this article. Such term shall not include an individual providing
related services only to preschool students with disabilities pursuant
to section forty-four hundred ten of this article. Such term shall
include a board of cooperative educational services only to the extent
it is an approved preschool special education program, and only for
those students provided special education programs or services pursuant
to section forty-four hundred ten of this article.
 2. Preschool grants for children with disabilities. Each school
district receiving an allocation of funds pursuant to section six
hundred nineteen of the individuals with disabilities education act for
the nineteen hundred ninety-nine--two thousand school year or any
subsequent school year shall sub-allocate such funds in accordance with
this subdivision to other public and private agencies providing special
education services to students ages three to five who were placed in
such agency by the school district's IEP team. For school years prior to
two thousand six--two thousand seven, such sub-allocations shall be made
on a per capita basis, based upon the number of students three to five
years of age who were placed in such agency by the school district's IEP
team and are served by the public or private agency as of December first
of the base year, as reported to the commissioner; and, for school years
two thousand six--two thousand seven and thereafter, such
sub-allocations shall be made on a per capita basis, based upon the
number of students three to five years of age who were placed in such
agency by the school district's IEP team and who are receiving special
education programming and instruction from the public or private agency
as of December first of the base year, as reported to the commissioner,
and according to a formulae based upon the number of students three to
five years of age who are receiving related services only from the
public or private agency as of December first of the base year, as
reported to the commissioner, such that such sub-allocation shall be in
an amount determined in accordance with the provisions of this
subdivision; provided, however, that for the nineteen hundred
ninety-nine--two thousand school year, the sub-allocation payable to
each public or private agency shall not be less than five hundred
forty-eight dollars per pupil. For the school year two thousand six--two
thousand seven, the per capita sub-allocation shall be adjusted whereby
each student three to five years of age who was placed in an agency by
the school district's IEP team and who is receiving special education
programming and instruction therefrom shall be counted as one per capita
and each such student who is receiving related services only from such
public or private agency shall be counted as two-thirds of a per capita,
for purposes of determining such per capita sub-allocation for such
school year and that for the school year two thousand seven--two
thousand eight and thereafter, shall be counted as one-third for the
purposes of determining the per capita sub-allocation for such school
year; provided, however, that any municipality which, prior to July
first, two thousand three, operated an approved special education
itinerant teacher program for students three to five years of age who
were placed in such program by a school district's IEP team, shall be
deemed to be a public or private agency for purposes of this section and
the sub-allocation directed by this subdivision shall be made on a per
capita basis, based upon the number of students, three to five years of
age who are receiving special education programming and instruction and
related services only therefrom. In the event the total amount allocated
to any school district pursuant to such section six hundred nineteen for
the nineteen hundred ninety-nine--two thousand school year is
insufficient to pay such sub-allocations at the required per pupil
level, the school district may apply to the department for a
supplemental allocation of funds in the amount of such deficiency from
the state allocation received pursuant to such section six hundred
nineteen. Payments of such sub-allocation shall be made in the same
proportion as such funds are paid to the school district by the state,
within thirty days after: (i) the school district receives any portion
of its allocation of funds for the current year pursuant to section six
hundred nineteen of the individuals with disabilities education act; or
(ii) the school district receives an application for a sub-allocation by
a public or private agency, or, for the nineteen hundred
ninety-nine--two thousand school year only, the school district receives
notice from the commissioner that such an application for a
sub-allocation has been filed with the commissioner, whichever occurs
later.
 3. Federal flow-through funds. Each school district receiving an
allocation of funds pursuant to section six hundred eleven of the
individuals with disabilities education act for the nineteen hundred
ninety-nine--two thousand school year or any subsequent school year
shall sub-allocate such funds in accordance with this subdivision to
other public and private agencies providing special education services
to students ages three to twenty-one who were placed in such agency by
the school district's IEP team. For school years prior to two thousand
six--two thousand seven, such sub-allocations shall be made on a per
capita basis, based upon the number of students three to twenty-one
years of age who were placed in such agency by the school district's IEP
team and were served by the public or private agency as of December
first of the base year, as reported to the commissioner; and, for the
school year two thousand six--two thousand seven and thereafter, such
sub-allocations shall be made on a per capita basis, based upon the
number of students three to twenty-one years of age who were placed in
such agency by the school district's IEP team and who were receiving
special education programming and instruction from the public or private
agency as of December first of the base year, as reported to the
commissioner, and according to a formulae based upon the number of
students three to twenty-one years of age who were receiving related
services only from the public or private agency as of December first of
the base year, as reported to the commissioner, such that such
sub-allocation shall be in an amount determined in accordance with the
provisions of this subdivision. For the school year two thousand
six--two thousand seven, the per capita sub-allocation shall be adjusted
whereby each student three to twenty-one years of age who was placed in
an agency by the school district's IEP team and who is receiving special
education programming and instruction therefrom shall be counted as one
per capita and each such student who is receiving related services only
from such public or private agency shall be counted as two-thirds of a
per capita, for purposes of determining such per capita sub-allocation
for such school year and that for the school year two thousand
seven--two thousand eight and thereafter, shall be counted as one-third
for the purposes of determining the per capita sub-allocation for such
school year; provided, however, that any municipality which, prior to
July first, two thousand three, operated an approved special education
itinerant teacher program for students three to five years of age who
were placed in such program by a school district's IEP team, shall be
deemed to be a public or private agency for purposes of this section and
the sub-allocation directed by this subdivision shall be made on a per
capita basis, based upon the number of students, three to twenty-one
years of age who are receiving special education programming and
instruction and related services only therefrom. Payments of such
sub-allocation shall be made in the same proportion as such funds are
paid to the school district by the state within thirty days after: (i)
the school district receives any portion of its allocation of funds for
the current year pursuant to section six hundred eleven of the
individuals with disabilities education act; or (ii) the school district
receives an application for a sub-allocation by a public or private
agency, or, for the nineteen hundred ninety-nine--two thousand school
year only, the school district receives notice from the commissioner
that such an application for a sub-allocation has been filed with the
commissioner; whichever occurs later.
 4. Charter schools. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivisions two
and three of this section, any sub-allocation of funds received pursuant
to sections six hundred eleven and six hundred nineteen of the
individuals with disabilities education act shall be made in accordance
with section twenty-eight hundred fifty-six of this chapter and the
regulations of the commissioner implementing such section.
 5. Carryover funds. In addition to the sub-allocations required
pursuant to subdivisions two and three of this section, each school
district receiving carryover funds from the nineteen hundred
ninety-eight--ninety-nine allocation pursuant to sections six hundred
eleven and six hundred nineteen of the individuals with disabilities
education act shall sub-allocate such carryover funds pursuant to this
subdivision to public and private agencies that have their chief
administrative offices located within the school district and have
carryover funds remaining from such allocation. Such sub-allocations
shall be made in the amounts determined by the commissioner in
accordance with procedures established by the commissioner. In the event
such a public or private agency has its chief administrative offices
located outside of the state, such agency may designate any school
district having resident students attending its programs as the district
responsible for sub-allocation of its nineteen hundred
ninety-eight--ninety-nine carryover funds pursuant to this subdivision.
 6. Unobligated funds. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to
the contrary, funds sub-allocated to public and private agencies
pursuant to subdivisions two and three of this section for any school
year that are neither obligated by the last day of the project year nor
expended consistent with procedures established by the commissioner
shall be carried over to the following school year and shall be made
available to such agencies in accordance with procedures established by
the commissioner, commencing in July and August of such following school
year.
 7. Funds; failure to apply. Any school district that fails to apply
for its full allocation of funds pursuant to both sections six hundred
eleven and six hundred nineteen of the individuals with disabilities
education act by a date to be prescribed by the commissioner shall
nevertheless be required to make sub-allocations to public or private
agencies pursuant to this section using local funds, based on the full
amount that the school district was eligible to receive, as if the
district had received an allocation of federal funds on such date.
 8. Reporting requirements. a. Each public or private agency that
receives a sub-allocation of funds pursuant to this section shall submit
an annual cost report in a form approved by the commissioner.
 b. The commissioner shall, in consultation with representatives of
statewide and regional provider organizations including municipalities
and school district personnel and other interested parties:
 (1) develop forms to be submitted by school districts that report the
number of students three to twenty-one years of age who are placed in a
public or private agency providing special education services and who
are receiving special education programming and instruction from such
agency, and the number of such students who are receiving related
services only from such agency; and
 (2) develop guidelines to assure that funds allocated and
sub-allocated pursuant to this section are used for purposes consistent
with federal laws and regulations governing such funds.
 § 4410-c. Audits of special education services program providers for
preschool children with disabilities. 1. Notwithstanding any other
provision of law to the contrary and within such funds as are made
available for such purpose, the comptroller shall audit the expenses
reported to the department by every program provider of special
education services for preschool children with disabilities in the
state. Pursuant to a plan developed by the comptroller, such audits
shall be conducted in a manner so as to cause every such provider to be
audited by the comptroller at least once by March thirty-first, two
thousand eighteen.
 2. a. The priority and frequency of such audits, and any audits
conducted thereafter, shall be based upon a risk assessment process
conducted by the comptroller which may include investigations of alleged
improprieties, previous audit findings and recommendations, or other
financial performance indicators.
 b. In undertaking such audits the comptroller's review shall include,
but not be limited to, examining, auditing and evaluating relevant
financial documents and records of providers for the particular years
included within the scope of the audit.
 c. All audits shall include any appropriate findings and
recommendations of the comptroller regarding the propriety of the
amounts reported as expenses to the department as well as any other
findings deemed appropriate with respect to the public funding of the
special education services.
 d. The comptroller shall refer any findings of fraud, abuse or other
conduct constituting a crime that are uncovered during the course of an
audit, as warranted to an appropriate agency or agencies possessing
jurisdiction.
 e. The final audit report resulting from audits performed pursuant to
this section shall be posted to the department's internet website and
otherwise made available to the public upon request for a period of at
least five years. Furthermore, the audited provider shall be required to
post the final audit report on its internet website, if any, for a
period of five years.
 f. The comptroller shall inform and advise the governor and the
legislature in December of each year regarding its audits of expenses
reported to the department by program providers of special education
services for preschool children with disabilities conducted during the
preceding twelve months and regarding any other pertinent information
the comptroller deems appropriate.
 ARTICLE 90
 GIFTED EDUCATION
Section 4451. Powers of the department with respect to gifted pupils.
 4452. Guidelines and definition.
 4453. Advisory council on the education of gifted pupils.
 § 4451. Powers of the department with respect to gifted pupils.
Subject to the availability of funds, the state education department is
hereby authorized and empowered to assist districts in meeting the
educational needs of gifted pupils through the following:
 1. provide information to school districts concerning development of
programs, curriculum resources, instructional procedures and strategies
to identify and encourage gifted pupils;
 2. provide technical assistance and inservice education for teachers
and administrators;
 3. maintain a record of programs available, and make this record
available for public inspection;
 4. develop, maintain, and distribute a handbook for parents of gifted
pupils.
 § 4452. Guidelines and definition. 1. In order to provide for
educational programs to meet special needs of gifted pupils, the
commissioner is hereby authorized to make recommendations to school
districts in accordance with the provisions of this subdivision and
section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter.
 a. As used in this article, the term "gifted pupils" shall mean those
pupils who show evidence of high performance capability and exceptional
potential in areas such as general intellectual ability, special
academic aptitude and outstanding ability in visual and performing arts.
Such definition shall include those pupils who require educational
programs or services beyond those normally provided by the regular
school program in order to realize their full potential.
 b. Prior to payment of state funds for education of gifted pupils, a
school district shall submit to the commissioner a summary plan for the
identification and education of gifted pupils. The plan shall be in
form and content as prescribed by the commissioner.
 c. Upon acceptance by a local school district of the apportionments
made under section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter such district
shall use such funding in accordance with guidelines to be established
by the commissioner for services to gifted pupils. Such services shall
include but not be limited to identification, instructional programs,
planning, inservice education and program evaluation. A board of
education may contract with another district or board of cooperative
educational services to provide the program and/or services with the
approval of the commissioner under guidelines established by the
commissioner.
 d. The identification of pupils for participation in gifted programs
funded under this chapter shall commence through the referral of a
parent, teacher, or administrator.
 e. Upon referral of a pupil for participation in a gifted program
funded under this chapter, the school district shall so inform the
parent or guardian of such pupil's referral and shall seek their
approval to administer diagnostic tests or other evaluation mechanisms
related to the program objectives of the district in order to determine
eligibility for participation in such gifted program. Failing to receive
approval, the child shall not be tested, evaluated or participate in the
program. In no case shall the parent, guardian or pupil be charged a
fee for the administration of such diagnostic tests or other evaluation
mechanisms.
 f. The parent or guardian of a pupil designated as gifted shall be
informed by the local school authorities of the pupil's placement in
such gifted program funded under this chapter.
 2. The commissioner shall establish procedures for evaluation of the
quality and educational effectiveness of programs for gifted pupils.
 § 4453. Advisory council on the education of gifted pupils. 1.
Subject to the availability of funds, the commissioner may establish
within the department an advisory council on the education of gifted
pupils. Such council shall assist and advise the commissioner and his
designees with respect to policies and procedures relating to the
education of gifted pupils and programs associated therewith.
 2. Such advisory council appointed by the commissioner shall consist
of at least ten members, who are directly concerned with gifted pupils
or who have specialized in the education of such pupils, provided,
however, that such advisory council shall include at least one parent of
such a pupil. The members shall be residents of this state and shall be
selected on the basis of their competence, concern, and professional
activity in the education of gifted pupils.
 3. The advisory council shall meet at least twice each year at a
location to be determined by the commissioner. The advisory council
shall report at least annually to the commissioner.
 4. Five years or sooner after the effective date of this section, the
commissioner shall review the necessity of such advisory council, and
shall make a determination whether to continue or disband such council.
 ARTICLE 91
 SCHOOL CAMPS
Section 4501. Establishment of camps by school districts and
 appropriations authorized.
 4502. Establishment of camps by city school districts and
 appropriations authorized.
 § 4501. Establishment of camps by school districts and appropriations
authorized. 1. A school district, acting through its board of
education, is hereby authorized to establish camps on lands acquired by
such school district by purchase, gift, grant, devise, rent or lease or
on lands the use of which has otherwise been acquired by such school
district for camp purposes. Also, two or more school districts may
jointly acquire lands for camp purposes in the same manner and establish
and operate such school camps thereon as joint projects within the limit
of funds provided therefor by the respective school districts and in
accordance with regulations approved by the commissioner of education.
Such camps shall be used to furnish education, physical training,
recreation and maintenance for all children of school age, whether in
attendance at a public or non-public school, and shall be under the
jurisdiction of the board of education of such school district. Such
board may, however, fix a reasonable fee to cover cost of food and
instructional materials. Such board shall provide opportunity for
children to receive instruction in such subjects as such board may deem
proper. Such board shall prescribe the activities to be carried on and
shall set up rules and regulations for admission to such camps and the
conduct and discipline thereof. No child, whether in attendance at a
public or non-public school, shall be denied admission to such a camp or
physical training, recreation and maintenance at such a camp, because of
inability to pay any required costs or fees; but no child shall be
entitled to free education, physical training, recreation and
maintenance in any such camp for a period in excess of two weeks during
any one year, unless the board of education prescribe and direct that
physically handicapped or other children be maintained for a longer
period. The board of education of such school district shall make a
report at the annual meeting of such school district, of matters
relating to carrying out the provisions of this section.
 2. Any such school district is hereby authorized to appropriate in the
manner prescribed by law relating to such school district such sums as
may be necessary for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this
section. Money shall be paid out of the treasury of such school district
in the manner provided by law.
 3. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the board of
education of the city of New York.
 § 4502. Establishment of camps by city school districts and
appropriations authorized. 1. A city school district, acting through
its board of education, is hereby authorized to establish camps on land
provided therefor in parks adjacent to such city school district under
the jurisdiction and control of the state office of parks and recreation
or department of environmental conservation, or elsewhere. Such camps
shall be used to furnish instruction, recreation and maintenance to
children of school age. The board of education shall provide opportunity
for children to receive instruction in such subjects as it may deem
proper. Such board shall prescribe the activities to be carried on and
shall set up rules and regulations for admission to such camps and the
conduct and discipline thereof. Such camps shall be operated between
July first and August thirty-first of each year and at such other times
as such board of education may prescribe. No child shall be entitled to
free instruction and maintenance in any such camp for a period in excess
of two weeks during any one year, unless the board of education
prescribe and direct that physically handicapped or other children be
maintained for a longer period.
 2. The board of education of a city school district may establish a
camp for children to be located in state parks on Long Island, which
have been or shall be selected by the state office of parks and
recreation on account of accessibility and availability, as a model camp
for the establishment of future camps.
 3. The board of education of a city school district is hereby
authorized to appropriate such sums as may be necessary for the purpose
of carrying out the provisions of this article.
 ARTICLE 93
 CAREER, PRACTICAL ARTS, CONTINUING ADULT EDUCATION
 AND VOCATIONAL AND EDUCATIONAL GUIDANCE
Section 4601. Advisory councils.
 4602. Career education.
 4603. Practical arts.
 4604. Continuing education adult schools.
 4605. Vocational and educational guidance.
 4606. School-to-employment program.
 4607. Bridge to employment, work tryout and education program.
 § 4601. Advisory councils. 1. The board of education of each school
district and of each board of cooperative educational services
maintaining an approved career education program shall appoint an
advisory council for career education consisting of at least ten
members. The membership shall include, but not be limited to, persons:
 a. Familiar with the vocational needs and problems of management and
labor in the region.
 b. Familiar with programs of career education at the postsecondary and
adult levels.
 c. Familiar with the manpower needs and requirements of the region to
be served.
 d. Familiar with the special educational needs of the physically and
mentally handicapped.
 e. Representative of community interests, including persons familiar
with the special needs of the population to be served.
 f. A student who is participating in a career education program at the
school district or board of cooperative educational services district
being served by the advisory council.
 2. It shall be the duty of such advisory council for career education
to advise the board of education or board of cooperative education on
the development of and policy matters arising in the administration of
career education, including the preparation of long-range and annual
program plans submitted to the commissioner of education, and assist
with an annual evaluation of career education programs, services and
activities provided by the school district or board of cooperative
education.
 3. Advisory councils may appoint consultant committees representative
of specific occupational fields to assist in the work of the council and
the board of education or board of cooperative education with respect to
the planning, development and requirements for establishment of new
programs or evaluation and revision of existing programs.
 4. The board of education of any school district or the board of
cooperative educational services may employ such professional, technical
and clerical personnel as may be necessary to enable the advisory
council to carry out its functions specified in this section.
 § 4602. Career education. 1. The board of education of each school
district shall provide secondary school pupils and adults access to
programs of career education, commensurate with the interests and
capabilities of those desiring and having a need for preparatory
training, retraining or upgrading for employment, and develop realistic
programs in accord with manpower needs in existing and emerging
occupations for present and projected employment opportunities.
 2. Career education programs and classes shall be organized and
conducted by boards of education or arranged through shared services as
provided by boards of cooperative educational services, in accordance
with the rules of the board of regents and the regulations of the
commissioner of education. Boards of education that are designated by
the commissioner as major career education providers shall submit to the
commissioner every two years, no later than the date specified by the
commissioner, a career education program plan, in a form specified by
the commissioner, which shall be revised annually.
 3. Programs may include pre-vocational activities, career classes,
apprentice related instruction, cooperative education, work experience,
continuing adult career education, and other effective means of
preparation and of upgrading employment capabilities. Classes for
out-of-school youth sixteen years of age and over and for adults may be
conducted during the day and/or evening.
 4. The board of education of each school district maintaining programs
in career education, practical arts, vocational and educational
guidance, or continuing career education for adults has full power and
authority:
 a. To employ properly certified directors, supervisors, principals,
teachers and counselors and assign them to serve in the schools and
classes authorized by this article.
 b. To establish approved courses of study.
 c. To purchase or acquire sites and grounds; to purchase, acquire,
lease or construct and to repair suitable shops and buildings or to
arrange for shared services.
 d. To purchase necessary machinery, tools, apparatus, books and
supplies.
 e. To enter into agreements with one or more financing agencies to
provide for the acceptance by such board of credit cards as a means of
payment of course fees or tuition when required for instructional
programs. Any such agreement shall govern the terms and conditions upon
which a credit card proffered as a means of payment of such fees or
tuition shall be accepted or declined and the manner in and conditions
upon which the financing agency shall pay to such board of education the
amount of such fees or tuition paid by means of a credit card pursuant
to such agreement. Any such agreement may provide for the payment by
such board of education to such financing agency of fees for the
services provided by such financing agency. For purposes of this
paragraph, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
 (i) "Credit card" means any credit card, credit plate, charge plate,
courtesy card, debit card or other identification card or device issued
by a person to another person which may be used to obtain a cash advance
or a loan or credit, or to purchase or lease property or services on the
credit of the person issuing the credit card or a person who has agreed
with the issuer to pay obligations arising from the use of a credit card
issued to another person.
 (ii) "Financing agency" means any agency defined as such in
subdivision eighteen of section four hundred one of the personal
property law;
 (iii) "Person" means an individual, partnership, corporation or any
other legal or commercial entity.
 5. School days spent in legal employment by pupils enrolled in
approved career cooperative education programs who are in part-time
school attendance shall be included in the average daily attendance and
average daily membership for apportionment of state aid under provisions
of section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter.
 § 4603. Practical arts. 1. The board of education of each school
district may establish and maintain non-vocational practical arts tryout
or exploratory courses in industrial arts, home economics, business and
agriculture.
 2. Such practical arts courses and exploratory courses shall be
classified as general education. The schools which offer such courses
shall not designate them as trade, technical or occupational courses.
 § 4604. Continuing education adult schools. 1. The board of education
of each school district may establish and maintain day and evening
schools for adults, the controlling purpose of which shall be to provide
a general program of continuing education in all its aspects for the
improvement of the civic, vocational and general intelligence of adults
and to enable them to make a wise use of their leisure time. Such
continuing education adult schools may be of the following kinds:
 a. Citizenship schools providing instruction in English, civics, the
common branches and other subjects which may increase the civic and
general intelligence of foreign born, illiterate and non-English
speaking persons.
 b. General continuing education adult schools providing instruction in
approved high school subjects, general cultural subjects, approved
occupational subjects, music, dramatic arts, fine, applied and practical
arts subjects.
 c. Recreation and leisure time schools providing instruction in
physical education, health education, sports, games, arts and crafts and
leisure time activities generally.
 2. The common council, council or board of estimate and apportionment
of a city, the board of supervisors or other governing elective body of
a county, the board of trustees of an incorporated village and the town
board of a town may make appropriations to aid and promote the extension
of education among illiterate and non-English speaking persons within
the jurisdiction of such respective bodies.
 3. The commissioner is authorized and directed to promulgate rules and
regulations to provide for the notification of participants in adult
continuing education schools of the emergency procedures to be followed
in the event of fire.
 § 4605. Vocational and educational guidance. 1. The board of
education of each school district or board of cooperative educational
services may employ qualified persons for the purpose of providing
vocational and educational guidance for minors. Such vocational and
educational guidance service and the qualifications of the counselors
employed for such work shall be approved by the commissioner.
 2. The board of education of each school district or board of
cooperative educational services may establish, conduct and maintain as
a part of the public school system a guidance bureau which shall perform
such of the following duties as may be determined by such board:
 a. Providing information and counsel for pupils regarding educational
and occupational opportunities.
 b. Providing employment and follow-up services for minors in
cooperation with existing public agencies.
 c. Conducting research studies of pupils and the local educational and
occupational opportunities in cooperation with existing public agencies.
 d. Assisting in the organization of courses of study dealing with
educational and occupational opportunities for use in the schools and in
teaching and supervising such courses.
 e. Organizing and conducting a counseling service in the schools to
assist pupils in the formation of their educational and vocational
plans.
 f. Cooperating with other staff members to advance the educational and
occupational progress of pupils.
 § 4606. School-to-employment program. 1. The commissioner is hereby
authorized to make apportionments to school districts in accordance with
the provisions of this section, to encourage and assist such districts
to provide a school-to-employment program to consist of a part-time
school and a part-time employment program.
 2. Any school district planning to establish such a program shall
submit to the commissioner on or before the first day of May of the
school year preceding the school year during which the program is to be
conducted, an application, together with such information as the
commissioner shall require, including at least a complete statement of
purposes of the program, the detailed procedures of operation, a
detailed estimate of the cost of such program and a complete description
of the manner in which the program will operate.
 In the event that any funds of a school district are to be utilized to
provide a stipend for students in the part-time employment program, the
plan shall indicate the types of employment situations which will be
furnished such students. The plan shall indicate that no public funds
will be used to pay a student in an employment situation furnished by a
non-governmental employer.
 3. The commissioner shall evaluate such applications and shall
promulgate a list in accordance with the merit and value of the various
programs and where several programs are evaluated, as having equal merit
and value, the date of receipt of the application.
 4. The commissioner shall determine the amount of apportionment which
shall be made to those programs which he deems to have merit within the
amount of the appropriation therefor.
 5. Notwithstanding any other provision or law to the contrary,
vocational schools and classes may be organized and conducted in
accordance with regulations adopted by the commissioner to provide a
program for students fifteen years of age and over who might benefit
from appropriate instruction consisting of a part-time school and a
part-time employment program.
 6. Any school district conducting a school-to-employment program is
hereby authorized and empowered to do and perform any and all acts
necessary or convenient to enable it to carry out the provisions of this
article and it is authorized to enter into a contract with any person,
firm, association, partnership, corporation or governmental agency
whereby such person, firm, association, partnership, corporation or
governmental agency will provide part-time employment to students
enrolled in such program, the consideration of such contract, if it
otherwise meets the provisions of this section, to be a legal charge
against the school district. Any person, firm, association,
partnership, corporation or governmental agency participating with a
school district in a school-to-employment program is not to be penalized
for participating in such program by reason of the fact that such child
may be only fifteen years of age or may not have otherwise complied with
other provisions of the law which would be applicable thereto, and any
pupil obtaining vocational experience in participation with a school
district in a school-to-employment program is not to be deemed an
employee within the meaning of the labor law, provided that the
school-to-employment program involved meets the regulations of the
commissioner.
 § 4607. Bridge to employment, work tryout and education program. 1.
The commissioner is hereby authorized and directed to make grants within
the limits of the appropriation available for such purpose, to major
education providers, as defined in the Vocational Education Act of 1963,
service delivery area administrative entities and private industry
councils as established by the Job Training Partnership Act (JTPA) of
1982 in accordance with the provisions of this section, to encourage the
establishment of a bridge to employment, work tryout and education
program for certain targeted populations with businesses with no more
than two hundred fifty employees in any facility and no more than an
aggregate of one thousand employees in the state of New York. Priority
shall be accorded to jointly developed proposals from major education
providers, as defined in the Vocational Education Act, and service
delivery area administrative entities. For the purposes of a statewide
program, the commissioner is hereby authorized to develop regulations,
and to consult with the commissioner of labor, to establish
administrative, program, and expenditure guidelines and standards for
the work tryout experience and the bridge to employment programs
pursuant to this chapter. Such regulations and guidelines shall include
provisions for educational services to meet additional job skill
requirements for youth or adults to continue such employment placements.
 2. Any agency or organization, eligible for a grant or contract under
the provisions of subdivision one of this section, which plans to
establish a bridge to employment, work tryout and education program
shall submit an application to the commissioner on or before the first
day of July of each year in which such program is conducted provided,
however, that such application for the nineteen hundred
eighty-seven--eighty-eight pilot program shall be filed by September
first, nineteen hundred eighty-seven. Priority shall be accorded to
jointly developed proposals from major education providers and service
delivery area administrative entities. Such application shall include
but not be limited to, at least a statement of the purpose of the
program, a detailed estimate of the cost of such program, a complete
description of the manner in which the program will operate and how the
program will improve and expand education and placement services
currently offered by the applicant, and such other information as the
commissioner shall require.
 3. For the purposes of a statewide program, the commissioner in the
consultation with the commissioner of labor shall evaluate such
applications, using as criteria the merit and value of the various
programs submitted and prior experience of such agency or agencies and
subcontracts in provision of placement services. The commissioner shall
then promulgate a list of those programs that have been selected
according to regulations established by the commissioner.
 4. The commissioner shall determine the amount of the apportionment
which shall be made to those programs which he deems to have merit
within the amount of the appropriation therefor.
 5. A person who seeks to participate under the bridge to employment,
work tryout and education program must be:
 a. (1) a secondary student who has completed an career sequence or
 (2) a community college graduate who has completed a certificate or
associate degree program in career education and
 (3) unemployed three months after completion of such education; or
 b. (1) an unemployed adult at least twenty-one years of age or older
who has completed a career education adult and/or other training program
or have the necessary capacity and past employment history to explore
new job experiences and
 (2) meet any of the following qualifications:
 (i) single parent;
 (ii) dislocated worker;
 (iii) long-term unemployed;
 (iv) displaced homemaker;
 (v) older worker;
 (vi) economically disadvantaged;
 (vii) handicapped individuals; or
 (viii) such other individuals as the commissioner may determine to be
eligible.
 c. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the work experience
under this chapter shall not affect any predetermined eligibility under
the Job Training Partnership Act of 1982 or any other appropriate
educational services program.
 6. Any agency or organization designated by the commissioner to
conduct a bridge to employment, work tryout and education program is
hereby authorized and empowered to do and perform all acts necessary or
convenient to enable it to carry out the provisions of this section and
it is authorized to enter into a contract with any person, firm,
association, partnership or corporation whereby such person, firm,
association, partnership or corporation will provide work tryout
experience to participants enrolled in such program, the consideration
for such contract, if it otherwise meets the provisions of this section,
to be a legal charge against the agency or organization. However, no
placements will be made with any person, firm, association, partnership
or corporation where there is an industry/labor controversy, as defined
in regulations of the commissioner of labor.
 7. Use of funds. a. Work tryout experiences. Agencies or organizations
participating in the bridge to employment, work tryout and education
program may provide to eligible participants up to one hundred hours of
full-time or part-time work tryout experiences with small to
medium-sized employers at no cost to those participating employers. No
such experiences may last more than forty hours with any single
employer. Employers who elect to retain a participant from the work
tryout experience may transfer such participants to a bridge to
employment placement component of the program and receive full benefit
of such program. Up to fifty percent of the funds are to be used to
support, administer and promote the work tryout experience program.
 Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, any
participants in the work tryout experience who are returned back to the
program operator because of lack of skills required to retain employment
shall be provided education and training in such skills as the program
operator deems necessary and available from local, state or federal
funded training programs.
 b. Bridge to employment placement. The remaining funds are to be
utilized to provide a bridge to employment placement program with small
and medium employers. Eligible agencies and organizations serving as
program operators may subcontract with temporary help services,
employment and training agencies, or employers for placement of
participants with the following support provided from these funds:
 (1) Payroll administration and program promotion by the agency or
organization or sub-contractor for up to two hundred eighty hours but
not more than seven weeks for each person placed in employment.
 (2) Appropriate share of wages and fringe benefits for such
employment.
 Employers will be responsible for payment of at least fifty percent of
the wages and fringe benefits for such employment. After seven weeks of
employment the bridge to employment and education program benefits shall
cease and the employer must pay all expenses.
 Employers participating in the program shall not be required to
participate for any specific period of time. Participants may be hired
by participating employers at any time or may be returned to the bridge
to employment and education program operator at any time with a
statement of circumstances and/or work related deficiencies. Continued
employer participation in the program shall be determined by
demonstrated transition to unsubsidized employment at levels established
by the agency or organization and approved by the commissioner. However,
employers who have released an excessive number of participants from the
bridge to employment programs within the first six months of placement
pursuant to commissioner regulations shall be prohibited from seeking
further placements from the bridge to employment program.
 c. Employment and training agencies or temporary help services or
other organizations which may serve as subcontractors may charge
overhead and promotional expenses as provided in approved contracts for
work tryout experience and bridge to employment programs as specified in
guidelines and/or regulations of the commissioner. Such agencies,
services or organizations shall endeavor to serve at least fifty percent
of the participants in the bridge to employment program from paragraph b
of subdivision five of this section.
 d. Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, any eligible
adult who is either economically disadvantaged or handicapped shall be
eligible for forty additional hours of work tryout experience benefits
and one hundred twenty additional hours of bridge to employment
placement benefits.
 8. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, any
participants in the bridge to employment and education program who are
referred back to the program operator because of lack of skills required
to retain employment shall be provided education and training in such
skills as the placement agency deems necessary and available from local,
state or federal funded training programs.
 ARTICLE 95
 FARM SCHOOLS IN COUNTIES
Section 4701. Establishment of farm schools.
 4702. Acquisition of lands and erection of buildings.
 4703. Board of managers.
 4704. Powers and duties of board.
 4705. Powers of superintendent; discipline of school.
 4706. Course of instruction.
 4707. Children admitted to such school.
 4708. State aid.
 4709. Agreements with parents and guardians to pay expense of
 maintenance; compulsory support.
 4710. Maintenance by county.
 4711. Reports to board of supervisors; inspection.
 4712. Powers of commissioner of education and education
 department.
 § 4701. Establishment of farm schools. The board of supervisors or
other governing elective body of any county outside of the city of New
York may adopt a resolution by a majority vote of the members of such
board or body establishing a farm school for the purpose of giving
instruction in the trades and in industrial, agricultural and homemaking
subjects to children of the county not more than eighteen nor less than
eight years of age who may be admitted thereto as provided by law.
 § 4702. Acquisition of lands and erection of buildings. Upon the
adoption of the resolution as provided in section forty-seven hundred
one the board of supervisors or other governing elective body shall
purchase land in some conveniently accessible place in the county to be
used for the purpose of such school. They may acquire such land by
gift, purchase or condemnation. The land when so acquired shall be held
in the name of the county for the benefit of such school. Upon the
acquisition of such land such board or body shall erect the necessary
buildings and suitably equip them for use. Such board or body may also
provide for the improvement of existing buildings and make such repairs
and alterations on the buildings upon the land used for the purpose of
the school as may be necessary for the maintenance and operation
thereof.
 § 4703. Board of managers. The board of managers of such school shall
consist of not less than five members and shall be composed of all the
city, village and district superintendents of schools of the county in
which it is located, in addition to such other members as may be
necessary to make a total membership of such board of not less than
five. Such additional members of the board shall be appointed by the
board of supervisors or other governing elective body from the resident
taxpayers of the county, who shall serve for terms of four years
commencing on the first day of January succeeding their appointment.
Such terms shall be so arranged that the terms of no two of the members
so appointed shall expire in the same year, and for this purpose the
terms of the members first appointed hereunder shall be as follows: In
case one member shall be appointed, the term shall be four years, in
case two members shall be appointed, the terms shall be four and two
years, respectively, in case three members shall be appointed, the terms
shall be four, three and two years, and in case four members shall be
appointed, the terms shall be four, three, two and one year,
respectively, which terms shall commence on the first day of January
succeeding their appointment, and their successors shall be appointed
for full terms of four years as above provided. Appointments to fill
vacancies shall be for the unexpired portion of the terms. The members
of the board shall serve without compensation. They shall receive their
necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. The
amount of such expenses shall be charged against the county and shall be
paid in the same manner as other county charges. The board shall
organize by the election of one of its members as chairman and another
as secretary.
 § 4704. Powers and duties of board. The board of managers of such
school shall be responsible for the operation and maintenance of the
school; employ a superintendent and such teachers and assistants as may
be required for the operation and maintenance of the school when
authorized so to do by the board of supervisors or other governing
elective body of the county; fix the compensation of such
superintendent, teachers and assistants within the amount made available
therefor by the said board or body; prescribe rules and regulations for
the management of the school and for the purpose of carrying into effect
the object thereof; provide for the detention, maintenance and
instruction of all children who are admitted to the school.
 § 4705. Powers of superintendent; discipline of school. The
superintendent of the school shall, subject to the regulations of the
board of managers:
 1. Have the general management of the school and the land, buildings
and equipment thereof, and devote his entire time to its affairs;
 2. Be responsible for the welfare of pupils of the school and see that
the regulations and directions of the board of managers are carried into
effect;
 3. Supervise and direct the methods of instruction and the performance
of duties by the teachers, assistants and employees of such school;
 4. Prescribe rules for the government and discipline of the pupils of
the school and cause such rules to be enforced;
 5. Protect and care for the property of the school;
 6. Give special attention to the proper instruction, detention,
restraint, discipline, comfort and physical and moral welfare of the
pupils of the school, and perform such other duties as may be required
of him by the board of managers, with a view of carrying out the
purposes of this article.
 § 4706. Course of instruction. The board of managers shall prescribe
the courses of instruction to be followed in such school, subject to the
approval of the commissioner of education. Such instruction shall
include instruction in agriculture, mechanic arts, trades and
homemaking. The provisions of this chapter and of the regulations of
the education department relating to vocational instruction in the
public schools shall apply to such school so far as they do not conflict
with the provisions of this article and may be made applicable thereto.
 § 4707. Children admitted to such school. Children not more than
eighteen nor less than eight years of age may be admitted to or received
in such school, either (1) upon the application of the parents or
guardians having the legal custody or control of such children,
accompanied by the written consent of such parents or guardians, or (2)
upon commitment thereto as truants or (3) upon commitment thereto as
juvenile delinquents as provided by law, provided that children
convicted of crime shall not be committed to such school. Children who
have no homes or who are without proper parental control or who are
under improper guardianship may be sent to and received in such school,
in the same manner and under the same authority as in case of other
children who are improperly provided for at home.
 § 4708. State aid. There shall be annually apportioned to such school
from the moneys appropriated by the state legislature for the support of
the public schools of the state the sum of one thousand dollars and an
additional sum of two hundred dollars for each teacher employed therein
for a period of thirty-six weeks during each school year, whose entire
time is given to the instruction of pupils in such school. No such
apportionment shall be made unless there are at least fifteen pupils
enrolled and actually in attendance at such school during such period of
thirty-six weeks, and unless such school maintains an organization and a
course of study and is conducted in a manner approved by the
commissioner of education.
 § 4709. Agreements with parents and guardians to pay expense of
maintenance; compulsory support. The board of managers may make an
agreement with the parents or guardian of a child in such school for the
payment of an amount therein specified for the instruction and
maintenance of such pupil. An application for the admission of a child
with the consent of the parents or guardian shall not be granted unless
suitable provision be made for the clothing of such child. The amount
agreed to be paid for instruction, maintenance and clothing shall be
secured to the satisfaction of the board of managers. Such board shall
ascertain by investigation the financial ability of parents, guardians,
and other persons legally liable for the support of pupils admitted to
such school upon commitment, and may demand of such parents, guardians
or persons the payment of an amount reasonably sufficient to pay all or
a portion of the cost of the instruction, maintenance and clothing of
such pupils. The board may proceed against such parents, guardians or
persons, by proper suit or proceeding in a court of competent
jurisdiction for the recovery of the amount agreed or required to be
paid, as herein provided. The amount so recovered, after the payment of
the necessary costs and expenses of such suit or proceeding, shall be
paid into the treasury of the county, and shall be applied to the
payment of the cost of the instruction, maintenance and clothing of such
pupils.
 § 4710. Maintenance by county. The board of supervisors or other
governing elective body shall provide for the maintenance of such
school, the repair and improvement of the lands and buildings used or
occupied thereby, and the equipment thereof with necessary machinery,
tools, apparatus and supplies. The cost thereof, and the expenses
incurred for such purposes, shall be charges against the county and
shall be audited and paid in the same manner as other charges against
the county. The maintenance herein provided for shall include the
support, instruction, care, board and clothing of pupils and such other
expenses as are necessarily incurred in the operation of the school.
 § 4711. Reports to board of supervisors; inspection. The board of
managers of such school shall report in writing to the board of
supervisors or other governing elective body of the county when called
upon to do so, and shall transmit such report to the clerk of such board
or body, annually, on or before the thirtieth day of June. Such annual
report shall state such facts in respect to the school as the board of
managers may deem advisable and as the board of supervisors or other
governing elective body may require. Such board or body may, by a
committee or any of its members or appointees, inspect such school, and
for such purpose may enter upon the land and into the buildings of such
school at all reasonable times.
 § 4712. Powers of commissioner of education and education department.
A school established as provided herein shall be deemed a part of the
public school system of the state, and shall be subject to the
supervision and control of the commissioner of education and the
education department in the same manner as other public schools, and
shall not be subject to any of the laws of the state relating to
charitable or penal institutions.
 ARTICLE 97
 HOME SCHOOLS IN CERTAIN CITIES
Section 4801. Establishment of home schools.
 4802. Acquisition of lands and erection of buildings.
 4803. Board of managers.
 4804. Powers and duties of managers.
 4805. Course of instruction.
 4806. Powers of superintendent and discipline of school.
 4807. Children admitted to such school.
 4808. Jurisdiction of courts.
 4809. Transfer of pupils.
 4810. Quarantine.
 4811. State aid.
 4812. Agreements with parents and guardians to pay expense of
 maintenance; compulsory support.
 4813. Maintenance by city.
 4814. Report of superintendent.
 4815. Powers of commissioner of education and education
 department.
 § 4801. Establishment of home schools. The common council of any city
having a population of over seventy thousand but less than two hundred
fifty thousand inhabitants may adopt a resolution by a majority vote
establishing a home school for the purpose of giving instruction in the
trades, industrial, agricultural and homemaking subjects in addition to
instruction in public school subjects to children of the city and other
children not more than eighteen years nor less than eight years of age
who may be admitted thereto as hereinafter provided. Such school shall
be known as the Home School of.................(Name of city
establishing school).
 § 4802. Acquisition of lands and erection of buildings. Upon the
adoption of the resolution as provided in section forty-eight hundred
one, the city, through its properly constituted officers having power
and jurisdiction therein, shall lease or purchase land in a convenient,
accessible place in the county in which such city is located and not
less than six miles from the center of the city to be used for the
purpose of such school. Such land may be acquired by gift, purchase or
condemnation. The land when so acquired shall be held in the name of
the city for the benefit of such school. Upon acquisition of such land
the city shall erect the necessary buildings and suitably equip them for
use. Such city may also provide for the improvement of existing
buildings and make such repairs and alterations upon the buildings upon
the land used for the purposes of the school as may be necessary for the
maintenance and operation thereof.
 § 4803. Board of managers. The board of managers of such school shall
consist of not less than five members to be appointed by the mayor of
such city and of which board the superintendent of schools in any such
city shall be one member ex-officio. Members of the board other than
the said superintendent shall be appointed from resident taxpayers of
the city who shall serve for terms of four years commencing upon the
first day of January succeeding the appointment. Such terms shall be so
arranged that the terms of no two of the members so appointed shall
expire in the same year, and for this purpose the terms of members first
appointed hereunder shall be as follows: In case one member shall be
appointed the term shall be four years; in case two members are
appointed the term shall be four and two years respectively; in case
three members are appointed the term shall be four, three and two years;
in case four members shall be appointed the terms shall be four, three,
two and one year respectively. Such terms shall commence on the first
day of January succeeding the appointment and their successors shall be
appointed for a full term of four years as above provided. Appointments
to fill vacancies shall be for the unexpired portion of the terms. The
members of the board shall serve without compensation. They shall
receive their necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their
duties. The amount of such expenses shall be charged against the city
and paid in the same manner as other city charges. The board shall
organize by the election of one of its members as chairman and another
as secretary.
 § 4804. Powers and duties of managers. 1. The board of managers of
such school shall be responsible for the operation and maintenance of
the school; employ a superintendent and such teachers and assistants as
may be required for the operation and maintenance of the school; fix
compensation of such superintendent, teachers and assistants within the
amount made available therefor by the board of estimate and
apportionment or other similar body or officer of such city; prescribe
rules and regulations for the management of the school and for the
purpose of carrying into effect the object thereof; provide for the
detention, maintenance and instruction of all children who are admitted
to the school. Such board shall on or before the first day of January
each year furnish to the mayor estimates in writing of the amount of
expenditures for the next fiscal year. All expenses and appropriations
for such school shall be subject to the provisions of sections
seventy-three, seventy-four, seventy-five, seventy-six and seventy-seven
of second class cities law, and of any and all other provisions of said
law applicable thereto.
 2. The board of managers shall have full power to discharge or parole
at any time any child admitted to such school. A child under sixteen
years of age committed to the school by a court and paroled for good
conduct may be arrested and detained in the school for violation of the
terms of his parole.
 § 4805. Course of instruction. The board of managers shall prescribe
the course of instruction to be followed in such school, subject to the
approval of the commissioner of education. Such instruction shall
include instruction in agriculture, mechanic arts, trades and homemaking
and in the duties, responsibilities and privileges of citizenship. The
provisions of this article and of the regulations of the education
department relating to vocational instruction in the public schools
shall apply to such school so far as they do not conflict with the
provisions of this article and may be made applicable thereto.
 § 4806. Powers of superintendent and discipline of school. The
superintendent of the school shall, subject to the regulations of the
board of managers:
 1. Have the general management of the school, land, buildings and
equipment thereof, and devote his entire time to its affairs.
 2. Supervise and direct the methods of instruction and the performance
of duties by the teachers, assistants and employees of such school.
 3. Be responsible for the welfare of the pupils of the school, see
that the regulations and directions of the board of managers are carried
into effect.
 4. Prescribe rules for the government and discipline of the pupils of
the school and cause such rules to be enforced. Discipline shall be
maintained by the honor system so far as practicable. Close or solitary
confinement shall not be used excepting when necessary for the
maintenance of proper discipline.
 5. Protect and care for the property of the school.
 6. Give special attention to the proper instruction, detention,
restraint, discipline, comfort, physical and moral welfare of the pupils
of the school and perform such other duties as may be required of him by
the board of managers with a view of carrying out the provisions of this
article.
 § 4807. Children admitted to such school. Children not more than
eighteen nor less than eight years of age may be admitted to or received
in such school as follows:
 1. Upon the application of the parents or guardians having the legal
custody and control of such children accompanied by the written consent
of such parents or guardians.
 2. Truants or children coming within any of the descriptions mentioned
in section thirty-two hundred fourteen of this chapter upon commitment
thereto either by the school authorities or by a court having
jurisdiction thereof.
 3. Children coming within any of the descriptions mentioned in
sections four hundred eighty-five and four hundred eighty-six of the
penal law upon commitment thereto by a court.
 4. Children under twelve years found guilty of juvenile delinquency.
 5. Children over twelve and under sixteen years of age found guilty of
juvenile delinquency for the first time and for an offense of a grade
not higher than misdemeanor.
 Children resident in the city establishing such school duly committed
thereto shall be received therein. The board of managers may in their
discretion and upon such terms as to payment of expenses as they see
fit, admit children resident in the county in which said city is
situated or resident in any adjoining county not having a city to which
this article applies.
 § 4808. Jurisdiction of courts. Courts having jurisdiction of
children shall have power to commit children to the school who are
receivable therein as set forth in section forty-eight hundred seven.
Commitments by such courts shall be in accordance with the provisions of
the penal law and code of criminal procedure applicable thereto. The
commitment shall not be for any fixed period of detention. Such
detention shall be conducted with a view to the improvement and to the
restoration, as soon as practicable, of the child so committed to its
home, if after due investigation such home is found to be satisfactory.
The provisions of section four hundred eighty-six of the penal law as to
commitments to institutions shall apply fully to commitments to the
school.
 § 4809. Transfer of pupils. The board of managers shall have full
power to transfer to other institutions any child if a court grants a
petition for transfer pursuant to section seven hundred seventy-three of
the family court act.
 § 4810. Quarantine. A pupil committed to the school either by court
or school authorities upon being received shall be kept separate and
apart for a period of not less than seven days. During this time a
complete physical and mental examination of such child shall be made by
qualified physicians. Such physicians shall make reports in writing to
the superintendent stating fully the results of such examinations; such
reports shall be kept on file by the superintendent in proper and
systematic order.
 During the period of such quarantine the superintendent and teachers
shall give special attention to the pupil with a view of obtaining
knowledge of the child and gaining his confidence.
 § 4811. State aid. There shall be annually apportioned to such school
from the moneys appropriated by the state legislature for the support of
the public schools of the state the sum of one thousand dollars and an
additional sum of two hundred dollars for each teacher employed therein
for a period of thirty-six weeks during each school year, whose entire
time is given to the instruction of pupils in such school. No such
apportionment shall be made unless there are at least fifteen pupils
enrolled and actually in attendance at such school during such period of
thirty-six weeks, and unless such school maintains an organization and a
course of study, and is conducted in a manner approved by the
commissioner of education.
 § 4812. Agreements with parents and guardians to pay expense of
maintenance; compulsory support. The board of managers may make an
agreement with the parents or guardian of a child in such school for the
payment of an amount therein specified for the instruction and
maintenance of such pupil. An application for the admission of a child
with the consent of the parents or guardian shall not be granted unless
suitable provision be made for the clothing of such child. The amount
agreed to be paid for instruction, maintenance and clothing shall be
secured to the satisfaction of the board of managers. Such board shall
ascertain by investigation the financial ability of parents, guardians
and other persons legally liable for the support of pupils admitted to
such school upon commitment, and may demand of such parents, guardians
or persons the payment of an amount reasonably sufficient to pay all or
a portion of the cost of instruction, maintenance, and clothing of such
pupils. The board may proceed against such parents, guardians or
persons, by proper suit or proceeding in a court of competent
jurisdiction for the recovery of the amount agreed or required to be
paid, as herein provided. The amount so recovered, after the payment of
the proper costs and expenses of such suit or proceeding, shall be paid
into the treasury of the city, and shall be applied to the payment of
the cost of the instruction, maintenance, and clothing of such pupils.
Such action at law shall be brought in the name of the city by the
corporation counsel thereof.
 This provision shall in no way affect the power of the committing
court to order payment as provided in subdivision b of section nine
hundred twenty-one of the code of criminal procedure.
 Children committed either by court or school authorities of the city
shall be a charge upon such city. Children so committed from outside of
the city shall be a charge upon the city, incorporated village or
township from which committed.
 § 4813. Maintenance by city. The board of estimate and apportionment
or other similar body or officer shall provide for the maintenance of
such school, the repair and improvement of the lands and buildings used
or occupied thereby, and the equipment thereof with necessary machinery,
tools, apparatus and supplies. The cost thereof, and the expenses
incurred for such purposes, shall be charged against the city and shall
be audited and paid in the same manner as other charges against the
city. The maintenance herein provided for shall include the support,
instruction, care, board and clothing of pupils and such other expenses
as are necessarily incurred in the operation of the school.
 § 4814. Report of superintendent. The superintendent of the school
shall report annually to the mayor in accordance with the provisions of
section twenty-three of the second-class cities law. Such report shall
be countersigned by a majority of the board of managers. The mayor
shall have power to inspect the school at any time, and may appoint a
committee of citizens who shall have power to inspect such school and
for such purpose may enter upon the lands and into the buildings of such
school at all reasonable times.
 § 4815. Powers of commissioner of education and education department.
A school established as provided herein shall be deemed a part of the
public school system of the state, and shall be subject to the
supervision and control of the commissioner of education and the
education department in the same manner as other public schools, and
shall not be subject to any of the laws of the state relating to
charitable or penal institutions.
 ARTICLE 99
 NEW YORK NAUTICAL SCHOOL
Section 4901. New York nautical school may be established and
 maintained.
 4902. Management.
 4903. Chamber of commerce to appoint committee to serve as
 council.
 4904. Expenses.
 § 4901. New York nautical school may be established and maintained.
The board of education of the city of New York, in its discretion, may
provide and maintain a nautical school in such city for the education
and training of pupils in the science and practice of navigation; may
furnish accommodations for such school and make all needful rules and
regulations therefor, and for the number and compensation of instructors
and others employed therein; may prescribe the government and discipline
thereof and the terms and conditions upon which pupils shall be received
and instructed therein and discharged therefrom and provide in all
things for the good management of such nautical school. Such board
shall have power to purchase the books, apparatus, stationery and other
things necessary or expedient to enable such school to be properly and
successfully conducted; and may cause such school or the pupils, or part
of the pupils thereof, to go on board vessels in the harbor of New York
and take cruises in or from such harbor for the purpose of obtaining a
practical knowledge in navigation and of the duties of mariners. Such
board is hereby authorized to apply to the United States government for
the requisite use of vessels and supplies for the purposes above
mentioned.
 § 4902. Management. The board of education of the city of New York
shall appoint annually at least three of its number who, subject to the
control, supervision and approbation of the board, shall constitute an
executive committee for the care, government and management of such
nautical school, under rules and regulations so prescribed, and whose
duty it shall be, among other things, to recommend the rules and
regulations which they deem necessary and proper for such school.
 § 4903. Chamber of commerce to appoint committee to serve as council.
The chamber of commerce of New York is authorized to provide for and
appoint a committee of its members to serve as a council of the nautical
school, whose duty it shall be, as far as may be, to advise and
cooperate with the board of education of the city of New York in the
establishment and management of such school and from time to time to
visit and examine the same, and to communicate in respect thereof with
the board of education or such executive committee thereof, and to make
reports to the chamber of commerce which may transmit to the
commissioner of education such reports, or any thereof, or an abstract
of the same, with such recommendations as may be deemed advisable.
 § 4904. Expenses. After the establishment and organization of such
school the expenses thereof, and of carrying out the provisions of this
article, shall be defrayed from the moneys raised by law for the support
of public schools in the city of New York.
 ARTICLE 101
 LICENSED PRIVATE CAREER SCHOOLS AND CERTIFIED ENGLISH AS A SECOND
 LANGUAGE SCHOOLS
Section 5001. Licensed private career schools.
 5002. Standards for licensed private career schools.
 5003. Disciplinary actions, hearings and penalties.
 5004. Private school agent's certificate.
 5005. Disclosure to students.
 5006. Teachout plans.
 5007. Tuition reimbursement account.
 5008. Trust accounts.
 5009. Duties of the commissioner.
 5010. Advisory council.
 § 5001. Licensed private career schools. 1. Schools required to be
licensed. No private school which charges tuition or fees related to
instruction and which is not exempted hereunder shall be operated by any
person or persons, firm, corporation, or private organization for the
purpose of teaching or giving instruction in any subject or subjects,
unless it is licensed by the department. As used in this article:
 a. "licensed private career school" or "licensed private school" shall
mean any entity offering to instruct or teach any subject by any plan or
method including written, visual or audio-visual methods, and shall
include any institution licensed or registered as a registered business
school or computer training facility on the effective date of chapter
three hundred eighty-one of the laws of two thousand twelve. Following
such effective date, there shall be no distinction between institutions
previously defined as "registered business schools" or "computer
training facilities" and other licensed private schools, and any
reference in law to a registered business school or computer training
facility shall be deemed a reference to a licensed private career
school. Institutions holding a valid business school registration on
such effective date, including computer-training facilities, shall have
such registrations replaced by the commissioner, at no cost, with
licenses valid until the expiration date listed on such previous
registration;
 b. "certified English as a second language school" or "certified ESL
school" shall mean a language school conducted for-profit which provides
instruction in English as a second language and which accepts no public
funds and is certified pursuant to paragraph f of subdivision four of
this section; and
 c. "online education marketplace" shall mean a website or other
internet-based online technology tool with which a licensed private
career school or certified ESL school contracts for marketing or
advertising services, or services in connection with the collection of
tuition and/or fees, to the extent authorized in subdivision three of
section five thousand four of this article.
 2. Exempt schools. The following schools are exempted from the
licensing requirement of this section:
 a. institutions authorized to confer degrees in this state;
 b. schools providing kindergarten, nursery, elementary or secondary
education, except schools conducted for profit which provide instruction
in English as a second language or preparation for high school
equivalency examinations to out-of-school youth or adults;
 c. schools operated by governmental agencies or authorities;
 d. schools which engage exclusively in training of students with
disabilities as defined in section forty-four hundred one of this
chapter;
 e. schools conducted on a not-for-profit basis by firms or
organizations for the training of their own employees only, provided
that such instruction is offered at no charge to such employees, or by a
fraternal society or benevolent order for its members or their immediate
relatives only;
 f. schools which provide instruction in the following subjects only:
religion, dancing, music, painting, drawing, sculpture, poetry, dramatic
art, languages, reading comprehension, mathematics, recreation, yoga,
martial arts, pilates and athletics, including the training of students
to teach such subjects, provided, however, that schools conducted for
the purpose of training personal trainers shall be excluded from this
exemption and shall be required to obtain licensure;
 g. schools in which the course of instruction is licensed, registered
or approved under any other section of this chapter or by any other
department or agency of the state;
 h. schools which provide instruction designed solely for giving flight
training and/or related ground school instruction;
 i. schools in which instruction designed solely to prepare applicants
for admission to professional licensing examinations administered by the
department pursuant to title eight of this chapter, and applicants for
examination for admission to the practice of law;
 j. schools which offer continuing education courses exclusively for
individuals licensed by the department pursuant to title eight of this
chapter and for individuals admitted to the practice of law;
 k. schools which provide instruction given exclusively to employees of
a person or organization which has contracted with another person or
organization to provide such instruction at no cost to the employees;
 l. conferences, trade shows, workshops, seminars, institutes or
courses of study offered and sponsored either jointly or individually by
recognized trade, business or professional organizations for the benefit
of their membership;
 m. schools that limit their total conferences, trade shows, workshops,
seminars, institutes or other course offerings to no more than twice in
one calendar year with each of those offerings for no more than five
days;
 n. schools which provide instruction exclusively to persons employed
full-time or part-time in the field in which instruction is being
offered, where the instruction is provided to meet continuing education
standards required for professional licensure as defined by law in this
state;
 o. schools in candidacy status pursuant to subparagraph (iv) of
paragraph b of subdivision four of this section; and
 p. schools which provide instruction in photography exclusively for
non-occupational purposes.
 2-a. Schools exempted pursuant to subdivision two of this section may
waive such exemption and apply for a license; provided, however, that
the review of such applications shall be left to the discretion of the
commissioner.
 2-b. Programs offered by licensed private career schools to employees
of a person or organization which has contracted with another person or
organization to provide such instruction at no cost to the employees
shall be exempt from the requirements of this article, provided that the
following requirements are met:
 a. Only employees of the employer for which the program is being
offered may enroll in classes that make up the program.
 b. Certificates or diplomas awarded to students in the program may not
reference in any way the department.
 c. Prior to the commencement of the program, such schools shall submit
to the department a disclosure form, prescribed by the commissioner,
copies of which shall be provided to all students in such exempt
program, which shall include but not be limited to the following
information:
 (i) a description of the location and time period in which the program
will be offered;
 (ii) a statement that the students enrolled in the program shall not
be subject to any tuition liability for the program, even if such
students do not complete the program;
 (iii) a statement that the program being provided to the employer has
not been approved by the department and is not under the department's
jurisdiction and that the students in the program have been advised of
the fact; and
 (iv) the signatures of the school director or owner of the school and
the representative of the employer for which the program is being
offered certifying the accuracy of the statements on the form.
 d. Any additional student openings in a program deemed exempt by the
department may be made available to students not affiliated with the
employer on the condition that such students execute a disclosure form
as prescribed in paragraph c of this subdivision. Such admitted students
shall only constitute up to ten percent of the exempt program's total
capacity.
 4. Application, renewal application and application fees. a.
Application and renewal application for a license as a private career
school required by the commissioner shall be filed on forms prescribed
and provided by the department. Except as provided in subparagraph (iii)
of paragraph e of this subdivision, each renewal application for a
private career school licensed pursuant to this section shall include an
audited financial statement audited according to generally accepted
auditing standards by an independent certified public accountant or an
independent public accountant and statistical reports certified by the
owner or operator of the school, as required by the commissioner;
provided, however, that the commissioner shall accept a copy of a
current financial statement previously filed by a school with any other
governmental agency in compliance with the provisions of any federal or
state laws, or rules or regulations if such statement contains all of
the information required under this subdivision and conforms to this
subdivision's requirements of auditing, review and certification. Any
required audit of the financial statement shall be a condition of
licensure and shall be paid for by the school, and the results of the
audit shall be forwarded to the commissioner. Applications not
accompanied by the audits and reports required pursuant to this
subdivision shall not be considered for approval by the commissioner.
Initial applications shall be accompanied by financial reports as
required by the commissioner. The applicant shall receive a written
approval or denial together with the reasons for a denial of such
application.
 b. (i) An initial license issued pursuant to the provisions of this
article shall be valid for a period of two years. A renewal of license
issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be valid for a
period of four years.
 (ii) Every applicant and renewal applicant shall pay to the department
a nonrefundable, nontransferable application fee. The initial
application fee for new schools shall be five thousand dollars, of which
three thousand dollars shall accrue to the credit of the proprietary
vocational school supervision account and two thousand dollars shall
accrue to the tuition reimbursement account. For additional licensed
locations of currently operating schools, the application fee shall be
two thousand five hundred dollars, which shall accrue to the credit of
the proprietary vocational school supervision account. For renewal
applications, the fee shall be based on gross annual tuition income as
determined by the annual financial statements required in paragraph a of
this subdivision for the most recent school fiscal year, according to
the following schedule:
 GROSS ANNUAL TUITION INCOME FEE
 0-$199,999 $ 750.00
 $200,000-$499,999 $ 1,500.00
 $500,000-$999,999 $ 2,225.00
 $1,000,000-$4,999,999 $ 4,500.00
 $5,000,000-$9,999,999 $ 9,000.00
 $10,000,000 or above $18,000.00
 Such renewal fees shall accrue to the credit of the proprietary
vocational school supervision account. If the evaluation of a particular
course or facility requires the services of an expert not employed by
the department, the department shall retain such expert and the school
shall reimburse the department for the reasonable cost of such services.
 (iii) Each school shall display, near the entrance to the school, the
license which has been issued to it. Such authorization shall be
displayed only during the period of its validity.
 c. An application for renewal of any license shall be submitted at
least one hundred twenty days prior to the expiration date of the
current authorization to operate accompanied by the nonrefundable
application fee and such certified statistical reports and annual
financial statements required pursuant to this subdivision.
 d. When complete and timely application has been made for renewal of
any license, the school shall receive a written approval or denial,
together with the reasons for denial of renewal, from the commissioner
no less than thirty days prior to the date such license expires.
 e. Financial statements and statistical reports. (i) Licensed private
career schools and candidate schools shall submit such certified
statistical reports and annual financial statements as required by the
commissioner. The commissioner may require audited statistical reports
upon a determination that a school has provided false or inaccurate
certified statistical reports. The financial statements shall be based
on the fiscal year of the school and shall also include an itemized
account of tuition refunds due and owing to past or presently enrolled
students. Statistical reports shall include, but not be limited to,
enrollment, completion and placement data. The commissioner shall use
such financial statements and statistical reports submitted for the
purposes of licensure of schools, establishing fees or assessments
pursuant to this article and determining standards pursuant to paragraph
b of subdivision five of section five thousand two of this article. The
attorney general, the comptroller and the president of the higher
education services corporation shall have access to this information
when it is necessary to perform their duties as required by state law.
 (ii) Any school which received five hundred thousand dollars or more
in gross tuition in a school fiscal year shall be required to submit to
the commissioner an annual audited financial statement prepared in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles for that fiscal
year. In addition, any school which has a gross tuition of less than
five hundred thousand dollars in a school fiscal year but whose combined
state and federal student financial aid in such year equals one hundred
thousand dollars or more shall also submit an annual audited financial
statement to the commissioner for that fiscal year.
 (iii) Schools whose gross tuition is less than five hundred thousand
dollars in a school fiscal year and which receive less than one hundred
thousand dollars in state and federal student financial aid in a school
fiscal year shall file with the commissioner an unaudited financial
statement in a format prescribed by the commissioner, provided, however,
that any such school shall file an audited financial statement the
fiscal year after a reviewed financial statement is submitted. For such
schools, audited financial statements are required every two years, at
minimum, with reviewed financial statements allowed during the alternate
year. Upon a determination by the commissioner that a school has
submitted false or inaccurate statements or that a significant,
unsubstantiated decline in gross tuition has occurred, the commissioner
may require any such school to file an audited financial statement
pursuant to this paragraph even during alternate years when reviewed
statements would ordinarily be allowed.
 f. Alternate licensing provision. The commissioner shall issue
regulations which define alternate licensing or certification
requirements for the following:
 (1) correspondence schools in which all approved programs and courses
are under three hundred hours;
 (2) schools which are eligible for exemption under this section but
which elect to be licensed;
 (3) non-profit schools exempt from taxation under section 501(c)(3) of
the internal revenue code whose programs are funded entirely through
donations from individuals or philanthropic organizations, or
endowments, and interest accrued thereon; and
 (4) language schools conducted for-profit which provide instruction in
English as a second language and which accept no public funds.
 5. Required disclosure for licensure. a. The commissioner shall
require that each applicant for a license for the operation of a private
career school disclose the following information:
 (1) Whether the applicant, or any corporation, partnership,
association or organization or person holding an ownership or control
interest in such school, or any employee responsible in a supervisory
capacity for the administration of student funds or governmental funds,
has been convicted of a crime defined in this article, or any other
crime involving the operation of any educational or training program,
or, in connection with the operation of any such program, a crime
involving the unlawful acquisition, use, payment or expenditure of
educational or training program funds; and
 (2) Whether the applicant, or any corporation, partnership,
association or organization or person holding an ownership or control
interest in such school, or any employee responsible in a supervisory
capacity for the administration of student funds or governmental funds
has been convicted:
 (A) in this state of any of the following felonies defined in the
penal law: bribery involving public servants; commercial bribery;
perjury in the second degree; rewarding official misconduct; larceny, in
connection with the provision of services or involving the theft of
governmental funds; offering a false instrument for filing, falsifying
business records; tampering with public records; criminal usury; scheme
to defraud; or defrauding the government; or
 (B) in any other jurisdiction of an offense which is substantially
similar to any of the felonies defined in clause (A) of this
subparagraph and for which a sentence to a term of imprisonment in
excess of one year was authorized and is authorized in this state
regardless of whether such sentence was imposed; and
 (3) Whether the applicant, or any corporation, partnership,
association or organization or person holding an ownership or control
interest in such school, or any employee responsible in a supervisory
capacity for the administration of student funds or governmental funds,
has been finally determined in any administrative or civil proceeding to
have committed a violation of any provision of this article or any rules
and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, or any related order or
determination of the commissioner, or of any similar statute, rule,
regulation, order or determination of another jurisdiction pertaining to
the licensure and operation of any educational or training program; and
 (4) Whether any school owned or operated by the applicant closed or
ceased operation and, if so, whether at the time of the closing the
applicant was subject to a pending disciplinary action, disallowance,
fine or other penalty and whether it owed refunds to any government
agency or students.
 b. No application for any license pursuant to this article shall be
denied by reason of disclosure pursuant to this subdivision of the
applicant, or any corporation, partnership, association or organization
or person holding an ownership or control interest in such school, or
any employee responsible in a supervisory capacity for the
administration of student funds or governmental funds unless the
commissioner makes a written determination that there is a direct
relationship between one or more of such previous offenses and the
license sought, or that issuance of the license would create an
unreasonable risk to property or to the safety, education or welfare of
specific individuals or the general public. In making such
determination, the commissioner shall be guided by the factors set forth
in section seven hundred fifty-three of the correction law. For purposes
of this subdivision, "ownership or control interest" means: with respect
to a school that is organized as or owned by a corporation, a position
as an officer or director of such corporation; or, with respect to a
school that is organized as or owned by a partnership, a position as a
partner; or any other interest totaling ten percent or more, whether
direct or indirect, in the total equity or assets of such school.
 c. The commissioner may deny, suspend, revoke or decline to renew any
license: (1) if the significance of the convictions or administrative
violations warrant such action; (2) if the commissioner determines that
a school did not make any disclosure required by this subdivision; or
(3) if the commissioner determines that a school's financial condition
may result in the interruption or cessation of instruction or jeopardize
student tuition funds.
 6. If, during the period for which a license is granted, the
commissioner determines that a school's financial condition may result
in the interruption or cessation of instruction or jeopardize student
tuition funds, the commissioner may, upon notice to the school, place
the school on probation for a period of no more than one year, during
which time the school and the department must make efforts to resolve
the problems at the school. The school shall submit a report on its
financial condition to the commissioner within the time prescribed by
the commissioner. Such report shall be in the form and shall include
content prescribed by the commissioner and shall be reviewed by the
commissioner to determine the school's financial viability. The
commissioner may suspend or revoke the school's license, as well as
require the cessation of student enrollment, upon a determination that
the school's financial condition continues to threaten its ability to
educate students and/or the student tuition funds. Alternatives for the
school to demonstrate a fiscally sound operation may include securing
and maintaining a performance bond, payable to the commissioner, in an
appropriate amount to eliminate any liability to the tuition
reimbursement account should the school cease operation, limiting the
collection of tuition funds until each student completes the program of
study, or other means acceptable to the commissioner. If no resolution
can be attained, a hearing, pursuant to subdivisions two and three of
section five thousand three of this article will be scheduled. Such
probation may include additional monitoring, inspections, limitations on
enrollment, teaching out some or all of a school's present students or
temporary cessation of instruction.
 7. No license granted under this section shall be transferable or
assignable without the approval of the commissioner. Upon transfer or
assignment of any interest totaling twenty-five percent or more, whether
direct or indirect, in the total equity or assets of a school, such
school shall be deemed a new school required to submit a new school
application and obtain a new license pursuant to this article.
Provided, however, that upon such a substantial change in interest, the
previous school license shall remain in effect until the new license is
issued or denied or the previous license expires or is revoked,
whichever occurs first.
 8. No licensed school shall discontinue operation or surrender its
license unless thirty days written notice of its intention to do so and
a plan for maintenance of safe keeping of the records of the school is
provided to the commissioner. However, upon good cause shown, the
commissioner may waive the thirty days notice requirement.
 9. Annual supervision fund and tuition reimbursement account
assessment. a. The commissioner shall annually assess each school a
total percentage of that school's gross tuition pursuant to subdivision
three of section five thousand two of this article, as determined by the
annual audited financial statement required by this article. This
assessment shall be based upon each school's gross tuition from the
previous year, and shall be payable to the commissioner in equal
quarterly installments which shall be due on June first, September
first, December first and March first.
 b. (i) Such annualized assessment shall be one percent for schools
which have paid less than sixteen quarters of assessments, but such
annual assessment shall not fall below five hundred dollars.
 (ii) Such annualized assessment shall be eight-tenths of one percent
for schools which have paid sixteen or more quarters of assessments, but
such annual assessment shall not fall below five hundred dollars.
 c. (i) Of the total assessment provided for herein, five-tenths of one
percent shall accrue to the credit of the tuition reimbursement account
pursuant to section five thousand seven of this article for those
schools which have paid less than sixteen quarters of assessments. Of
the total assessment provided for schools which have paid sixteen or
more quarters of assessments, three-tenths of one percent shall accrue
to the credit of the tuition reimbursement account pursuant to section
five thousand seven of this article. For schools paying the minimum
five hundred dollars annual assessment, none shall accrue to the tuition
reimbursement account.
 (ii) The balance of the total assessment provided for herein shall be
dedicated to fund the department's supervision and regulation of
licensed private schools pursuant to an annual appropriation and an
annual plan of expenditure prepared by the commissioner and approved by
the director of the budget.
 d. Payments made within thirty days following the due date shall be
subject to interest at one percent above the prevailing prime rate.
Thereafter, late payments may result in suspension of licensure by the
commissioner. Payments required by this subdivision shall be considered
a condition of licensure.
 § 5002. Standards for licensed private career schools. Any school
licensed pursuant to section five thousand one of this article shall be
organized and conducted only as a school and shall be subject to the
jurisdiction of the department exclusively, or in conjunction with such
other state agency or department or district attorney upon which
jurisdiction has also been conferred by law. Such schools shall be
subject to and comply with the provisions of this section.
 1. Standards. a. No program of such schools shall be conducted in a
factory or commercial establishment, except where the use of facilities
or equipment of such factory or commercial establishment is permitted
for necessary or desirable educational purposes and objectives.
 b. For every such school, the commissioner shall set forth in
regulation standards governing all of the following:
 (1) criteria for admission, which shall provide that students at least
possess a high school diploma or its equivalent or demonstrate the
ability to benefit from the instruction, except that in the case of
students who do not possess a high school diploma or its equivalent,
certification of the students' ability to benefit from instruction shall
be provided to the commissioner as provided in paragraph c of this
subdivision;
 (2) the standards and the methods of instruction;
 (3) the equipment available for instruction with the maximum
enrollment that such equipment and physical plant will accommodate;
 (4) the qualifications and experience of teaching and management
personnel;
 (5) the form and content of the student enrollment agreement or
contract, provided that such agreement or contract shall be written in
the same language as that principally used in the sales presentation;
 (6) the methods of collecting tuition;
 (7) eligibility criteria for programs that will require licensure;
 (8) the sufficiency and suitability of the resources available for the
support of such school; and
 (9) counseling provided to students.
 b-1. (1) Student loans or other financial aid funds received from
federal, state, or local governments or administered under the federal
student financial assistance programs governed by Title IV of the Higher
Education Act of nineteen hundred sixty-five, 20 U.S.C. section 1070 et
seq., as amended, must be collected and applied in the manner as
controlled by the applicable federal, state or local regulations.
 (2) Student loans or other financial aid funds received from private
entities, including, but not limited to, banks, financing companies, and
other lending sources must be collected or disbursed in the following
manner:
 (A) Loans or other financial aid payments for amounts of five thousand
dollars or less may be disbursed as a single disbursement, regardless of
course length.
 (B) Loans or other financial aid payments for amounts greater than
five thousand dollars that reflect a class term of less than six months
shall have two equal disbursements. The disbursement schedule for such
loans or payments shall be as follows: one-half of the tuition amount
released initially, and the remainder released halfway through the
course term.
 (C) Loans or other financial aid payments for amounts greater than
five thousand dollars that reflect a class term of greater than six
months, but less than twelve months must have three equal disbursements.
The disbursement schedule for such loans or payments shall be as
follows: one-third of the tuition amount released initially, the second
disbursement shall be released one-third of the way through the length
of the training, and the remainder released two-thirds of the way
through the course term.
 (D) Loans of other financial aid payments for amounts greater than
five thousand dollars that reflect a class term greater than twelve
months shall have four equal disbursements. The disbursement schedule
for such loans or payments shall be as follows: one-quarter of the
tuition amount released initially, the second disbursement shall be
released one quarter of the way through the length of the training; the
third disbursement shall be released halfway through the length of the
training, and the remainder shall be released three-quarters of the way
through the training.
 (3) No school may enter into any contract or agreement with or receive
any students loan or financial aid funds from private entities,
including, but not limited to, banks, financing companies, and any other
private lending sources unless the private entity has a disbursement
policy that, at a minimum, meets the requirements of subparagraph two of
this paragraph.
 (4) The term private entity referenced in subparagraphs two and three
of this paragraph shall not be construed to include a friend or family
member of the student who is not in the routine business of providing
student loans or financial aid funds. The provision of such a loan or
fund by a private entity shall also not include the payment of the
student's tuition or fees by use of a credit card.
 c. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article to the
contrary, the commissioner shall define alternative educational and
curriculum standards for any program of less than forty hours designed
exclusively for non-occupational, personal enrichment purposes.
 d. Admission of students under the ability to benefit provision.
 (1) Certification. Each school admitting students who do not possess
at least a high school diploma or its equivalent shall certify to the
satisfaction of the commissioner that such prospective students have
been administered and passed an examination which has been approved by
the commissioner to determine their ability to benefit from the chosen
curriculum prior to admission to the curriculum or course of study. Such
examination shall, whenever possible, be a nationally recognized test
appropriate for the course of instruction which has been approved by the
commissioner. The examination results of each such student who is
admitted shall be made available to the commissioner at a time
prescribed by the commissioner and, together with the student's original
answer sheet, shall be maintained by the school in the student's
permanent record. For any student failing to achieve the necessary score
on such examination for enrollment, the school shall be required to
provide such student with a listing of appropriate counseling and
educational opportunities available to the student at no cost, as
determined by the commissioner. Where appropriate, the commissioner may
accept such other entrance requirement documentation such as
prerequisite coursework, professional or vendor certifications, personal
interviews, and/or attestations of equivalent knowledge in lieu of the
examination requirement.
 (2) Counseling. Each school offering curricula which admit students
who do not possess a high school diploma or its equivalent shall develop
a plan to be approved by the commissioner for the counseling of such
students on an individual basis on matters including but not limited to
the student's ability to progress in the curriculum, the student's
financial aid rights and responsibilities, the availability of programs
to earn a high school equivalency diploma, including programs provided
at no cost to the student, and the potential of the training to prepare
the student for available employment opportunities within the region.
 (3) Compliance. (A) The commissioner shall monitor compliance with
this paragraph and verify the examination and counseling process and
student examination scores. Such procedures may include but not be
limited to an annual, statistically significant, random sampling of the
examinations taken by prospective students of each school administering
such examinations.
 (B) In the event that the commissioner determines that the school is
out of compliance with the examination process and counseling, the
commissioner shall require that examinations and counseling for students
admitted under the ability to benefit provision and the counseling
required by subparagraph two of this paragraph be conducted off the
premises of the school by an entity approved by the commissioner for
such period of time as the commissioner deems appropriate, the cost of
which shall be incurred by the school.
 2. Inspections. a. Every school licensed pursuant to this article
shall maintain adequate and accurate records for a period of not less
than seven years at its principal place of business within this state.
Such records shall be maintained in a manner and form prescribed by the
commissioner and shall be made available to the department and the
higher education services corporation upon request.
 b. In addition to other requirements in this article, the information
to be made a part of the record shall include, but not be limited to:
 (1) names and addresses of each enrolled student;
 (2) the course of study offered by the institution;
 (3) the name and address of its faculty, together with a record of the
educational qualifications of each;
 (4) the graduation date of each student; and
 (5) for each student who fails to complete his or her program, the
student's last date of attendance and, if applicable, the amount of any
refund paid to, or on behalf of, the student and the date the refund was
made.
 c. The commissioner shall conduct periodic unscheduled inspections of
licensed private career schools to monitor compliance with the
provisions of this article or the rules or regulations promulgated
thereunder or any final order or decision of the commissioner made
pursuant to this article. The department shall conduct an inspection of
each school at least once every licensure period. All schools shall
provide upon request of the department, any and all records necessary to
review compliance with the provisions of this article.
 d. Student permanent records, as defined in the regulations of the
commissioner, shall be maintained for a period of twenty years.
 3. Tuition liability. a. The tuition charge for programs approved for
participation in student financial aid general award programs pursuant
to articles thirteen and fourteen of this chapter shall be apportioned
on the basis of terms, quarters or semesters. For the purposes of this
section, the terms "term", "quarter" and "semester" shall be defined in
regulations by the commissioner.
 b. The tuition refund policy for the first term or quarter of any
program at schools licensed pursuant to section five thousand one of
this article shall be as follows:
 (1) For programs which are divided into quarters of up to fourteen
weeks, the school shall evenly divide the total tuition charges among
the number of quarters. After instruction is begun in a school, if a
student withdraws or is discontinued, the school may retain no more
than:
 (i) zero percent of the quarter's tuition if the termination is during
the first week of instruction; or
 (ii) twenty-five percent of the quarter's tuition if the termination
is during the second week of instruction; or
 (iii) fifty percent of the quarter's tuition if the termination is
during the third week of instruction; or
 (iv) seventy-five percent of the quarter's tuition if the termination
is during the fourth week of instruction; or
 (v) one hundred percent of the quarter's tuition if the termination
occurs after the fourth week of instruction.
 (2) For programs organized by terms of fifteen, sixteen, seventeen or
eighteen weeks apiece, the school shall evenly divide the total tuition
charges among the number of terms. After instruction is begun in a
school, if a student withdraws or is discontinued, the school may retain
no more than:
 (i) zero percent of the term's tuition if the termination is during
the first week of instruction; or
 (ii) twenty percent of the term's tuition if the termination is during
the second week of instruction; or
 (iii) thirty-five percent of the term's tuition if the termination is
during the third week of instruction; or
 (iv) fifty percent of the term's tuition if the termination is during
the fourth week of instruction; or
 (v) seventy percent of the term's tuition if the termination is during
the fifth week of instruction; or
 (vi) one hundred percent of the term's tuition if the termination
occurs after the completion of the fifth week of instruction.
 c. (1) The tuition refund policy for the second term or quarter of any
program at schools licensed pursuant to section five thousand one of
this article shall be as follows:
 (A) For programs which are divided into quarters of up to fourteen
weeks, the school shall evenly divide the total tuition charges among
the number of quarters. After instruction is begun in a school, if a
student withdraws or is discontinued, the school may retain no more
than:
 (i) twenty-five percent of the quarter's tuition if the termination is
during the first week of instruction; or
 (ii) fifty percent of the quarter's tuition if the termination is
during the second week of instruction; or
 (iii) seventy-five percent of the quarter's tuition if the termination
is during the third week of instruction; or
 (iv) one hundred percent of the quarter's tuition if the termination
occurs after the third week of instruction.
 (B) For programs organized by terms of fifteen, sixteen, seventeen or
eighteen weeks apiece, the school shall evenly divide the total tuition
charges among the number of terms. After instruction is begun in a
school, if a student withdraws or is discontinued, the school may retain
no more than:
 (i) twenty percent of the term's tuition if the termination is during
the first week of instruction; or
 (ii) thirty-five percent of the term's tuition if the termination is
during the second week of instruction; or
 (iii) fifty percent of the term's tuition if the termination is during
the third week of instruction; or
 (iv) seventy percent of the term's tuition if the termination is
during the fourth week of instruction; or
 (v) one hundred percent of the term's tuition if the termination
occurs after the completion of the fourth week of instruction.
 (2) Notwithstanding the provisions of subparagraph one of this
paragraph, the tuition refund policy set forth in paragraph b of this
subdivision shall apply unless the school demonstrates that there are no
significant educational changes in the educational program of the
student, such changes as defined in regulations of the commissioner.
 d. The tuition refund policy for the third and any subsequent term or
quarter of any program licensed pursuant to section five thousand one of
this article shall be the policy set forth in subparagraph one of
paragraph c of this subdivision.
 e. No program shall have a term in excess of eighteen weeks.
 f. The amount of the refund shall be calculated based on the last day
of student attendance.
 g. (1) Any refund due to a student shall be paid by the school within
forty-five days of the date on which the student withdraws from the
program. For the purposes of this article, such date shall be the
earliest of (i) the date on which the student gives written notice to
the school or (ii) the date on which the student is deemed to have
withdrawn pursuant to subparagraph two of this paragraph.
 (2) If a student has failed to attend classes for a period of thirty
calendar days, the school shall send by regular mail a notice to the
student that the student shall be deemed to have withdrawn from the
program if the student does not notify the school to the contrary within
twelve days from the date on which the letter is sent. If the student
fails to respond within such twelve-day period, the student shall be
deemed to have withdrawn and the school shall notify the higher
education services corporation that the student has withdrawn and the
date of the withdrawal.
 h. Schools shall submit, for approval by the commissioner, the school
catalog with a weekly tuition liability chart for each program that
indicates the amount of refund due the student in the event of
withdrawal.
 i. Upon payment of a refund to a lender, the school shall forthwith
send a notice to a person designated by the president of the higher
education services corporation upon a form approved by the president
that such refund was made.
 j. If the higher education services corporation fails to receive the
notice required by paragraph i of this subdivision, it shall forthwith
notify the student of his or her right to a refund and the commissioner
of such failure. Upon receipt of such notification, the commissioner
shall take appropriate action against the school.
 4. Curriculum approval. a. An application and fee shall be made for
the initial approval of a curriculum or course and shall include such
information as the commissioner may require by regulation. Approval
shall be valid for a period not to exceed four years. The application
fee for any curriculum of one hundred clock hours or more shall be two
hundred fifty dollars. The application fee for any course of less than
one hundred clock hours shall be one hundred dollars. Such application
fees shall accrue to the credit of the proprietary vocational school
supervision account.
 b. In approving curriculum, the commissioner shall take into
consideration the following:
 (1) that the entrance requirements demonstrate that students possess
the skills, competencies and prerequisite knowledge needed to progress
in the curriculum;
 (2) that the content will enable the student to develop those skills
and competencies required for employment in the occupational area for
which the curriculum was developed;
 (3) that the school will utilize appropriate instructional methods;
 (4) that the instructional equipment used within the curriculum is
comparable to the equipment currently used by business or industry in
the occupational area for which the curriculum was developed; and
 (5) that a curriculum may include instruction in English as a second
language at a beginning or basic level, provided such instruction shall
not constitute more than fifty percent of such program.
 c. (1) If the evaluation of a particular course or facility requires
the services of an expert not employed by the department, the department
shall retain such expert at the school's expense in addition to the
application fees prescribed in paragraph a of this subdivision.
 (2) If, in the interest of expediting the approvals, a school requests
the department to employ an outside consultant, the school shall pay the
cost of such services in addition to the application fees prescribed in
paragraph a of this subdivision.
 d. The commissioner shall act on applications for approval of a course
or curriculum within one hundred twenty days of receipt of a complete
application and, in the case of a denial, shall set forth in writing the
reasons for such denial.
 e. Notwithstanding paragraphs b, c and d of this subdivision,
curriculum certified by a nationally recognized vendor as defined in
commissioner's regulations shall be recognized by the department in lieu
of an expert evaluation when such curriculum is adopted by a school in
the original format provided by the vendor as long as the proposed
curriculum is a stand alone program and not part of a larger
comprehensive course.
 f. Notwithstanding any other provision of the law, a not-for-profit
licensed career school, that is eligible for participation in the
tuition assistance program and which has national accreditation, may,
for the purpose of calculation of federal financial aid amounts only,
measure students' academic progress in an approved curriculum in
non-degree granting credit hours, based upon a national accrediting
agency's conversion and approval of clock hours to non-degree credit
hours. For the purposes of this paragraph, "national accreditation"
shall mean accreditation by a national accrediting agency as defined in
the commissioner's regulations.
 5. Application for reapproval. a. An application and fee shall be made
for reapproval of a curriculum or course. Such application shall be
considered timely if submitted at least one hundred twenty days prior to
the expiration of the current approval. The application fee for any
curriculum of one hundred clock hours or more shall be two hundred fifty
dollars. The application fee for any course of less than one hundred
clock hours shall be one hundred dollars, provided that no fee shall be
assessed for the submission of a reapproval application without change.
Such application fee shall accrue to the credit of the proprietary
vocational school supervision account.
 b. Curriculum reapproval standards. (1) The commissioner shall prescribe by regulation, standards for reapproval after the first year of
licensure, of any curriculum or course based upon factors including but
not limited to the following, as appropriate:
 (i) for each curriculum or course, the percentage of students who have
dropped out;
 (ii) the acquisition of a specified minimum level of skills by the
students; and
 (iii) for each curriculum or course, the percentage of students placed
in occupations related to the instruction, where applicable.
 (2) Such standards shall be consistent with those applied to all
non-degree career education programs.
 c. Reapproval contingency. Reapproval of a curriculum or course shall
be contingent upon a demonstration by the applicant that the curriculum
or course has met the curriculum reapproval standards set forth in this
subdivision. Except as otherwise provided in paragraph d of this
subdivision, no such curriculum or course or substantially similar
curriculum or course may be given without reapproval by the
commissioner.
 d. When timely and complete application is made for the reapproval of
a curriculum or course, and no written denial is made thirty days prior
to the date of expiration of the existing approval, the curriculum or
course shall be deemed to be approved for the period of the curriculum.
If the application is denied, the commissioner shall set forth in
writing the reasons for such denial.
 e. The commissioner may provide in regulations for reapproval
procedures, consistent with this subdivision, for applications submitted
less than one hundred twenty days from the expiration date.
 f. The commissioner shall act upon enrollment agreements and catalogs
within ninety days of receipt, and, in the case of denial, shall set
forth in writing the reasons for such denial. If the commissioner fails
to act within ninety days, a catalog shall be deemed approved for one
year and an enrollment agreement shall be deemed approved until the
commissioner acts upon it.
 6. a. Teachers and directors. No person shall be employed by a private
career school as a director or teacher who is not licensed in such
capacity by the department pursuant to regulations of the commissioner,
which shall take into consideration such factors as moral character,
educational qualifications and practical experience. The application
shall include a statement, signed by the president or chief executive
officer of the school, certifying that to the best of his or her
knowledge, the applicant is able to meet the educational qualifications
and practical experience set forth in the commissioner's regulations.
Such application shall be considered timely if mailed to the
commissioner and postmarked four days prior to employment at the school
and must be completed within twenty days thereafter; provided, however,
that the commissioner may, for good cause shown, extend the time within
which to complete the application. When a complete application is made,
the commissioner shall act upon such application within thirty days. If
no written denial is made within the thirty days, the application shall
be deemed to be approved until the commissioner acts upon it or until
the end of the term or semester, whichever occurs first. If a written
denial is made after the thirty day period, the commissioner may allow
the applicant to teach at the school for the remainder of the term or
semester if the commissioner determines that the removal of the teacher
would not be in the best educational interest of the students. This
subdivision shall not apply to directors or teachers employed on or
before July first, nineteen hundred seventy-two. Teachers' licenses
issued on or after the effective date of the chapter of the laws of two
thousand twelve which amended this paragraph shall be valid at all
licensed private career schools for the courses, curricula, or
occupations indicated on the license. Teachers holding valid private
school teacher licenses valid at only one school location shall have
them replaced, at no cost, with licenses valid at any licensed school in
the same subject or subjects and with the same expiration date as was
listed on the previous teaching license.
 b. A school director shall have access to all student and school
records which shall be maintained in accordance with this article and
the regulations of the commissioner and shall make such records
available to the commissioner or the commissioner's designee upon
request during an on-site school inspection.
 c. Notwithstanding paragraph a of this subdivision, a teacher who has
been certified as an instructor by a nationally recognized vendor as
defined in commissioner's regulations may be deemed qualified as an
instructor by the department, provided such teacher shall only provide
instruction in the course or courses for which he or she holds vendor's
certification. A teacher authorized by this paragraph will be subject to
all licensing fees required by the department for licensed teachers.
 7. Advertising. a. The commissioner is authorized to commence a
disciplinary proceeding pursuant to this article for false, misleading,
deceptive or fraudulent advertising pursuant to regulations promulgated
by the commissioner which shall be consistent with article twenty-two-A
of the general business law. The department shall issue guidelines as to
appropriate advertising content. In developing such guidelines, the
department shall consider advertising for similar programs offered by
various educational institutions. In a disciplinary action or other
proceeding, such guidelines shall not be presumptive evidence that
particular advertising is appropriate.
 b. Beginning on January first, two thousand, all schools shall include
in their advertising, promotional material, or letterhead the statement
"Licensed by the State of New York", and an accompanying symbol to
indicate such status, issued by the commissioner pursuant to section
five thousand nine of this article.
 8. The higher education services corporation shall adopt rules and
regulations to effectuate the cessation of collection activities by
lenders or by the corporation in cases in which a licensed private
career school at which the student enrolled has closed or ceased its
teaching activities during the academic period for which the loan was
made or guaranteed.
 § 5003. Disciplinary actions, hearings and penalties. 1. Disciplinary
action. a. The commissioner for good cause, after affording a school an
opportunity for a hearing, may take disciplinary action as hereinafter
provided against any school authorized to operate under this article.
 b. Good cause shall include, but not be limited to, any of the
following:
 (1) fraudulent statements or representations to the department, the
public or any student in connection with any activity of the school;
 (2) violation of any provision of this article or regulation of the
commissioner;
 (3) conviction or a plea of no contest on the part of any owner,
operator, director or teacher:
 (A) of any of the following felonies defined in the penal law: bribery
involving public servants; commercial bribery; perjury in the second
degree; rewarding official misconduct; larceny, in connection with the
provision of services or involving the theft of governmental funds;
offering a false instrument for filing, falsifying business records;
tampering with public records; criminal usury; scheme to defraud; or
defrauding the government; or
 (B) in any other jurisdiction of an offense which is substantially
similar to any of the felonies defined in clause (A) of this
subparagraph and for which a sentence to a term of imprisonment in
excess of one year was authorized and is authorized in this state
regardless of whether such sentence was imposed; or
 (4) incompetence of any owner or operator to operate a school.
 c. (1) Any person who believes he or she has been aggrieved by a
violation of this section, except a person aggrieved by the actions or
omissions of a candidate school, shall have the right to file a written
complaint within: (A) two years of the alleged violation; or (B) one
year of receiving notification from the higher education services
corporation or any other guarantee agency that the student has defaulted
on a student loan payment; provided, however, that no complaint may be
filed after three years from the date of the alleged violation. The
commissioner shall maintain a written record of each complaint that is
made. The commissioner shall also send to the complainant a form
acknowledging the complaint and requesting further information if
necessary and shall advise the director of the school that a complaint
has been made and, where appropriate the nature of the complaint.
 (2) The commissioner shall within twenty days of receipt of such
written complaint commence an investigation of the alleged violation and
shall within ninety days of the receipt of such written complaint, issue
a written finding. The commissioner shall furnish such findings to the
person who filed the complaint and to the chief operating officer of the
school cited in the complaint. If the commissioner finds that there has
been a violation of this section, the commissioner shall take
appropriate action.
 (3) The commissioner may initiate an investigation without a
complaint.
 (4) Notwithstanding the provisions of subparagraph one of this
paragraph or any other provision of this article to the contrary, a
student at a candidate school shall have the right to file a written
complaint from an alleged violation of the provisions of clause three of
subparagraph (iv) of paragraph b of subdivision four of section five
thousand one of this article that require disclosure of candidacy status
and its implications and a signed attestation by the student, within two
years of such violation. Upon a finding that such a violation has
occurred, the candidate school shall be required to provide a refund of
all monies and fees received from or on behalf of the student.
Appropriate action shall also be taken against the candidate school
pursuant to the provisions of subparagraph (iv) of paragraph b of
subdivision four of section five thousand one of this article.
 (5) No owner, operator, licensed personnel, or agent thereof of a
licensed private career school shall discriminate, intimidate, or
retaliate against any person who files a written complaint pursuant to
this paragraph.
 2. Hearing procedures. a. Upon a finding that there is good cause to
believe that a candidate school under the provisions of subparagraph
(iv) of paragraph b of subdivision four of section five thousand one of
this article, or a licensed school, or an officer, agent, employee,
partner or teacher, has committed a violation of this article, the
commissioner shall initiate proceedings by serving a notice of hearing
upon each and every such party subject to the administrative action. The
school or such party shall be given reasonable notice of hearing,
including the time, place, and nature of the hearing and a statement
sufficiently particular to give notice of the transactions or
occurrences intended to be proved, the material elements of each cause
of action and the civil penalties and/or administrative sanctions
sought.
 b. Opportunity shall be afforded to the party to respond and present
evidence and argument on the issues involved in the hearing including
the right of cross examination. In a hearing, the school or such party
shall be accorded the right to have its representative appear in person
or by or with counsel or other representative. Disposition may be made
in any hearing by stipulation, agreed settlement, consent order, default
or other informal method.
 c. (1) The commissioner shall designate an impartial hearing officer
to conduct the hearing, who shall be empowered to:
 (A) administer oaths and affirmations; and
 (B) regulate the course of the hearings, set the time and place for
continued hearings, and fix the time for filing of briefs and other
documents; and
 (C) direct the school or such party to appear and confer to consider
the simplification of the issues by consent; and
 (D) grant a request for an adjournment of the hearing only upon good
cause shown.
 (2) The strict legal rules of evidence shall not apply, but the
decision shall be supported by substantial evidence in the record.
 3. Decision after hearing. The hearing officer shall make written
findings of fact and conclusions of law, and shall also recommend in
writing to the commissioner a final decision including penalties. The
hearing officer shall mail a copy of his or her findings of fact,
conclusions of law and recommended penalty to the party and his or her
attorney, or representative. The commissioner shall make the final
decision, which shall be based exclusively on evidence and other
materials introduced at the hearing. If it is determined that a party
has committed a violation, the commissioner shall issue a final order
and shall impose penalties in accordance with this section. The
commissioner shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a
copy of the final order to the party and his or her attorney, or
representative. The commissioner shall, at the request of the school or
such party, furnish a copy of the transcript or any part thereof upon
payment of the cost thereof.
 4. Judicial review. Any order imposed under this section shall be
subject to judicial review under article seventy-eight of the civil
practice law and rules, but no such determination shall be stayed or
enjoined except upon application to the court after notice to the
commissioner.
 5. Enforcement proceedings. The attorney general, in his or her own
capacity, or at the request of the commissioner, may bring an
appropriate action or proceeding in any court of competent jurisdiction
to recover a fine or otherwise enforce any provision of this article.
 6. Civil penalties and administrative sanctions. a. A hearing officer
may recommend, and the commissioner may impose, a civil penalty not to
exceed three thousand five hundred dollars for any violation of this
article, including a school's failure to offer a course or program as
approved by the commissioner. In the case of a second or further
violation committed within five years of the previous violation, the
liability shall be a civil penalty not to exceed seven thousand five
hundred dollars for each such violation.
 b. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph a of this subdivision,
a hearing officer may recommend, and the commissioner may impose a civil
penalty not to exceed seventy-five thousand dollars or double the
documented amount from which the school benefited, whichever is greater,
for any of the following violations: (1) operation of a school without a
license in violation of section five thousand one of this article; (2)
operation of a school knowing that the school's license has been
suspended or revoked; (3) use of false, misleading, deceptive or
fraudulent advertising; (4) employment of recruiters on the basis of a
commission, bonus or quota, except as authorized by the commissioner;
(5) directing or authorizing recruiters to offer guarantees of jobs upon
completion of a course; (6) failure to make a tuition refund when such
failure is part of a pattern of misconduct; (7) the offering of a course
or program that has not been approved by the commissioner; (8) admitting
students, who subsequently drop out, who were admitted in violation of
the admission standards established by the commissioner, where such
admissions constitute a pattern of misconduct and where the drop out
resulted at least in part from such violation; (9) failure to provide
the notice of discontinuance and the plan required by subdivision seven
of section five thousand one of this article; or (10) violation of any
other provision of this article, or any rule or regulation promulgated
pursuant thereto, when such violation constitutes part of a pattern of
misconduct which significantly impairs the educational quality of the
program or programs being offered by the school. For each enumerated
offense, a second or further violation committed within five years,
shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed one and one-half times
the amount of the previous violation for each such violation.
 c. In addition to the penalties authorized in paragraphs a and b of
this subdivision, a hearing officer may recommend and the commissioner
may impose any of the following administrative sanctions: (1) a cease
and desist order; (2) a mandatory direction; (3) a suspension or
revocation of a license; (4) a probation order; or (5) an order of
restitution.
 d. Penalty factors. In the recommendation of any penalty, a hearing
officer shall, at a minimum, give due consideration, where applicable,
to the good faith of the violator and the gravity of the violation.
 e. The commissioner may suspend a license upon the failure of a school
to pay any fee, fine, penalty, settlement or assessment as required by
this article unless such failure is determined by the commissioner to be
for good cause.
 f. All civil penalties, fines and settlements received after April
first, nineteen hundred ninety shall accrue to the credit of the tuition
reimbursement account established pursuant to section ninety-seven-hh of
the state finance law.
 7. Criminal penalties. In addition to any other penalties elsewhere
prescribed:
 a. Any person who knowingly violates any of the provisions of this
article shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor punishable in
accordance with the penal law. If the conviction is for a second offense
committed within five years of the first conviction under this
paragraph, such person shall be guilty of a class A misdemeanor
punishable in accordance with the penal law.
 b. Any person who knowingly (1) falsifies or destroys school or other
business records relating to the operation of the school with intent to
defraud; (2) fails to make a tuition refund as required by section five
thousand two of this article with the intent to defraud more than one
person; or (3) operates a school without a valid license required by
section five thousand one of this article shall be guilty of a class A
misdemeanor punishable in accordance with the penal law.
 c. Any person who, having been convicted within the past five years of
failing to make a tuition refund in violation of subparagraph two of
paragraph b of this subdivision, knowingly and intentionally engages in
a scheme constituting a systematic ongoing course of conduct involving
the wrongful withholding of refunds in violation of section five
thousand two of this article with the intent to defraud ten or more
persons, and so withholds tuition refunds in excess of one thousand
dollars, shall be guilty of a class E felony punishable in accordance
with the penal law.
 d. Upon a determination that there exist reasonable grounds to believe
that a violation of this article has been committed, or that any other
crime has been committed in connection with the operation of a school
required to be licensed pursuant to this article, the commissioner shall
refer such determination, and the information upon which it is based, to
the attorney general or to the appropriate district attorney. The
attorney general or a district attorney may bring an action on his or
her own initiative.
 8. Private right of action. A student injured by a violation of this
article may bring an action against the owner or operator of a licensed
private career school for actual damages or one hundred dollars,
whichever is greater. A court may, in its discretion, award reasonable
attorney's fees to a prevailing plaintiff. No owner, operator, licensed
personnel, or agent thereof of a licensed private career school shall
discriminate, intimidate, or retaliate against any student who brings a
private right of action against the owner or operator of a licensed
private career school pursuant to this subdivision.
 § 5004. Private school agent's certificate. 1. a. No party may, for a
consideration or remuneration procure, solicit or enroll any student for
instruction in or given by any school within or without the state of New
York, unless (i) the party is a salaried employee of the school and (ii)
the party shall have secured a private school agent's certificate from
the department pursuant to regulations of the commissioner.
 b. Upon submission of a complete new application for licensure, an
applicant may procure, solicit or enroll any student for instruction;
provided, however, that such applicant be in possession at all times
during the procurement, solicitation or enrollment processes of a
temporary approval certificate which the commissioner shall issue within
five days of receipt by mail or on the same day at designated offices. A
school shall submit such application for licensure on or before the
first day of employment of such individual.
 c. No consideration or remuneration shall be paid in the form of a fee
per student enrolled by a private school agent except pursuant to the
following limitations:
 (1) a school may pay twenty-five percent of the consideration or
remuneration after the student has completed three weeks of the program;
 (2) a school may pay the remainder of the consideration or
remuneration after the student has completed eight weeks of the program;
 (3) the total amount of the consideration or remuneration paid per
student may not exceed one percent of the annual salary paid to the
agent.
 d. In promulgating regulations in relation to the issuance of such
certificates and the conduct of the holders of such certificates, the
commissioner shall give consideration to:
 (1) good moral character of the candidate for such certificate;
 (2) the use of ethical and fair practices in the presentation of the
school's offerings; and
 (3) whether the prospective agent has within five years of the date of
the application violated any provision of this article or the
regulations of the commissioner adopted pursuant to this article.
 2. Instruction, as contemplated by this section, shall be any plan or
method for teaching any subject or subjects in any form or manner,
including correspondence or home study.
 3. a. Exempted from the requirements of this section are persons
acting solely for schools which are not required to be licensed or are
specifically exempted from the licensing requirements of this article.
 b. (i) Also exempted from the requirements of this section is an
online education marketplace as defined in paragraph c of subdivision
one of section five thousand one of this article, provided that the
online education marketplace complies with each of the following:
 (1) An online education marketplace shall not solicit, procure, or
enroll any student for instruction in a licensed private career school
or certified ESL school, as defined by the commissioner in regulations.
 (2) Upon receipt of any monies collected by an online education
marketplace from a prospective student for payment of tuition and/or
fees, the prospective student and the licensed private career school or
certified ESL school shall execute an enrollment agreement in accordance
with regulations of the commissioner. If an enrollment agreement is not
executed, the monies shall be promptly returned to the prospective
student in a timeframe and manner prescribed by the commissioner in
regulations.
 (3) If an enrollment agreement is executed, the online education
marketplace shall forward the monies received from the prospective
student to the licensed private career school or certified ESL school in
a timeframe and manner prescribed by the commissioner in regulations.
 (4) An online education marketplace shall not receive from a student
an amount greater than the tuition or fees to be charged by the licensed
private career school or certified ESL school to the student, and shall
separately account for monies received from the prospective student to
be thereafter transferred to a licensed private career school or
certified ESL school in payment of tuition or fees, and any remuneration
and/or compensation received by the online education marketplace from a
licensed private career school or certified ESL school in payment for
services rendered to such school by the online education marketplace.
The licensed private career school or certified ESL school shall also
separately account for tuition or fees transferred to the school by an
online education marketplace on behalf of a student in payment of
tuition or fees, and payments made by the school to an online education
marketplace for services rendered to the school by the online education
marketplace.
 (5) The commissioner may take disciplinary action against an online
education marketplace pursuant to section five thousand three of this
article, to the extent such provisions are deemed applicable by the
commissioner in regulations.
 (6) An online education marketplace is prohibited from offering
advertising/marketing services to an unlicensed private career school or
uncertified ESL school.
 (ii) Any licensed private career school or certified ESL school that
contracts with an online education marketplace shall comply with the
provisions of this subdivision and the regulations of the commissioner
or they may be subject to disciplinary action pursuant to section five
thousand three of this article.
 c. Persons who are paid to procure, solicit or enroll students on the
premises of schools required to be licensed shall not be exempt from the
provisions of this section.
 4. Application and renewal application for a private school agent's
certificate shall be filed on forms to be prescribed and provided by the
commissioner. Said certificate shall be valid for three years from the
date of issuance. Certificates which have been renewed shall be valid
for a period of three years from the expiration date of the certificate
which has been renewed. Every applicant and renewal applicant shall pay
to the department a fee of two hundred dollars.
 4-a. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision four of this
section, the school director may apply for a private school agent's
certificate on forms to be prescribed and provided by the commissioner
without incurring the agent application fee.
 5. No recovery shall be had against any student or enrollee and full
recovery shall be made on any contract for or in connection with any
instruction if the student or enrollee was procured, solicited or
enrolled outside or on the school premises by a person paid to procure,
solicit or enroll students but not having a valid private school agent's
certificate pursuant to the provisions of this section at the time that
the contract was negotiated or executed or the sale of the instruction
was made, or by a person who holds such a certificate but has made
fraudulent or improper claims. Each enrollment agreement shall include,
where applicable the name of the agent responsible for procuring,
soliciting or enrolling the student or enrollee.
 6. The issuance of such a private school agent's certificate shall not
be deemed to constitute approval of any course or of the person or
institution offering, conducting or administering the same.
 7. The commissioner, after giving to the certificate holder due notice
and opportunity to be heard, may fine a private school agent, suspend or
revoke a private school agent's certificate at any time for failure to
comply with the provisions of the law or the regulations of the
commissioner or for any other good cause.
 8. No employer of a private school agent other than a school may
indemnify, save harmless or otherwise reimburse any agent for the amount
of any fines imposed pursuant to this section. If a person fined
pursuant to this section can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
commissioner that the action for which the fine was imposed was
undertaken pursuant to explicit instructions from the employer, the
employer shall idemnify, save harmless, and reimburse that person for
the fine and shall pay to the commissioner an additional fine of an
equal amount.
 § 5005. Disclosure to students. The school shall disseminate to all
prospective and enrolled students through an enrollment contract or
agreement or other appropriate publications or documents, and in
appropriate languages as required by the commissioner in regulation:
 a. information concerning the school, including but not limited to:
 (1) a description of the courses offered;
 (2) program objectives and the length of the program;
 (3) a schedule of tuition payments, fees and all other charges and
expenses necessary for completion of the course or program;
 (4) the tuition refund and contract cancellation policies;
 (5) a description of the faculty and other instructional personnel and
their qualifications;
 (6) the names of associates, agencies or governmental bodies which
accredit, approve or license the school;
 (7) a description of any special facilities and services available to
handicapped students; and
 (8) any other items identified by the commissioner in regulation
following consultation with the advisory council;
 b. if the school advertises job placement rates as means of attracting
students to enroll in the school, the most recent available data on
employment and graduation statistics for students who have attended that
school;
 c. information concerning any student financial assistance, including
a description of the procedures and forms, student eligibility
requirements and the rights and responsibilities of students receiving
financial aid;
 d. the pass rate of graduates of the program for the most recent
calendar year on any licensure or certification examination required by
the state for employment in the particular vocational, trade, or career
field;
 e. the process for obtaining a tuition refund from the tuition
reimbursement fund and the availability of loan forgiveness in the event
the school closes while the student is in attendance;
 f. a sample enrollment contract, a sample cancellation form developed
by the department in consultation with the advisory council and a
tuition reimbursement fund claim form; and
 g. a description of the complaint procedures established pursuant to
this article.
 § 5006. Teachout plans. 1. A school may submit a teachout plan to the
commissioner for approval pursuant to regulations established by the
commissioner. A teachout plan shall consist of a contract between a
licensed private career school, with another school, hereinafter called
the teachout school, so that in the event that the licensed private
career school ceases instruction, the teachout school will provide the
necessary instruction specified in a student's original enrollment
agreement with the school ceasing instruction. A teachout plan may
employ more than one teachout school to provide instruction to students
in the school ceasing instruction. Schools under common ownership but
having separate licenses may, subject to the approval of the
commissioner, enter into teachout agreements. A teachout plan may be
contracted between the commissioner and one or more teachout schools in
the event that the closing school is unable or unwilling to do so.
 2. A teachout plan shall include the following provisions: (a) the
teachout school must offer courses of study that are substantially
similar to those offered in the school ceasing instruction;
 (b) teachout schools must be located in the geographic area in which
the school ceasing instruction was located unless the school ceasing
instruction provided distance learning or online training;
 (c) all provisions for a teachout plan must be included in the
enrollment agreement signed by the student; and
 (d) the teachout school shall agree to fulfill the enrollment
agreement signed by the student at the school ceasing instruction.
 3. The licensed school shall provide to the teachout school and to the
department the following information prior to closure:
 (a) Copies of the academic and financial records for all students in
attendance at the school at the projected time of closure;
 (b) A listing of all such students presently in attendance including
their names, addresses, social security numbers, curriculum that each
student is enrolled in and the number of hours the students will have
completed at the time of the school closure.
 4. The department will provide to the teachout school, immediately
upon notification of a school closing, a copy of each approved
curriculum that the closing school is presently offering.
 5. The commissioner shall require all teachout schools to address the
following issues:
 (a) Integration of students into a curriculum which may be different
from the curriculum in which they are currently receiving instruction;
 (b) Assessments of students' progress so that they may be placed into
an appropriate course;
 (c) Provision of remedial instruction to students who are found to be
deficient in one or more course areas upon their initial assessment;
 (d) Provision by the teachout school to adhere to the required
student/teacher ratios and room capacities; and
 (e) Compliance with statutory and regulatory requirements during the
teachout.
 6. The student shall not be subject to any costs beyond the total
costs identified in the original enrollment agreement.
 7. A student may decline to pursue instruction at the teachout school
and may instead seek a refund pursuant to section five thousand seven of
this article.
 § 5007. Tuition reimbursement account. 1. Except as otherwise provided
in subdivision six of this section, the portion of the annual assessment
of schools licensed pursuant to section five thousand one of this
article as prescribed in subdivision nine of such section and all fines,
penalties and settlements received pursuant to this article shall be
transferred upon receipt into the tuition reimbursement account.
 3. a. The commissioner shall develop a complaint form and provide such
form to students. In order to claim a refund, a student shall apply to
the fund with a complaint form pursuant to the requirements of section
five thousand three of this article. Except as otherwise provided in
this article, the commissioner shall compute the refund, if any, using
the refund formula established by subdivision three of section five
thousand two of this article.
 b. Claimants who had been enrolled in schools which have not closed or
ceased operation shall be required to show in a manner determined by the
commissioner that:
 (1) the student is eligible for a refund;
 (2) the student has made a request to the school for a refund; and
 (3) the school has failed to make the refund within the time period
required by this article.
 c. The commissioner shall act on each refund request within thirty
business days of such request.
 4. Students may be eligible for refunds under this section as follows:
 a. A student who is offered a teachout plan for the curriculum in
which the student was enrolled at the time the school closed or ceased
operation, which has been approved by the department, may elect to
continue instruction pursuant to the teachout plan or may decline to
continue instruction and may instead apply for a full refund under this
section. The option to apply for a refund shall extend to the end of the
first week of instruction at the teachout school.
 b. A student who was enrolled in a school which has not closed or
ceased operation is entitled to a refund computed in accordance with the
refund policy established by subdivision three of section five thousand
two of this article.
 c. A student who was enrolled in a school at the time the school
closes or ceases operation is entitled to a refund of the full amount of
prepaid tuition. In addition, commencing September first, nineteen
hundred ninety-three, a student who drops out of a school, where such
school closes within thirty days of the student's termination and prior
to completion of such student's program as specified in the enrollment
agreement, shall be entitled to a full refund of all tuition, fees and
book charges paid for by or on behalf of the student in cash or in
loans, excluding funding provided by any government agencies.
 d. A student who was enrolled in a school which has not closed or
ceased operation, and who has dropped out, is entitled to a full refund
of all tuition, fees and other required costs paid by the student if the
student has submitted a complaint form to the commissioner and the
commissioner has determined that a violation of this article has
occurred which warrants a refund. The commissioner shall promulgate
regulations identifying those violations that warrant a refund.
 e. Commencing September first, nineteen hundred ninety-three, a
student who drops out of a school, which subsequently closes, and who is
owed a refund for the failure of such school to follow the provisions
enumerated in subdivision three of section five thousand two of this
article shall be eligible for a refund from the tuition reimbursement
fund according to the provisions of subdivision three of section five
thousand two of this article.
 f. Commencing September first, nineteen hundred ninety-three, any
student enrolled in a school based upon an ability to benefit
examination shall be eligible for a full refund, regardless of whether
the student is currently enrolled, graduated or dropped out, if the
school enrolled the student contrary to the provisions of the approved
entrance requirements and the student complies with the requirements of
subdivision one of section five thousand three of this article.
 5. a. For a student who had been enrolled in a school that has not
closed or ceased operation, the refund shall be paid as follows:
 (1) guaranteed student loans, if any, in which case the commissioner
shall notify the student of such payment and shall be paid directly to
the lender or guarantee agency where appropriate;
 (2) actual personal tuition expenditures, if any; and
 (3) tuition assistance program awards and other governmental aid.
 b. For schools that have closed or ceased operation, the commissioner
shall refund actual personal tuition, fees and book expenditures to the
student. The repayment of any loans incurred by the student as part of
the actual personal tuition, fees and book expenditures shall be paid
directly to the lender or the guarantee agency where appropriate.
 6. a. Where a claim is paid to a student of an operating school, the
commissioner shall immediately notify the school.
 b. Within ten days of the receipt of the notice, the school shall
either request a hearing to challenge the commissioner's determination
that a refund was owed to the student or reimburse the fund the amount
paid to the claimant plus a penalty up to two times such amount. This
payment shall also incur interest for each day it remains unpaid at an
annual interest rate of one percent above the prime rate. The
commissioner may promulgate streamlined procedures for conducting
hearings pursuant to this paragraph. Any penalty assessed under this
paragraph shall be in addition to any other penalties assessed pursuant
to this article. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, penalties
and interest paid pursuant to this paragraph shall accrue to the credit
of the proprietary vocational school supervision account to support the
costs associated with the hearings authorized in this subdivision.
 7. Notwithstanding the notice procedures described in subdivision
three of this section, in the event of a school closing, the
commissioner on his or her own initiative may take appropriate action in
accordance with this section to process refund claims on behalf of all
of the students of the closed school.
 8. Assignment of rights. Persons and entities receiving refunds under
this section shall be deemed to have assigned or subrogated their
tuition reimbursement rights to the commissioner on behalf of the
tuition reimbursement fund only for the amount refunded by the tuition
reimbursement fund. Within ninety days of any refund made pursuant to
this section, the commissioner or the attorney general shall take
appropriate action to recover the total amount of the refunds made, plus
administrative costs, from the school.
 9. a. A student whose loan liability is exempted pursuant to former
section six hundred eighty-three of this chapter and is entitled to or
owed a refund shall transfer to the higher education services
corporation the right to claim the refund owed and due from the tuition
reimbursement fund. In such event, the corporation shall be entitled to
receive a refund for that portion of the claim not paid to the
corporation by the United States Secretary of Education pursuant to the
federal guaranteed loan program.
 b. Any amounts remaining in the tuition reimbursement fund as of June
first, nineteen hundred ninety-three and on every March thirty-first
thereafter, shall be made available to the higher education services
corporation for payment of student loans on which collection activity
has ceased pursuant to the provisions of subdivision six of former
section six hundred eighty-three of this chapter. No amounts shall be
paid to the higher education services corporation for loans on which
collection activity has ceased because of the operation of section 437
of the Higher Education Act of 1965, as amended.
 10. Management of the tuition reimbursement account. a. As used in
this subdivision, net balance is defined as the actual cash balance of
the account as determined by the commissioner on June thirtieth,
nineteen hundred ninety-three and every three months thereafter. For the
purpose of calculating the net balance, the commissioner shall not take
into consideration any refunds made from the account pursuant to
paragraphs d and f of subdivision four of this section for the year
immediately preceding the date on which the calculation is made.
 b. In the event that the account has accumulated a net balance in
excess of one million eight hundred thousand dollars, the commissioner
shall, with the approval of the director of the budget, waive an amount
not to exceed the amount due for the next quarterly assessment pursuant
to this section and subdivision nine of section five thousand one of
this article for schools which have paid sixteen quarters or more of
assessments only. In such event, payment of future quarterly assessments
shall be suspended for schools which have paid sixteen quarters or more
of assessments until the net balance of the account falls below one
million three hundred thousand dollars.
 c. In the event the net balance of the account falls below one million
three hundred thousand dollars, if the quarterly assessment has been
suspended for schools which have paid sixteen quarters or more of
assessments pursuant to paragraph b of this subdivision, it shall be
reinstated for the next quarterly assessment and all subsequent
quarterly assessments until the account has accumulated a net balance in
excess of one million eight hundred thousand dollars.
 d. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph b of this subdivision,
in the event that the balance of the account is in excess of one million
three hundred thousand dollars, all schools licensed after June
thirtieth, nineteen hundred ninety-nine shall be required to pay into
the account the equivalence of three years of annual assessments over a
five year period.
 e. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph b of this subdivision
all schools licensed after June thirtieth, nineteen hundred ninety-three
and before July first, nineteen hundred ninety-nine will be required to
pay into the account the equivalence of three years of annual
assessments within four years of the effective date of this paragraph.
This amount to be assessed shall be determined based upon the school's
gross tuition in its first three years of licensure.
 g. In the event that the balance of the tuition reimbursement account
is equal to or in excess of two million dollars, the amounts assessed
the schools in accordance with the provisions of paragraphs d and e of
this subdivision shall be deposited directly to the proprietary
vocational school supervision account.
 h. The commissioner may annually apportion from the account an amount
up to two hundred thousand dollars for the purpose of securing, scanning
and otherwise making student records from closed schools available to
students who attended such schools. Provided, however, that in no case
shall such apportionment cause the account to fall below the balance set
forth in paragraph c of this subdivision, nor shall such apportionment
cause schools whose quarterly assessments have been suspended to pay
additional quarterly assessments.
 11. Fund audit. The state comptroller shall audit or cause to be
audited the tuition reimbursement fund once every two years and produce
an audited financial statement according to generally accepted
accounting principles.
 12. New schools. Within the first year that a school begins licensed
operation, the commissioner shall assess such school an amount to be
deposited into the fund in an amount to be determined by the
commissioner.
 § 5008. Trust accounts. 1. If the commissioner determines that a
school has demonstrated a pattern or practice of failing to make tuition
refunds in a timely manner consistent with this article and/or the
school's financial condition may result in the interruption or cessation
of instruction or jeopardize student tuition funds, the commissioner
shall require a school to establish a trust account in a form or manner
which the commissioner shall determine to be appropriate. The assets or
funds contained in the trust account shall be maintained for the sole
and exclusive benefit of the students.
 2. In making this determination, the commissioner shall consider the
following factors: the number of refunds not paid by the school in a
timely manner; the number of claims made to, or paid by, the tuition
reimbursement account; a pattern of misconduct which substantially
affects the financial interests of students or the state, potential
liability to the tuition reimbursement account, current assets as
opposed to current liabilities, and such other measures as may be
appropriate.
 § 5009. Duties of the commissioner. In addition to all other duties
assigned in this article, the duties of the commissioner shall include,
but not be limited to:
 1. ensuring that up-to-date, accurate information is available to the
public, via the internet and other appropriate media, regarding every
duly licensed proprietary school in this state, as well as disciplinary
actions decided by the state.
 2. developing and issuing to duly licensed proprietary schools a
symbol to indicate such status; provided that such symbol shall be
developed and made available to such schools no later than September
thirtieth, nineteen hundred ninety-nine.
 3. administering a public information campaign aimed at increasing
awareness about the importance of attending licensed proprietary
vocational schools. Such campaign shall be targeted to populations at
risk of enrolling in unlicensed schools, and shall be conducted using
means including, but not limited to, public service announcements on
commercial radio and television stations, public access television, and
print media.
 4. providing for the orderly maintenance of any student records which
may be transferred to the department pursuant to any school's plan
developed pursuant to subdivision eight of section five thousand one of
this article; including responding to student requests for transcripts
and records within twenty days of receiving a request. The commissioner
is hereby authorized to impose an appropriate fee for such transcripts
pursuant to a schedule approved by the director of the budget.
 § 5010. Advisory council. 1. An advisory council for licensed private
career schools is hereby created for the purpose of advising the board
of regents and the commissioner as provided herein. The council shall be
composed of eleven members appointed by the governor, two of whom shall
be upon the recommendation of the temporary president of the senate, two
of whom shall be upon the recommendation of the speaker of the assembly,
one of whom shall be upon the recommendation of the minority leader of
the senate and one of whom shall be upon the recommendation of the
minority leader of the assembly. Of the five remaining members, one
shall be an owner or director of a school regulated pursuant to this
article, and one shall be a student advocate. The governor shall
designate a chairperson from such members. The commissioner, the
president of the higher education services corporation, the secretary of
state, the comptroller, the director of the division of the budget, and
the executive director of the job training partnership council, or their
designees, shall serve as ex-officio, non-voting members of the council.
 2. The council shall meet no less than four times a year. Members of
the council shall receive no compensation for their services but shall
be reimbursed for reasonable expenses actually and necessarily incurred
by them in the performance of their duties. Council member terms of
office shall be limited to three years, provided that members may be
reappointed. All appointments to the council to fill vacancies in
existence on the effective date of the chapter of the laws of two
thousand twelve which amended this subdivision shall be made within
ninety days of such effective date.
 3. The council shall advise the commissioner on such matters as the
council determines are appropriate.
 ARTICLE 103
 WORKPLACE LITERACY PROGRAMS
Section 5100. Definitions.
 5101. Grants.
 5102. Regulations.
 § 5100. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms
shall have the following meanings:
 1. "Eligible agency" means labor organizations, their federations or
organizations of employers acting in consortium with labor
organizations, that have been approved by the commissioner, upon
application therefor, to conduct workplace literacy and basic skills
education programs.
 2. "Labor organization" means organizations of workers established to
bargain collectively on behalf of their member workers.
 3. "Workplace literacy and basic skills education" means those common
branch skills and English-as-a-second-language skills that are directly
related to the ability to perform occupational tasks.
 § 5101. Grants. 1. The commissioner is authorized to make grants to
eligible agencies that conduct workplace literacy and basic skills
education programs for employees of public or private employers or for
members of unions whose present levels of literacy skills constitute a
barrier to continued employment or to promotion.
 2. No for-profit agency or institution may act as the fiscal agent of
any grant receivable under the provisions of this section.
 § 5102. Regulations. The commissioner shall promulgate regulations to
carry out the provisions of this article. Such regulations shall, among
other things, specify the programs, services, or functions that are
eligible for funding under this article, including, but not limited to,
instruction, administration, counseling, support services, and
curriculum development.
 ARTICLE 105
 RESEARCH INSTITUTE ON ADDICTIONS
Section 5200. Establishment of the research institute on addictions.
 5201. Functions of institute.
 § 5200. Establishment of the research institute on addictions. There
is hereby established at the university center at Buffalo of the state
university of New York the research institute on addictions for research
and teaching in the sciences related to addiction, including alcohol
abuse and substance abuse, as such terms are defined in section 1.03 of
the mental hygiene law, and chemical dependence, as defined in section
19.40 of the mental hygiene law.
 § 5201. Functions of institute. The research institute on addictions
is designated as an institute for the conduct of research and education
directed towards furthering knowledge of the etiology, diagnosis,
treatment and prevention of addictions, including alcoholism, alcohol
abuse, substance abuse, substance dependence and chemical dependence.
The university shall foster support and obtain funds for research
thereby, or under the direction thereof, or through contract or
agreement, relating to primary biochemical and social causes of such
addictions, the epidemiology of such addictions and the effectiveness of
various types of prevention, treatment, and rehabilitation programs and
approaches.